THE STORY BEHIND THE COVER 



In recent years— particularly in the realm of physical diagnosis — 
modern medicine has advanced in seven-league boots. So confident has 
been its stride and so brilliant its utilization of instruments of science 
Undreamed of In the horse-and-buggy era that it has imparted to even 
the most routine of hospital examinations a deceptive aspect of infallibility. 

You may now step without misgivings into a great modern hospital 
and be assured of a physical screening as exact and painstaking as 
a test for radio-active fall-outs in the vicinity of an atomic proving 
ground. 

And yet — we've a disturbing, incredible suspicion that your assurance may be rudely shaken. You may chance to glance up, for instance, 
and see a momentary flicker of uncertainty in the gaze of the young 
chap in white who greeted you with such cheerfulness barely three 
minutes before. He's human, you see. He knows what the machines can 
do, but he's remembering what happened to him when he was just a 
young medical student and mistook a faint, ghostly shadow on an 
X-ray for a revelation of the direst significance. 

Or he may simply be remembering how misleading and uncertain 
symptomology in general can be. He may be remembering what every 
competent medical man knows -that symptoms in themselves are seldom 
absolutely diagnostic, and that the organic changes which so often 
produce them may be simulated by perfectly healthy organs and tissues. 
The organs and tissues may not even be "acting up" psychosomatic-ally. 
Symptoms often appear with a kind of ghostly irrationality, precisely 
as "fatigue" may develop in giant computing machines that cannot 
luyically undergo the slightest impairment of function. 

There is so much that remains totally inexplicable and beyond the 
range of human interpretation that our present diagnostic aids must 
remain just that — valuable assisting mechanisms with a rigidly circumscribed utility. 

But suppose — just suppose — that the machines were to become 
robotlike in their complexity and really infallible in their diagnostic 
findings. Suppose that the instant you stretched yourself out on a 
hospital couch beams of radiant energy arched and flickered above you, 
and — 

People vary in what they consider prophetic. But we rather suspect 
that this month's unusual cover illustration will set you to dreaming 
about the remarkable implications of an infallible mechanical diagnostician with an unerring instinct for getting at the root of "what ails 
you !" 

FRANK BELKNAP LONG 




aJtn 2/ out 



\ 



•■ Secret of 

MENTAL CREATING 

TF YOU just like 10 dream, read no furX ther. There comes a time when your 
fancies must be brought into light — and 
Stand the test of c very-day, hard realities. 
Are you one of the thousands — perhaps 
milllons-whosc thoujehu never «ct 
beyond the stage of uhtfu) wishing? Do 
you often come to from o daydream with 
the sigh, "If only I could bring it about— 
ntakt U r, " 



All things beginwith thought— it is what 
"jws that may take your life out of 
class of those who hope and dream. 



Thought energy, like anrtning else, can 
be dissipated —or it can be made to prodace actual effects. Jfyauknowhowtoplaf* 
your thoughts you can stimulate the creative processes within vour mind— through 
them you can assemble things and conditions of your world into a happy life of 
accomplishment. Mttttm treating does noc 
depend upon a magical prongs. It consista 
of knott ing how to marshal your thoughts 
iota a power that draws, compels and 
organizes your experiences into a worthwhile design of lining. 

ACCEPT THIS ^tee BOOK 

u how you may 



Let the Rosicrucians u 
accomplish these mini 
<noi a religious 



. philosophical fraternity, have freed for centuries the antients' masterful 
wU-citfeof i he (iiiictioniiiK of the inner 
i of man. They have caught men and 
j how to use this knowledge to 

._. . ft thrirlivtt.They offer you a free copy 
of the fascinating hook, "The Mastery of 
Life." It tells how you may receive ihia 
information for study and use. Use coupon. 

7Zc Rosicrucians 



FANTASTIC 

UNIVERSE 



Epidemic on Venus 4 

by Ed M. Clinton, Jr. 

Free Will 32 

by Dal Stiven* 

Operation Triplan 36 

by Mack Reynolds 

Fresh Pastures 49 

H. L. Herbert by G arne tt Radrliffe 

President 

The Advantages Are Tremendous ... 55 

by Curtis W. Casewit 

Leo Margulies 

PuilMer A New World • • • • ■ 61 

Jimial Direct,, ** R™lwrd 12. Smith 

— ■ The Good Husband 76 

by Evelyn E. Smith 

Escape Mechanism 79 

by Arthur Sellings 

Grand Rounds 89 

by Alan E. Nourse 

Homesick Lane 102 

by Norman Arkawy & Stanley Ilenig 

Crazy Mixed-Up Planet 108 

by Charles E. Eritch 

Kelly Freas Homecoming 126 

Cm, Design by J . Harvey Haggard 



1" ANT A STIC UNIVERSE. Vol. 4. No. L Publisher! monthly by Kiv Si/v: Punt.tCATlONrt. 
Inc., 471 Park Ave.. N. Y. 22. N. Y. Subscription, 12 issues *:t.T&. single conies Jfi«. Fnn iit'i 
l>,i*Wi£e extra. Reentered its si l'.nil-cln mr.ller at the fust office, New York. New York. 'I'll* 
elm I'set ers in this ni.'ien/.ine n re entiti-lv iittitious anil have no relation to any persons living 
or dead. Copyright 13"^,. by KiN.-Si/e Publications, Inc. AUG., 19GG. i-uintou in u. o. a. 



ARE YOU TOO OLD 
TO LEARN? 

not at all, scientists sdy 




New tents show tli.it : your ability to think increases 
with age; your powers of deduction are greater; 
your judgment is belter. 

In the I. CS. files ore thousands of cases of 
and women of every age. Their successes, their 
promotions, their raises prove that men ar 
past school age can learn! 

I.C.S. GIVES YDU EXPERT GUIDANCE FREE I Do you have the 
feeling you're "stuck" in your job? Your trained 
J.C.S. counselor will appraise your abilities, help you 
plan foi the future. 

IT'S NEVER TOO LATE TO GET STARTED I You st udy with 
l.C.S. at home, in your spare time. There's no inter* 
ference with business or social activity. Famous I.CS. 
teats make learning easy. Don't delay. Pick yocr 
field from the coupon below. And mail it today! 

3 FREE BOOKS 



' rokt mh» of tie* on "lie* 
cuuloe outllnlnn opporlonl 



"I am piesidcntol a 
small corpwsrtctr A yeir 
to I enrolled with I. C. 5. 
as the most practical 
means available tome 
in what I needed." 
ffJA 
Michigan 




For Real Job Security— Get an I.CS. Diploma! . ..Easy-pay Plan . . .I.C.S., Scran ton 9, Penan. 



INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOLS 



BOX 99003F. SCKANTON 9, PENNA. 



1 kg Mwh» fj M Tim— B □ Il-nnmr. p *n.nNnlini Uh — « 
niW Gla«ial<id(>tigMlj>« P Ofc-tl-IHc l]UW ' . 

C teftnl'M l.1i"~»il w P Italic Lout .H *m. 
|_i ip J. Q «itiaw> Clr-w 



!J r'i.iv i? "■■^T.. i"""' o sir^SilfiiTiBini r! K!*i (™»3 ll,M ""* fj t™ Fii'st l"tt!St> rw 

CHCIVI'T. fflV IL'CTBICAL 1 1 "-ll'i> '-<■• IHWIMIl I 1 I.tlil. l K ' 1 C.I I fi . . . 

; l l:::: , .:', t ,.::..'", BBSS BBS. I*w.vr ... "BSfffiSW™ 

D N.IW.I 1 KkM HIGH SCHOOL p l~)inli»l'tlmi.- r, DtimlmBiii 

[1 P**i„ ,ih. I. |.fiM ..." P Hi™-.. i. .- 1 , I Li-lith 1 1 * ■ ' * T V : ."n, ( ] *, u. -l ■. I'x-,- -.1 



epidemic 
on 
venus 

by . . .Ed M. Clinton, Jr. 



They were men of vision, bringing 
to a new world a multitude of 
bright new skills. But in the 
mist was an enemy, cobra-deadly. 



Hans Shaeffer's arrival as the 
fourth member of our medical stain 
at Hulbert, Venus, could hardly 
have been better timed. It was while 
I was giving him the customary 
'this-is- Venus' talking to that venusia mysteriosa burst upon us. 

I guess it must have been rny 
umpteenth run-through of the newarrival routine and it probably 
sounded pretty uninspired by then. 
And yet — how grim and tragic it 
all seems in retrospect! We were 
such blindly groping babes in the 
Venusian woods. 

There was, of course, no logical 
justification for our surprise and 
consternation when the epidemic 
struck. When underneath the cloud 
of carbon dioxide that had baffled 
the astronomers for a century we 
found a Venus as green and warm 
and hospitable as Earth, why should 
we have been surprised by the appearance of disease-bearing organisms? Why shouldn't we have assumed that an almost identical environment would support germs to 
which human beings would be dangerously susceptible? 



Every aspect of human life on Earth constantly reaffirms that man does not 
live by bread alone. Even the most savagely embittered of cynics must of 
necessity follow his guiding star in the silent watches of the night, "dreaming dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before." And that is why, in Ed M. 
Clinton's stark documentary account of the human struggle for survival on 
a world primeval and unexplored the shining vision, the search for the 
Kvaitatnubk, takes on such a thrilling and utterly irresistible immediacy. 



4 



EPIDEMIC 

"But they've never given evidence 
of their presence before," I said, as 
we all settled down in Dr. Crocker's 
office a few minutes later. Jerry Le* 
Blanc, a medical specialist of rare 
discernment, sat directly opposite 
Shaeffer nervously smoking a cigarette. 

Shaeffer, a quiet, powerfully built 
man of my own age, was a biologist 
who had only recently become a 
doctor, and who looked upon Venus 
as a naturalist's paradise, which indeed it was, 

"We assumed there were subtle 
differences of bodily structure," LeBlanc said, "and blood-stream susceptibility which would prevent us 
— and most probably all terrestrial 
vertebrates — from becoming adequate hosts for Venus tan parasites. 
That certainly isn't a new concept, 
and it applies in a limited sense to 
the immunity factor in all communicable diseases." 

Jerry offered. Hans a cigarette, 
and as Shaeffer reached for it the 
visiscreen buzzed and announced the 
second tragically confirmatory link 
in the chain of events which was to 
turn mankind's Venusian adventure 
into an epic struggle against disaster. 

I flipped the toggle. "Bad news 
I'm afraid," said Janie Nelson, our 
attractive blonde receptionist. "It's 
another sick call. The woman 
sounded desperately concerned." 

I nodded. "Address, please." 

"Just a moment.** She scanned 
a sheet of paper. "Eighty-eight K 
Lane. Mrs. Chris Larsem" 



ON VENUS 5 

"Thank you, darling." I scribbled 
the address. She stared at me, her 
eyes flashing, as the image faded. 

"Sam," growled, Jerry, "why 
don't you marry that girl and settle 
some bets around here?" 

I grinned and handed Jerry the 
address. 

A few minutes later Jerry phoned 
in and said he was bringing Larsen 
to the hospital. "Call Crocker," he 
added. "I don't like the looks of 
this." 

"All right," I said, and switched 
off. 

Shaeffer frowned quizzically. 
"Do you people always become 
geared to an emergency so quickly?" 

"We don't scare easily," I said. 
"But we've been holding our breath 
for a long time now." 

I had Janie put a call through to 
the administration building, where 
Dr. Crocker was in conference with 
Charles Gordon, the founder and 
governor of the settlement. 

The ambulance from 88 K Lane, 
with Jerry LcBlanc and his patient 
aboard, was back before Crocker 
arrived. Shaeffer and I and two 
nurses were waiting as it emerged 
from the mist which was steaming 
down from the high, swirling fog 
bank. The long Venusian night had 
just dispelled the last flicker of 
waning daylight. After almost four 
long months of getting used to the 
darkness you must adjust all over 
again when daylight comes, and the 
strain can be appalling. 

Jerry leapt down from the back 
of the vehicle and the driver came 



6 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



around and helped him with the 
Stretcher. I swung up beside them, 
spoke a few words, and then stopped. For I had seen the patient's 
face, staring up from.the shadows. 

There's something unutterably 
ghastly about the fate of mysterhsti. 
I came to know the expression well 
— the utter withdrawal, the living 
consciousness cut off from the outside world. It suggests the way a 
man might look if he were watching 
himself in a mirror, dying. 

"Okay, let's get on with it," I 
snapped, pulling myself together. 
"Careful now. Crocker will be here 
in a moment." 

Crocker walked up even as I 
spoke. "Hello, Doc," I said. 

Dr. Nathan Crocker was a sturdily built, white-haired man with a 
ruggedly weather-bronzed face lined 
with creases beyond'eounting. Imagine a legendary nineteenth century 
country doctor transported across 
the dark night of space to Venus, 
and you will have something of the 
essence of the man. But Crocker 
was no country doctor. He was a 
real cosmopolite in the world of 
medicine, who still moved and talked like a youngster, and could have 
surpassed me in endurance any day 
in the week. 

"Well, Sam." He smiled cordially, all the lines in his face shifting 
in unison. "Precisely what docs it 
look like?" 

I shrugged. "Worse than the first 
case," I said. "See for yourself." 

His face became somber. "I've 
seen some strange things, Sam. I 



spent ten years in Africa, as you 
know, doing some highly revealing 
work on sleeping sickness. Remind 
me to tell you sometime about poor 
Harry Graytag." 

I didn't remind him of the fifty 
times he had already told me about 
Harry Graytag. 

He bent over, and looked down 
at Larsen and as he did so his eyebrows twitched, and his whole scalp 
settled back. There was no other 
physical reaction. I could almost 
read his thoughts, though. He looked up, squinted, and then returned 
his gaze to the stricken man's convulsively distorted face. I knew that 
he was seeking to link what he 
knew and suspected with certain 
novel intangibles that eluded his 
comprehension. 

Larsen was awake, or at least his 
watery, glazed eyes were wide open. 
There was something about his attitude that simulated an acutely 
heightened consciousness. 

"Easy now," said Crocker, "how 
do you feel?" 

Larsen did not reply. His mouth 
twitched and he started playing with 
the air with jerky shaking hands. 
Then he began to sob softly. 

Crocker looked up at me again, 
then back at Larsen. He coughed 
and said, "I see." After a pause, he 
added: "Brain, I suppose. It might 
even be an abscess. Don't stand 
there staring. We'll run an electroencephalograph — " 

Doc wore an impassive mask during the whole of the examination. 
We went over Larsen from head to 



EPIDEMIC 

foot, submitting him to every clinical test at our command. Unfortunately the more painstakingly thorough we became, the less we discovered. He was dreadfully sick, 
and that was all of which wc (Quid 
be certain. 

After a while the lab reports began drifting in. The EEC showed 
nothing. The blood count indicated 
some anemia, which might well 
have been the result of his difficulty 
in taking food. The blood sugar index was only slightly above normal. 
As we expected, the electrocardiogram was perfectly normal. His 
blood pressure was a little low, but 
not alarmingly so. Our cluster of 
X-rays was just as unrewarding. 
There wasn't a mark on him, internally or externally. The routine 
radiation count was safe. The last 
data to be studied wis the spinal 
fluid analysis. It was clear. 

Jerry had talked to Mrs. Larscn, 
and incorporated in a written summary a history of her husband's illness until the moment of his collapse. Such information as she was 
able to supply was disappointingly 
meagre. There seemed to have been 
no previous contributing illnesses. 
As far as she knew, aside from the 
usual childhood maladies, his only 
sickness had been a bout with virus 
pneumonia. Until a week before, he 
had been in perfect health. Then he 
had begun to deteriorate. Eirst he 
had lost his appetite. Then, rapidly, 
his strength had failed, and he had 
become increasingly irritable and 



ON VENUS 7 

restless. Finally he had taken to his 
bed, and she had called us. 

Crocker paced nervously, his expression somber and preoccupied, 
his £nark<.\ hands tightly intertwined behind his back. 

"What do you think, Doc?" I 
ventured. 

He grimaced in a manner that 
was all his own. The thousand lines 
in his face seemed to sink in deeper 
than ever. "What can I think?" he 
exclaimed. "I'm going to have to go 
pretty far back on this, Sam." 

"Back?" asked Shaeffcr, puzzled. 

"I haven't been in the tropics for 
many years," Crocker said, looking 
up quickly and gesturing toward the 
window. "There's a tropical landscape all around us, but it's a little 
different from the tropics I knew as 
a young lad." 

He went to the window and stood 
regarding the swirling fog outside. 
The winds of nightfall had passed, 
and the mist seemed to mirror the 
surge of his thoughts in its restless, 
mysterious eddying. 

Hesitantly, as though reluctant to 
detach himself from his memory of 
the past, he turned and faced us. 
"We'll have to wait and see. I'll 
keep my eye on Larsen. Meanwhile, 
one of you had better get some 
sleep." 

I advised Shaeffcr to turn in. He 
was dead on his feet, having exposed himself too recklessly to the 
strains and stresses of die unfamiliar 
Venusian gravity after his weeks in 
space. 

1 injected several of our rcsi


8 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



dent customers wiffi derivitomycin, 
changed a few bandages, took some 
temperatures, and found myself a 
maga2ine which I had read at least 
seven times before- I dozed off, secure in the knowledge that Jerry 
would be up in * while, anyway. 

II 

Crocker's hand on my shoulder 
roused me. I blinked and looked at 
my wrist-watch through blurred 
pupils. I had been sleeping almost 
seven hours, and the stiffness in my 
back bore painful testimony to the 
fact. 

"Larsen's de*d," Crocker said 
with grim urgency. "He died in 
agony, screaming and clawing at the 
air." His hand tightened on my 
shoulder. "We're conducting an immediate autopsy. Get dressed Sam, 
and come along. HI need your 
moral support. We can't tell what 
may show up." 

After the autopsy, we were still 
tragically bewildered. 

A short while later, Governor 
Gordon called Crocker. I was in 
Crocker's office at the time, sitting 
directly across the room from him. 
I could hear Gordon's voice dearly 
on the visiphone. 

"Anything new on Larsen?" I 
heard him ask. 

"I'm afraid not," replied Crocker, 
shaking his head wearily. 

"Well, something's come up," 
Gordon said. "Mrs. Larsen was just 
ia to see me." 

"Oh?" Crocker shifted in his 



chair. "If she's ill she should have 
called us." 

"No, no, it's not that," Gordon 
said. "It's more serious." He paused, 
and I wondered what could be more 
serious than a repetition of the 
tragedy that had overtaken Larsen. 
Then I knew what it must be. 

"She's asked for transportation 
back to Earth," Gordon said. "Immediately. I'm afraid she's legally 
entitled to it." 

I leaned forward. Crocker had 
lied beautifully when he had assured Larsen's wife that her husband 
had died of a recurrence of virus 
pneumonia. We were afraid to tell 
her that we didn't know what had 
killed him. The settlement was precarious enough and to have let the 
fear of a new and horrible disease 
run like quicksilver through the tiny 
popu I a ti on w ou 1 d have been to 
court utter disaster. 

"We'll have to be firm with her," 
said Crocker, managing to blend 
urgency with a patient sympathy. 
"There's too much danger she 
might carry the disease back to 
Earth. We have no way of knowing 
whether or not it's communicable." 
He ran trembling fingers through 
his tousled white hair. "We discussed this at the autopsy, Gordon. 
You said that unofficially — " 

"Yes, unofficially Hulbcrt is 
under quarantine. But that doesn't 
solve the problem. I was wondering 
if it might not be advisable to tell 
her the truth." 

"I hardly see how we can avoid 
it" Crocker gnawed at his underlip. 



EPIDEMIC 

"There may be one other alternative. I'll let you know, Gordon." 

"All right But be quick." 

Crocker switched off the visiphone and stared into emptiness. 

"I couldn't help overhearing," I 
murmured. "Mrs. Larsen's attitude 
makes our whole problem more difficult" 

Crocker focussed his eyes on me. 
"Suppose you take a walk with me, 
Sam," he said. "Just talking it over 
may help me reach a decision." He 
grunted and unwound his wiry fivefoot-five from behind the littered 
desk. "It's bad business, Sam," he 
added, shaking his head. 

A hot, heavy rain was falling, 
blurring the great banks of artificial 
light that bathed the night-time colony. We pulled our feather-light 
raincapes high about our necks and 
moved forward shivering. Our feet, 
clattering on plastic walkways and 
sloshing through mud puddles At 
unpaved intersections, made the 
only sounds there were. In Hulbcrt 
in the year 1990 all men and women 
walked, for the only vehicles that 
the colony possessed were work 
trucks and die hospital's four ambulances. 

As I walked, I thought of how 
far away, m time as well as in space, 
Earth seemed. Though in sober reality it had been scarcely two years, it 
seemed incalculably longer since I 
had last seen 'New York, or had 
watched fleecy clouds slip across the 
enchanted palette of a sunset sky. 
Here tfiere was only fog — overhead 
and on every side. The fog and the 



ON" VENUS g 

somberly forbidding jungle, into 
which we cut— it seemed barely an 
inch a day — with our raucous, ugly 
machines. 

All we had of Eartii was this 
utilitarian, scientifically organized 
pin-prick of a settlement called 
Hulbert, after the memory of the 
first man who had crossed the dark 
night of space to Venus. A mining 
town, a pseudopod of civilization 
adhering with nothing more than 
the cement of human tenacity to the 
alien muck of a world men had not 
been born to. Every square foot was 
occupied, every minute of time consumed had a value precisely calculable in dollars and cents — a cost 
that had to be met. 

Because of this, Gordon had designed the settlement on a completely functional basis and had imposed 
on it a casual but thoroughly mechanistic rulebook management. Someday, I hoped, all that would change. 
The settlement would take firmer 
root and the uranium shipments to 
Earth would begin to pay off. Then, 
surely, a little relaxation would be 
in order. 

"I think we've arrived," Crocker's voice, half-muffled by his cape, 
interrupted my thoughts. We stood 
directly in front of a squat grey tin 
structure with windows, in all respects similar to the thousand other 
tin dwellings which housed the majority of the colonists. 

He pushed the buzzer. The 
woman who let us in was small and 
blonde, rather unattractive and perhaps thirty-five years of age. She 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



1 o 

seemed to blend completely with the 
ugly little cabin that was her home, 
almost losing her identity in the 
process. 

Crocker came" directly to the 
point. "I understand you'd like to 
go back to Earth," he said. 

M rs. Larsen sat in a straightbacked metal chair, a grim and 
tragically pathetic figure shadowed 
by the harsh interior of the hut. I 
looked around that room for some 
measure of relief from the grey 
sameness, but my eyes encountered 
only one picture — an old and faded 
color photograph of an elderly couple, hung on the wall to my left. 
The floor was covered by a plain, 
resilient, durable linoleum. The furniture was mostly of light-weight 
metal, incredibly cold to the touch 
even on Venus. By comparison, the 
hospital seemed a haven of luxury. 

At Crocker's words, Mrs. Larsen 
stiffened, and her hands tightened, 
one upon the other. "Why should I 
Stay, now?" She was obviously fighting back tears. I felt very uncomfortable. 

Crocker cleared his throat. "Mrs. 
Larsen, I have a confession to make. 
I'm not going to ask that you listen 
to me in strict confidence. I'll trust 
to your judgment on that." 

She seemed stiffer than ever, already determined to take exception 
to whatever he might have to say. 
"What is it, Doctor?" 

"Mrs. Larsen, your husband did 
not die of virus pneumonia. Sometiroes we're not as wise as we should 
be, we doctors. We just don't 



know everything — especially about 
Venus." He scratched the back ot 
his head with a shy gesture. "We 
wisli we did, but we don't." His 
knotty hand swept jerkily through 
the air. "He died of something from 
out there, Mrs. Larsen, something 
from out of the jungle." 

She gasped and seemed to crumple. "Why didn't you tell me this 
before? Why did you try to deceive 
me with a foolish lie?" Her voice 
became shrill. "Did you think me 
1 ac k i ng in cou r age ? Did you ? I 
have a right to know." 

Crocker leaned forward and put 
a hand upon hers. "We're just trying to keep the others from becoming frightened. Until we know exactly what killed your husband, we 
can't take a chance on its being carried back to Earth." 

"Are you trying to tell me I can't 
go back?" There was cold fury in 
her eyes. 

"Mrs. Larsen, I don't have to 
tell you what might happen if the 
other settlers should learn that a new 
disease has taken two lives and may 
take more. There was an earlier 
case, you see." 

"But — " And then she bent forward and started to cry, her shoulders sagging and her face pressed 
into her thin hands. 

Crocker reached over again and 
gripped her hand tightly. "You and 
your husband came to Venus to 
build a new life. Just now you 
spoke of courage. Without great 
and exceptional courage there would 
have been no settlement, and yo»» 



EPIDEMIC OK VJ.1NUS 



are one of the original colonists." 

"But Giris and I— I mean, without him — " 

"Of course. But walk through the 
settlement sometime and consider 
how important its preservation is to 
every one of its citizens. None of us 
has an easy task," He got up, somewhat uncertainly. I followed suit. 
' ' M rs. Larsen , J thought perhaps 
you'd like to join our hospital staff. 
We're very short-handed, you know. 
We could really rise you. And frankly, if the disease reaches epidemic 
proportions, you could be of tremendous help." 

Ill 

It was still raining when we went 
back to the hospital. "Dr. Crocker," 
I said, shaking my head, "you're a 
wonder . . ." 

The night wore on. Gordon announced that a case of unusual virus 
pneumonia had appeared in the settlement, and warned the colonists to 
report instantly anyone stricken with 
a sudden illness, accompanied by 
great weariness, loss of" appetite, 
and, in the end, utter collapse and a 
complete inability to initiate conscious action. 

But nothing further of an alarming nature developed, and we began 
to hope that we had permitted ourselves the rather masochistic luxury 
of a good scare. Crocker, untiringly 
studying Lars-en's history, would 
knit his brows and shake his head, 
and then finger his way with maddening deliberation through a 



1 1 

thumb-worn and tattered medical 
volume. 

Colonial Transport Service spaceships continued to arrive and depart 
on schedule. They brought new colonists and the precious supplies we 
couldn't yet produce on Venus, and 
took back with them the incalculably valuable uranium ore which 
was Hulbert's economic lifeline to 
security. 

"Free land — Vti paralleled opportunity!" die posters on Earth kept 
shouting. "Go to Venus!" 

An over-burdened civilization 
was seeking equilibrium and we 
were the fulcrum upon which it 
swung. The wheels of industry were 
turning ever more staggeringly to 
the surge of atomic power stemming 
from the product of Venus' vast 
uranium fields. 

The First Interplanetary Land 
Rush, the greatest movement into 
free land since the opening of the 
American West more than a century 
before, was in full swing. First 
there was Hulbert and New America, and then an increasing sprinkling of other settlements founded 
by small and large nations from one 
end of the Earth to the other. 

Gordon's dream of a new world 
for fnen was truly nearing fulfillment. The statistics told their own 
story. It had taken four years to attract a thousand settlers and their 
families to New America. Now, in 
less than two months, since the beginning of the year 1990, Hulbert's 
population had increased twofold, 

And then at the peak of the rush, 



IZ 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



when everything Gordon had hoped 
for seemed about to be realized, 
venusia mysteriosa struck again, and 
again, with an appalling mortality. 

It was Shaeffer- who named the 
ghastly plague the Dying Death. 

Ten cases came in during fifteen 
terrifying periods. In a population 
the size of Hulbert's, it had all the 
earmarks of an incipient epidemic. 
Wc were helpless. All we could do 
was to attempt, with all the resources at our command, to dull the 
agony of death. Always it was the 
same, and one by one the colonists 
died, their pitiful, emaciated bodies 
leaving behind not one jot of information as to the cause of the invariably fatal malady. 

I began to hate the sight of the 
operating room. Crocker himself 
supervised every desperate recourse 
to surgery and each time he went 
about his task he seemed to become 
a little grimmer and a little more 
drawn of face. Only his hands remained steady and unshaking. 

Then one morning I emerged 
from the operating room to see 
Charles Gordon striding down the 
hallway toward us, his lips set in 
tight lines and his head cast ever so 
slightly sideward. He was the kind 
of man who could hold steadfast to 
the most unattainable of dreams and 
drive his way doggedly through the 
underbrush of human inadequacy. 

"Well, Crocker — anythingnew?" 
he demanded. Close up, I saw that 
there were shadows of worry around 
his vigorous black eyes and that in 
general he had tlie appearance of a 



man who wasn't getting ne.irly 
enough rest. 

Crocker began pulling off his 
surgical gloves. "I'm afraid not, 
Gordon," he replied, laying both 
gloves carefully in his left hand. 
"We keep getting the same answer." 

"You think it's hopeless, then?" 
asked Gordon, staring hard at the 
surgeon. 

"These people die," Crocker 
spoke calmly, his pale blue eyes 
shifting out of focus. "They die of 
somediing we know virtually nothing about. Something, I think, of a 
different, a completely alien disease 
process." He shook his head and 
ran skinny fingers through his white 
hair. "Bacteria of a similar environment should — But I told them they 
were wrong." 

The three of us paced silently toward Crocker's office. 1 got the distinct impression that Gordon was 
reluctant to speak his mind with 
complete candor. As we reached the 
door to Crocker's office, he asked 
abruptly: "Crocker, do you honestly 
think we can cope with this ourselves?" 

Crocker turned with one hand on 
the doorknob, his eyebrows raised. 

"For God's sake," snapped Gordon, "we mustn't let pride stand in 
the way of admitting that a tragedy 
of this magnitude may be too much 
for us?" 

You could almost see the ramrod 
unfold in Crocker's spine. His eyes 
flashed, and his hand tightened on 
the knob until the knuckles showed 



EPIDEMIC ON VENUS 



13 



white against the pink flesh. "You 
don't really mean "we', Charlie. You 
mean 'Dr. Nathan Crocker.' " He 
swung open the door and went into 
the office. "You are the governor, 
Charlie. You'll have to decide that 
for yourself." 

The door slammed in our faces. 

Gordon stretched his shoulders 
nervously. Then he gestured down 
the hallway and took firm hold of 
my arm. We walked. 

"Smith, I know I can trust you," 
he said. "I think you'll agree that 
we can't let any element of personal 
feeling influence our judgment in 
this nutter. Crocker's a pretty old 
man." 

"That doesn't necessarily mean 
anything," I said, hating Gordon 
for putting me so aggressively on 
the defensive. 

"Certainly not," he agreed instantly. "Crocker is eminently suited 
to this job, with half a lifetime of 
exjxi-rience in tropical research behind him. But a lifetime of experience can make a man stubborn — 
perhaps dangerously so in a situation like this." 

At the hospital entrance, Gordon 
turned to me and smiled — with a 
warmth unusual in that hard-driving 
man. "Smith, just remember what 
I've said. If you ever honestly think 
that Crocker has lost control of the 
situation, let me know." He shook 
my arm before relaxing his grip. 
"Thanks." 

I watched him go, feeling a little 
better. When I went into Crocker's 
office a moment later he didn't ask 



me what had transpired between 
Gordon and myself, for which I was 
thankful. He just muttered, "Sam, 
I'm going to make Gordon change 
his mind." 

We knew we could not long hide 
our ignorance, and the fact that the 
frightful Dying Death was something more than just a virulent 
atypical pneumonia. Rumor and gossip were already working their 
havoc. After all, there were the husbands, wives and children who had 
lost loved ones and who had seen 
the mysterious malady's initial 
phases, and could not help but wonder and pass on their dark doubts 
to their frightened neighbors. 

All this time Mrs. Larsen was 
wonderful, never sparing herself at 
the hospital, keeping up die confidence of doctors and patients alike. 
She was, I came to realize, one of 
the really great pioneer women of 
Venus. 

Crocker worked doggedly, denying himself desperately needed rest, 
studying case histories and checking 
the autopsies. He spent hours in the 
lab with the technicians, taking 
copious notes, and reading through 
the fabulous, worn library of medical volumes that dealt with every 
aspect of medical research and practice. He became so familiar with the 
unvarying pattern of mysteriosa that 
we could plot perfectly the development of a case, almost to predicting 
the hour of death. 

Then, miraculously, the near-epidemic halted after the twelfth case 
— and Crocker found something of 



J4 FANTASTIC 

startling significance in a post mortem. 

IV 

For thirteen periods we had relief. Our last case had just deceased 
■ — she had been the eighth woman 
to succumb — and Crocker and 
ShaefTer were performing the autopsy. For the first time in weeks I 
had a few free minutes, and I was 
spending; them with Janie Nelson, 
our all-around receptionist. 

jerry's remark about marrying her 
meant simply that I was convinced 
that Janie was the most desirable 
girl in Hulbert. I had just remarked 
that I liked being with her when 
she said abruptly: "Sam, how long 
do you think we can keep Up this 
pretense?" 

That came as quite a jolt. "Why, 
I'm afraid I don't know what you're 
talking about," I said. 

"Yes, you do. You know exactly 
what I'm talking about," she affirmed. 

"Then suppose you tell me." 

"You're in love with me, and you 
want to marry me. But you're afraid 
to say so because the situation here 
has become so desperately tragic." 

She took one of my hands in both 
of hers — too tightly, I thought. 
"Sam, V nt scared. Suppose you can't 
find the answer. Suppose the settlement has to be abandoned. We can't 
go back !" She shook my hand tensely. "We can't, without carrying the 
disease to Earth." 

I honestly hadn't thought of that. 
I had been working too close to it 



UNIVERSE 

to consider how it might affect me 
personally. But Janie had seen the 
miserable frightened faces passing 
in ajid out, and was in constant, 
tragic contact with the most thoroughly personal part of it. 

I tried to picture the situation she 
had suggested. All contact, all supplies would be cut off. We'd be 
alone in that planetary vastuess of 
jungle, dying one by one of mys/e~ 
riosa. No, it was impossible. It was 
too horrible to contemplate. But I 
saw in Janie's tormented blue eyes 
that awful alienness of Venus as I 
had not dared to visualize it before. 

I heard Crocker and Shaeffer coming down the corridor, their steps 
rapid and excited. Then I heaid 
Crocker's confident laughter. He 
hadn't laughed like that since before Larscn s death. 

He came toward me and stopped 
in front of me and clapped both 
hands on my shoulders. 

"Come to my office," he said. 
"I've got something to show you.'' 

"Doc thinks we've found it," said 
Shaeffer, his voice utterly weary. 
"We discovered a little puncture in 
the cerebellum — " 

"A culture so small, a perforation 
so tiny as to be almost invisible," 
Crocker said. "And a colony of bacteria and a virus present in the surrounding cells." 

It was a catastrophic coincidence. 
Consider how beautifully the pieces 
fell into place, misleading us almost 
to complete disaster. Consider the 
sudden cessation of new cases, and 
Crocker's discovery of the virus in 



EPIDEMIC 

the cerebellum of the iaif victim of 
mysteriosa. Remember, too, that we 
were engaged in no mere abstract 
research. 

We were fighting for the very 
life of the colony, and hence had no 
time to waste. Our testing and research and re-checking had to be of 
the quickest possible sort. It had 
also to be as direct and immediately 
applicable as good science would allow. We were just not quite good 
enough scientists. 

But there was rejoicing in the 
hospital. For the first time the dark 
shadow that had been about to swallow us lightened a little. Gordon 
was elated. He congratulated 
Crocker and thanked him and told 
him to get some rest. I forgot 
Janic's fears and the picture of an 
abandoned settlement faded. We 
went fearlessly ahead and made 
tentative marriage plans. 

With loving hands Crocker bred 
a culture. When he had enough, he 
tested some for sterilization. The 
bacteria he took from the culture 
succumbed completely to a prolonged exposure of infra-red radiation. It was a happy bit of news, for 
it meant that individuals exposed to 
Veuusian conditions could return to 
Earth after the infra-red treatment 
which had been standard all along. 
It was a great step forward. 

Crocker bred the culture further. 
He prepared a toxin and injected it 
into the cerebellum of one of Shaeffer's guinea-pigs. Three periods 
later the pig could no longer maintain its balance and exhibited all 



ON VENUS 15 

measurable physical signs of mysteriosa. 

In two more periods Crocker had 
his antitoxin. He then proceeded to 
check it, two ways. First for modulatory effect, and then for the slim 
possibility that it might prove curative. Into one guinea-pig he first injected the toxin, waited until the 
animal became clearly ill, and then 
gave it an injection of the antitoxin. Many were the guinea-pigs 
that laid down their lives to enable 
Crocker to master the technique of 
time and dosage. 

But at the end of two months, 
when the long night had passed 
and the sweltering heat of day once 
more returned to cause us acute discomfiture, he called Gordon and 
told him that the Dying Death had 
been conquered. The anti-toxin was 
both inoculatory and curative. 

In one of those dramatic announcements in which he took delight, Gordon revealed the truth to 
the settlers, and we set up an inoculation schedule. It was a nervewracking task. We had to be scrupulously careful, too, since our supply 
of anti-toxin, though growing, was 
severely limited. Everything went 
smoothly, however, and in about 
fifty periods — twenty-five Earth 
days — we had over half the settlement inoculated. 

And then, disaster struck again. 

I was in Doc's office, drowsily relaxing in his swivel chair and listening to the distant droning of the 
mining machinery. I was thinking 
very comfortable thoughts about 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



16 

Janie, when the buzzing of the visiscieen aroused me from my lethargy 
and I bent forward and snapped the 
toggle. 

"Hello, darling," -I said. "I was 
just thinking about you." 

"I'm glad," Janie said. "But this 
is urgent. "There's an emergency 
wave-length radio call for Dr, 
Crocker. Sparks is holding it down 
at the field until he can get a local 
line for it." 

"Who sent the message?" 

"New Moscow. Sparks says they'll 
talk to no one but Crocker." 

I hurried out of the office and 
down to the inoculation station. I 
was fairly certain I knew what the 
call was about. We had been expecting to hear sooner or later from the 
other settlements. It seemed unlikely that the Dying Death would remain localized in Hulbert alone. 

When 1 went in Doc had just 
finished an inoculation. They were 
frequently a little rugged. The reaction was often severe and usually 
required a period of enforced rest. 

"New Moscow wants to talk to 
you," I said. 

He looked up, the hypodermic 
gleaming in his hand. "Take over 
for me, Sam," he said. "This may be 
serious." 

After inoculation we always delivered the patients back to their 
cabins in stretchers. I got Crocker's 
last victim on his way and loaded up 
for the next in line. 

When Crocker finally received 
the call, he found himself talking to 
a very heavy Russian accent. He told 



me later that the conversation ran as 
follows: 

"This is Dr. Pietr Arensky, Medical Director, Little Russia. Doctor, 
we have what we believe to be our 
first case of tuysteriosa. Your previous communication regarding the 
location of the virus is most appreciated, but — " 

"Of course. But I must warn you 
we are in perilous short supply. I'll 
provide what I can of the toxin, 
culture, and anti-toxin. Incidentally, 
I recommend at least twenty powers 
magnification when you search for 
those punctures." 

"Yes, I understand. Would 
twenty-four hours give you sufficient 
time to prepare the materials ?" 

"I should think so. And by all 
means keep in touch with me, Dr. 
Arensky." 

V 

Twenty-four hours later, rather 
desperately in need of sleep but excited at the prospect of seeing somebody new for a change, I was down 
at the field with the toxins and cultures. The landing field was our 
pride and joy. At the time it was 
certainly the finest landing area in 
existence on the two worlds, boasting twenty cradles, and hangars 
enough for twice that many transport spacecraft. 

At one end was the administration building, which was also the indoctrination station and the physical 
capitol of American Venus. Every 
person arriving on the planet passed 
through that imposing building and 



EPIDEMIC 

was screened from hairline to toenail. It may seem that these extensive facilities far exceeded the needs 
of a tiny settlement like Hulbert. 
They did. But we were looking 
ahead, to a time when Hulbert 
would be the largest metropolis on 
Venus. 

I strolled out onto the field, scanning the grey sky. Far to the south 
I could see the Russian ship — a 
black speck moving rapidly against 
the mottled backdrop of clouds. In 
another moment it was hovering directly overhead, and I could hear 
the droning of its auxiliary motors. 
Then the tower triple- flashed, a 
landing cradle slipped open, and the 
ship dropped neatly down on charging jets. 

I strode across the field to meet 
the burly figure emerging from the 
ship. He came swiftly toward me, 
smiling and shouting something in 
Russian, 

I smiled back, and shook my 
head, and handed him the kit containing the all-important materials. 
He spoke again in Russian and 
saluted briefly. We touched hands, 
and then he was hurrying back toward his ship. 

The cradle swung south. The 
tower gave its long-short flash, and 
the Russian craft roared upward and 
out over the rippling sea of jungle. 
In a moment it was gone. 

As I turned back toward the administration building, I saw Shaeffer. He was just emerging on the 
field, a hatless figure who was gesturing in my direction, "Sam!'' he 



ON VENUS 17 

shouted. "Sam! Doc wants you 
right away." 

I joined him in the front of the 
hangars and the first question I 
asked was: "What's on Crocker's 
mind?" 

"Two more cases of mysteriosa," 
he gasped. "That's what's on his 
mind." 

We both ran toward the administration building . . . 

It looked like the real thing this 
time. By the end of that period there 
were eight cases in the hospital, all 
in a critical condition. The antitoxin was our major problem. At 
the rate at which we were using it 
we knew it would soon be exhausted. 

We worked on into the next period without sleep, our task made 
more difficult by frightened people 
who came to the hospital with 
harmless sneezes and backaches they 
mistook for early symptoms of 
mysteriosa. 

"What we need," growled Shaeffer through stubble-shadowed lips 
as we clucked like frenzied mother 
hens over our dwindling cultures, 
"are virus with a hopped-up sex 
urge." 

Though it was pretty well knocked into a cocked hat, we salvaged 
what we could of the regular inoculation program. 

After thirty-six hours without 
sleep, Crocker sent me to my room 
to rest. As I moved out into the corridor I heard Janie call me, and 
turned to see her standing almost at 
my elbow, her face white and anx


[fi 



FANTASTIC L' N tVBRSfi 



ious. She had that scared look again, 
and I didn't like the ugly things it 
did to her fate. 

"It's Moscow again, Sam," she 
said. "Where's Dr. Crocker?" 

'Til take it," I told her. "If they 
don't like me, they can — Look, 
darling, you get sonic sleep. I'll put 
somebody else on the desk. We'll 
manage." 

' ' Are- you sure you can ? I 
mean — " 

"Get!" I kissed her, and turned 
her firmly about:. 

I knew enough about the board 
to pick up the New Moscow line 
from Sparks. Arensky asked for 
Crocker the instant I established 
contact, but I told him that my superior was unavailable, and that 
whatever he had to say I would be 
capable of comprehending. I was 
just tired enough to be a little testy. 

"Very well," Arensky said. 
"Something is very, very bad." 

"We've got our troubles too," I 
told him. All the same, I didn't like 
the feeling that came over me when 
I heard him draw in his breath. "Go 
on," I said. 

"One of our rnysterios.t cases passed away abruptly as the result of a 
heart attack brought on by his weakened condition. We conducted an 
immediate autopsy. But, Dr. Smith" 
— at this point Arensky's deep voice 
rose an octave or so, and almost 
cracked — "there is no puncture in 
the cerebellum." 

I choked down the gasp that 
formed in my throat. "I'm sure 
you're mistaken," I said quickly. 



"No offense intended, Doctor. But 
so minute a puncture would be very 
easy to miss. Try a lateral." 

"We did. Our staff is very good. 
And since we knew exactly what 
we were looking for — " 

"I see." I had to steady myself 
against the switchboard. "I'll tell 
Crocker. We'll contact you." I clicked off, leaving Sparks with a fuming, frightened Russian to pacify. 

1 went down the corridor very 
slowly, thinking about what Gordon 
had said to me about an old man's 
stubbornness. I knew that Arensky's 
message wou Id j ust abou t kill 
Crocker. I didn't dare let myself 
think what it might do to the colony. Possibly Arensky was mistaken, 
but in my heart I knew that he 
wasn't. I was rationalizing, desperately and without any real conviction. 

I found Crocker bending over a 
patient in the crowded main ward. 
When he saw me he straightened 
and the little muscles around his 
jaws tightened. 

"What's wrong, Sam?" lie asked, 
"I've been talking to Arensky," 
I said. 

"And?" He turned from his patient, his eyes searching my face. 

"One of their mysteriosa patients 
died." 

Crocker's expression did not 
change. "So soon?" he asked, quiet
"His heart gave out. They conducted an autopsy, but they found 

"No puncture," he completed my 



EPIDEMIC OM VENUS 



halting sentence. His calmness stunned me. He simply scratched his 
unshaven chin and shook his head. 
"Time will tell," he said firmly, and 
turned back to his patient. 

I returned to my room, and fell 
immediately into a deep sleep of 
utter exhaustion. 

The hoot of an ambulance awakened me. I was still slipping on my 
surgical gown when I joined the 
stretcher bearers. I was anxious to 
talk to the patient but when the 
bearers halted at my request I saw 
that his condition was too far advanced. 1 cursed the stricken man's 
stupidity. How could he have been 
fool enough to ignore the always 
pronounced initial symptoms? 

jerry Lc-Blanc descended from 
the ambulance and stood beside mc. 
His hand shook as he reached down 
and pulled the blankets off the 
man's shoulder. "Look, Sam," he 
said, pointing. 

The man had waited because he 
had felt convinced that he was in 
no danger. He had been inoculated. 

VI 

I accompanied Crocker on an 
urgent visit to Gordon. Crocker's 
face was grave, his manner abrupt 
to the point of rudeness. "Sit down, 
Charlie," he said. "This is going to 
hurt. It seems that the inoculation 
doesn't work." 

Gordon's eyes widened just a 
trifle and he leaned forward across 
his desk, but he said nothing as the 
other continued: "I now know that 



19 

I can't aire anyone of mysierhsa, 

much less prevent their getting it I 
made a serious mistake, but it was 
unavoidable." 

Gordon eased back into his chair, 
and compressed his lips, his deep 
black eyes unfathomable. 

"Apparently," Crocker went on, 
"we have accidentally stumbled 
across another disease, the one 
whose cause is the virus we found. 
Our lab animals displayed a physical decay so similar to mystenosa 
that I was misled into thinking — " 

"Never mind !" Gordon seemed 
to explode to his feet. He strode to 
the window and stared out, his 
hands locked tightly behind his 
back. "Crocker, what do you expect 
me to say? Your 'mistake', as you 
call it, has done more damage than 
the Dying Death itself." He turned 
furiously toward us. "Do you realize 
that everything we've worked so 
hard for may be irretrievably lost 
because of this?" 

Crocker nodded, his face grim. 
"You told me, once, that we 
couldn't afford to let pride stand in 
our way. Well, Charlie" — he returned Gordon's stare unwaveringly 
— "I'm willing to step aside." 

Gordon drew in his breath sharply. "Very well. I'll leave for Earth 
on the next CTS ship. I'll bring 
back a staff of specialists in internal 
medicine from Earth. The best I can 
find. They may not ask you to step 
aside. But at least you won't have to 
assume sole responsibility for whatever future mistakes may be made." 

Outside of the hospital staff, only 



30 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Gordon's immediate aides, Colin 
MacDuffie's Civil Police and the top 
engineers at the mines knew that 
Gordon had left He carried to 
Earth an order that must have caused him the most intense anguish. 
CIS must be halted until further 
notice. To Acting Governor Carroll 
Gleason he assigned the unpleasant 
task of turning back the shiploads 
of colonists so unfortunate as to arrive before the order could be implemented. No more colonists could 
be accepted into the plague-ridden 
colony. Only the uranium exports 
and supply imports could continue. 

At the hospital, we had to begin 
all over again. We needed a volunteer, somebody who had not yet 
been inoculated. No guinea-pig 
would do. Finally, one of the miners, a man whose wife had succumbed to ?nysteriosa, offered himself. 
With considerable trepidation, 
Crocker assumed full responsibility 
and the test was made. The miner 
Was injected with toxin. Simultaneously, Mrs. Larsen, who had been 
inoculated, was at her own request infected. 

She remained perfectly healthy. 

But in four periods, the miner became desperately ill. He lost muscle 
control, complained of pains in the 
head, and had trouble maintaining 
his balance. But he -was at all times 
perfectly coherent, and except for 
the extreme discomfort of his condition, showed none of the most 
noticeable psychological signs of advanced mysteriosa. Crocker gave 



him the anti-toxin, and he recovered. 

"Well," said Crocker, almost 
smiling, "at least we beat one devil 
to the punch." 

So the inoculation of the settlement continued. But cases of the 
Death kept coming in. We were 
sure now that mystehasa was not 
particularly contagious. The occurrences had been too generally scattered, and we had been unable to 
establish a pattern of contact based 
on any reasonably consistent incubation period. It was as maddening as 
It was frightening. 

Life settled into a frantic routine. 
We completed the inoculation of 
the settlement against dolorhi Crockeria — Crocker's disease. From the 
captain of a CTS ship, picking up a 
load of uranium for Earth, we 
learned that Gordon had arrived on 
Terra. Reports that the Death was 
taking its toll in the other colonies 
trickled in, Little Copenhagen, 
French Venus, Brazilian Enterprise, 
Little Britain — each reported one or 
more fatal cases. 

Despite my familiarity with 
death, it made me almost physically 
ill. Once, alone in my room, I raged 
futilely for an hour, cursing the 
swirling fog and shaking my fist at 
the indifferent black jungle that 
walled us in. After that I slept, exhausted, for fifteen hours. 

On the eve of the new year, with 
Gordon gone scarcely three mondis, 
there had been well over a hundred 
cases of mysteriosa in Hulbert. 
Eighty-five of them had died and 



EPIDEMIC ON' Vfcxus 



the prognosis for the still-living pa 
tients was absolutely negative. 

With prospects of anything but a 
Happy New Year, the hospital staff 
tried to relax in Crocker's office. We 
drank a toast to the occasion, and 
attempted desperately to be cheerful 
and uncomplaining. But we couldn't 
escape mysteriosa. It dominated our 
thoughts and inevitably our conversation returned to it. 

Crocker, who seemed to have 
aged years since Gordon's departure, 
sipped his Scotch and said, "It will 
take considerable doing, even by the 
persuasive Charles Gordon, to get 
the kind of men we need to come 
here now." 

"Perhaps we'll surprise him," 
somebody cheerfully volunteered. 

Jerry LeBlanc, a good looking lad 
with a Barrymore profile, stared into 
the half-empty g!ass which was 
clenched tightly in his hand. "How 
do we know he's coming back?" he 
asked. "How can we be sure?" 

"That's a devil of a thing to 
say !" I exclaimed. 

"Is it?" He gulped the rest of 
his drink and stood up. "I don't 
share your trust in Gordon. How do 
we know he hasn't deliberately 
walked out on us, deliberately left 
us here to rot? Why should he come 
back to this hell-hole?" 

I got up, and gripped him firmly 
by the shoulders. "You'd better 
sober up," I said. "You can't really 
believe that." 

"I believe it, all right. I tell you, 
you're all crazy." He reeled away 
from me, staggered and almost fell. 



"We must have been out of our 
minds to come here in the first 
place. Venus will never be successfully colonized." 

Crocker's angry voice crashed 
through the crowded room. "LeBlanc, sit down! Sit down or I'll 
cal! MacDuffie and have you locked 
up." He rose, a tight-lipped, bent 
old man with fire in his eyes. "Do 
you hear me?" 

jerry started to say something, 
choked, and then sent his glass 
crashing to the floor. It bounced 
once before it splintered, scattering 
tragments in all directions. 

"Happy New Year, everybody!" 
he shouted, and stumbled from the 
office. The room vibrated for a moment to the slammed door. 

Janie turned to me, her eyes 
bright with alarm. "Sajn, you'd better talk to him," she whispered. 

I nodded and pressed her hand. 
"1 think you're right" 

LeBlanc was nowhere in sight 
when I stepped out of the office. For 
a second, I hesitated. And in that 
second the crashing thunder of a 
shot rang out in the stillness of the 
hospital. 

Crocker, with the others behind 
him, was in the hallway and accompanying me toward Jerry's room almost before the echoes had died 
away. The door was hanging ajar. I 
kicked it open and the stench of 
gunsmoke stung my nostrils. 

Jerry was sprawled awkwardly 
across his tumbled bed. His head 
was shattered and there was blood 
on the throwri-back blankets. One 



22 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



arm was jammed behind him where 
he had fallen back upon it. The 
other, swaying still, hang above a 
smoking automatic on the floor. 

In a few hoars the news was all 
over Hulbert that one of the doctors 
had committed suicide. To the colonists that could only mean that even 
the medical staff was giving up. 

A half hour after the tragedy 
Gleason, the acting governor, put 
through an urgent call to Crocker's 
office. 

"The situation is becoming progressively worse," he said simply. 
"We're having a council of war 
over here. We want you in on it" 

Crocker insisted that I accompany 
him. We were the last to arrive. Besides the acting governor and ourselves, Rudolph Ahrens, chief engineer, was there with two of his 
assistants, as was MacDuffie, and 
Cleason's three young assistants. 

Gleason came directly to the 
point. 

"Gentlemen, I'm going to be 
completely frank. If I were the final 
authority I'd be inclined to suggest 
we pack our bags and admit defeat. 
It's that serious. But as matters 
stand, we'll probably go on doing 
what we can— until we're either 
dead or candidates for glory." 

The group remained silent, but 
the tension in the room seemed 
visibly to mount, and become for an 
instant almost unbearable. 

"The settlers," continued Gleason, "have interpreted Dr. LeBIanc's 
suicide as an admission of defeat on 
our part, I can understand their re


action." He turned to an assistant, 
who handed him a bulky envelope 
of documents. 

"Gentlemen, these petitions have 
all been .received in the last four 
hours. There are considerably more 
than three hundred of them. They 
arc petitions for transportation back 
to Earth. And the petitioners realize 
that if they return to Earth, they 
forfeit all rights and property claims 
attached to their service here." 

MacDufne's heavy, stern countenance puckered, and he whistled 
long and softly. Ahrens shook his 
bead and muttered to himself. Gleason nodded grimly, riffling thoughtfully through the petitions with his 
index finger, and when he spoke it 
was with some hesitation. 

"It seems to me that we have only 
one recourse. Heretofore the local 
government of this community lias 
resided in the semi-formal elected 
Citizen's Council. MacDuffie's 
group" — he nodded toward the big 
man — "has provided us with all the 
law enforcement that has been necessary." He paused an instant, then 
went on: "The Civil Police will 
henceforth be much more than a 
mild agency of law enforcement. It 
will have the sanction of absolute 
authority. In the event of any serious disturbance, its authority will 
only be subordinate to that of this 
office." 

"But what you're suggesting," I 
gasped, "is actually martial law." 

He swung toward me. "Yes, Dr. 
Smith— martial law. But it will be 
guided by reason and sanity." He 



EPIDEMIC ON VENUS 



23 



turned, and spoke directly to MacDutfie. "There must be no blusterin,!:; soldierism, no infringement on 
tiie rights of law-abiding colonists." 

M-uDuftic nodded. I could hear 
Ahrens still muttering, shaking his 
head as if in reply to himself. Wilbur Hulbert's portrait seemed to 
stare accusingly at us from over 
Glcason's head. 

""Then we're all agreed," Gleason 
said. "I also suggest that all of us 
here, and the rest of your staff, Dr. 
Crocker, carry arms. Discreetly, 
please. Those of us who are in authority will be in constant danger of 
physical assault by hysterical individuals or groups." 

"Have you any idea when Governor Gordon will be back?" I 
asked. 

"I wish I could answer that. We 
must accept as unfortunate the fact 
that his absence is bound to get out, 
and probably has already." 

Gleason turned to Ahrens. 
"Rudy, be particularly careful. My 
guess would be that if we do have 
trouble it will start at the mines." 

Ahrens nodded. "We've already 
had fist fights and several big arguments." 

Crocker and I walked back to the 
hospital through a heavy, hot drizzle. Doc was silent, his liuc a fluid 
mask for thoughts which rould 
hardly have been pleasant. 

"I was just thinking," he said 
suddenly and with startling candor, 
"what Gordon would think if he 
came back now, and found me as 
keen and confident and certain of 



eventual victory as the younger men 
he'll be bringing with him." 

I realized then, as Gordon had 
intimated, how completely he was 
dominated by the deep, intense 
pride of an old man dedicated to 
the last important task of a lonq 
career. The challenge had to be mei, 
for every man has one shining gift 
to bestow, and one citadel of integrity which cannot be undermined. 

VII 

The following day utter disaster 
struck. It was twilight, and a thick 
rain was falling, driven slantwise 
by a vicious wind which whipped 
the great trees skirting the jungle's 
edge into a dancing frenzy. Rudolph 
Alliens, scrunched down in his desk 
chair in his tin-hut office near the 
head of Shaft Number One, looked 
up in amazement, wondering what 
it was that had disturbed his concentration. Abruptly the truth 
dawned on him. 

One by one, the machines were 
stopping. 

The machines never stopped in 
JIulbcrt. They had operated constantly for five years, and without 
them the colony could not have 
survived. 

It was a major disaster. 

Ahrens arose hastily and went 
outride. He saw immediately that 
the men of the incoming shift had 
collected in little groups along the 
line of shaft openings, and were no 
longer moving into the mines. He 
saw also that there was a flickering 



24 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



it the head of the elevator shaft at 
Pit One. 

He stared at it, and after a moment realized that more miners were 
emerging from the darkness into the 
twilight, their bodies casting flickering shadows as they poured out, 
They came forward, like a viscous 
living syrup spilling from an overturned bottle, and cjuickly joined 
the men of the incoming shift. The 
very silence of their movement was 
terrifying. 

Ahrens peered down the long 
line of mines. Everywhere the tragedy was repeating itself. The men 
had stopped working. 

Footsteps clattered suddenly on 
the ground behind him. He jerked 
around, his fists clenched just as one 
of MacDuffic's men, the gold band 
of authority gleaming on his forearm, came scrambling toward him. 

"This is serious, Ahxens," he 
shouted. "We've got' to do something." 

Ahrens touched the knuckle of 
his index finger to his thick mustache. "Call Gleason from my 
office," he ordered. "Hurry." The 
man nodded and moved quickly 
past him into the hut. 

Ahrens turned to face the advancing" line of miners. "Why aren't you 
men working?" he shouted,, the 
wind almost swallowing his words. 

The ragged line halted. The whispering and muttering subsided. 
There remained only a restless stirring, made more ominous by the 
patter of the rain and the wind 
groaning through the trees. 



Suddenly, with startling abruptness, the night lights of Hulbert 
went on, blinding in their brilliance, 
transforming the dusk into a tableau 
of glittering luminescence. 

One miner detached himself from 
the others, and shuffled forward 
until he was about halfway to Ahrens. The engineer, understanding, 
crossed the remaining distance and 
the two men stood facing each 
other. Ahrens planted his fists on 
his hips, and stared steadily at the 
miner through the glare. 

The miner seemed a trifle chagrined. He reached out to shake 
Ahren's hand. The engineer frowned and obliged. 

"Dr. Ahrens," the man began 
haltingly, "we want you to understand we've got nothing against you 
personally." 

Ahrens looked out at the nervous 
crowd, now stretching in an unbroken line to the mine entrances. 
Then he returned his gaze to the 
man in front of him, and laughed. 

'"It's just that we came here to 
mine uranium, because the government gave us good money and free 
land and a chance at a new life," 
the miner went on quickly. "I guess 
none of us figured it would be easy 
work. But we didn't come to see 
our wives and friends die helpless 
around us, or to die ourselves — for 
nothing." He scratched his head. 
"You see what I mean?" 

"Go on," said Ahrens, mopping 
rain from his brow, 

"Well, now, Dr. Ahrens, there 
are some things we've found out 



EPIDEMIC ON VENUS 



25 



(hat we don't like. One is, they 
aren't going to let us leave the colony. The second is, Governor Gordon's already gone. That seems kind 
of unfair." 

"So you've decided ?" 

"We've decided that we aren't 
mining another ounce of uranium 
until you've agreed to let us go back 
to Earth — if we want to go back. 
I'm sorry about this. But we've got 
to hold your engineers until we get 
our way. Not as hostages, exactly. 
Just as — well, insurance." 

"I see," nodded Ahrens. "I don't 
suppose anything I could say — " 

"Nothing," said the miner, shaking his head emphatically. "Nothing will suit us but action, and a 
ruling signed by Gordon or Gleason. Until then you'll have to clear 
out. Dr. Ahrens. We'd keep you, 
too, but you're an old man. We're 
afraid you might get hurt." 

Ahrens looked out at the shifting 
men again, at their spokesman, and 
shook his head. He could not entirely fail to sympathize with them. He 
felt a hand nudge his elbow. It was 
MacDuffie's policeman. 

"I think we'd better go, Ahrens." 

"Yes, I think so," agreed the engineer, and together they left the 
area . . . 

Hulbert was — the mines. When 
the mines stopped, Hulbert stopped 
too. Inevitably the strike vitally involved almost every family in the 
colony, for only the hospital starf 
and a few other specialist occupations did not work in the mines. 



Somehow, though, order was 
maintained. Apparently the spokesman for the miners — who had been 
patently embarrassed — had really 
represented the entire colony. 
Shocked and frightened they might 
be, but there were no cowards 
among them. 

MacDuffie had stationed armed 
men along the top of the long winding declivity that edged the string 
of mines and their half dozen machine guns pointed directly down 
toward the pits. Below, miners 
strolled aimlessly about, occasionally 
stopping for shouted, friendly conversations with members of the 
hospital staff. 

Once Gleason went down into 
the mines and talked directly with 
the men, pleading with them to go 
back to work. They became angry 
when he defended Gordon. Gleason 
simply could not make them believe 
that the governor had not run away. 
When one of the miners swung on 
him, he wisely left before his stubborn persistence could lead to 
bloodshed and violence. 

No one doubted his courage. 

It was then that Dying Death 
cases started coming in again. Several cases appeared in the mines, 
and the miners started demanding 
medical aid. Crocker picked me for 
the job. 

We had twenty-eight cases laid 
out like so many living cadavers in 
the hospital, and the ambulances 
hadn't been silent for hours. I refused to dwell on what I might find 
in the mines. 



26 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



I loaded up with medicine and 
equipment and stopped on the way 
out to kiss Janiegood-bye. I couldn't 
help thinking it would probably be 
good-bye forever. She looked dead 
lired, and more than ft little st.ircd. 
She put her head on my shoulder 
and cried a little. 

"Sam," she said wearily, "do you 
suppose Crocker or Hans could run 
a basal on me "when they get a 
chance? I've been feeling awfully 
lired and uneasy lately, and I can't 
seem to shake this headache." 

A cold fear came upon me. "Any 
other symptoms," I asked. 

She held out her hands. They 
were trembling visibly. 

I stepped quickly back a foot or 
two and flipped a pencil out of my 
pocket. "Catch!" I said. 

The pencil dropped through the 
air. She made a frantic attempt to 
catch it — much too late and far too 
wide of the mark. I wanted to 
scream. 

"What's the matter, Sam?" 
Crocker asked, a moment later at 
the door of the reception room. 

"Janie, Doc." I was a grown man 
and s doctor and I'd seen a lot of 
people die of mysteriosa. But the 
thought of Janie going that way — 

"Number twenty-nine," I said, 
and put my face in my hands. 

Crocker closed his eyes for a moment, and put down his stethoscope. 
Shatffcr cursed, shrugged, and went 
on with his work. 

"I'll get a col," I said softly. 

In a few moments we had her in 
bed. She'd known the minute I'd 



gone for Crocker what the trouble 
was. Now she just lay there, tears 
welling effortlessly out of her eyes, 
looking up at me in desperate appeal. 

"I'm sc a red, Sam, " she wh i spered. 

"Don't be," I said, gently. "All 
our cards haven't been played yet." 

She shook her head. "No, Sam, 
I've been through it with you, remember." She closed her eyes. "It's 
been wonderful, Sam." 

"And it will be!" 1 said. I took 
her hand, which was shaking worse 
than ever now. "Darling, we'll take 
care of you. Darling, when we go 
back to Earth — " 

"Earth?" She opened her eyes, 
and thev seemed to stare a million 
miles away. "Oh, how wonderful! 
Earth! Blue skies and people and 
movies and music and everything 
like that ... oh, yes, Sam, I want to 
go to Earth ..." 

Crocker straightened. "Sam, go 
to the mines," he said. 

] stared at him. "Now? You expect me to—" 

"Go to the mines. You're just in 
the way here. Stay there, until you 
hear from me." He was pushing me 
gently and the whole tone of his 
voice changed as he muttered fiercely, "I may yet make Charlie Gordon 
tat his words." 

He turned away from me. 

I went, but it wasn't easy. All I 
could think of as I trudged through 
the fog was Janie, lying unconscious, close to death. I could barely 
remember Crocker's parting words. 



EPIDEMIC 

VIII 

Conditions in general at the 
mines were good. The men were 
eating well and things hadn't gotten 
dangerously out of hand. 

They were good to me, providing 
mc with meals from Lhc food their 
families brought them every period 
without fail and making available a 
sleeping area — an elevator car packed with dirt for a mattress and my 
medicine bag for a pillow, which 
was, under the circumstances, reasonably comfortable. 

We talked little, though, after the 
first couple of periods. They saw 
that I was doing what I could, 
which was just about nothing. They 
had one thought in mind, one overmastering desire. They wanted to see 
again the green hills and valleys of 
Earth. 

I could nt blame them. 

In the thirteenth period of my 
stay, a mass meeting was held inside 
the main shaft. Number Four. I 
was not invited. Harry Griswold, 
the originally somewhat reluctant 
man who spoke for thein, and who 
by now had had most of his reticence 
ground away by the constant presence of death, stalked out of the 
meeting grimly. 

He was followed soon after by 
the others, who wandered casually 
to their usual places. 

Griswold went out into the open 
area covered by MacDurlie's armed 
guards, and once again demanded 
release and a guaranteed return to 
Earth. 



ON VKNUS 37 

M aoDtluSe refused h is request. 
"You know what my answer must 
be, Harry. You know I have to say 
no!" 

Without replying, Harry Griswold spun about and stamped back 
into the mine. Two of the men, who 
had been standing near the entrance of the shaft puffing on cigarettes carefully hoarded from diminishing stores, straightened determinedly and came forward. 

I stared at them in alarm. "Griswold," I said, "what's going on 
here?" 

Griswold looked at me. ' 'Doc. 
I'm .sorry as hell." He shifted from 
one foot to the other, wiping a 
grimy hand across his bearded face. 
"We all appreciate what you've 
done." He inclined his head, and 
the two men seized my arms in 
crushing grips. "Unfortunately, 
Doc, you and Ahrens' five engineers 
seem to be our only tickets out of 
here." 

I struggled, but not too hard, 
realizing that it would have been 
useless in any event. "Harry, you're 
crazy," I said. "You'll never get 
anywhere this way," 

Griswold stared at me steadily. 
"It's try or die of a disease that's 
kitting the whole settlement. I prefer trying." He whirled and shouted. "Hal ! Bring up those engineers." 

Another shout answered him. 

Men started moving, purposefully for the first time since I had been 
with them. The other shafts quickly 
emptied, and the miners began to 



28 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



gather outside Number Four in a 
great restless mob. 

I was dragged to the front, along 
with the engineers. I saw Mao 
Duffie, who had been sitting, smoking a pipe, on the edge of the embankment, slowly rise to his feet. 

"Harry !" he yelled. He stood silhouetted against the blazing brilliance of a bank of lights. "Don't 
try anything!"' 

Griswold licked his lips, wiped 
his forehead with his hand, and 
took two steps forward. "Mac, you 
can see what we've got down here. 
We've got Doc Smith and Ahrens' 
five engineers. In about nothing fiat 
we're walking out of here. If you 
shoot, you'll have to shoot these 
boys first." 

He turned slightly. "All right. 
Let's go.** 

We moved, the engineers and 
myself propelled relentlessly forward and up the embankment by 
the surging mob behind us. I held 
my breath. I hadn't the slightest 
idea of what MacDuffie would do. 
He was a calm, thoughtful man, 
but this was the sort of situation 
really to test a man's temperament. 

After all, Griswold had been a 
shy nonentity a week before. For all 
'I knew, MacDuffie might go out of 
his head and blast the whole lot of 
us with his ugly-looking machineguns. 

MacDuffie shook his fist. "Stay 
back, I warn you — stay back !" 

"Go ahead, you lousy brasshat!" 
yelled somebody behind me. "Go 
ahead and shoot!" 



The mob roared. We moved faster; I stumbled, fell on my face, and 
was dragged back to my feet. It 
seemed as if I could almost reach 
out and touch the machine-guns. 
And then in a moment quietly, and 
without fanfare, it was all over. 

For the record, I'll make it 
straight. It didn't seem dramatic to 
any of us involved in it. Doc Crocker's arrival on the edge of the embankment was not deliberately 
planned. It wasn't in Doc to be 
theatrical. Of course, by the time 
the story had filtered back to Earth 
through the warpings and twistings 
of news agencies and feature writers 
it must have seemed as if there was 
an orchestra playing a theme song 
in the background. 

But it wasn't like that at all. For 
me, it was relief from hell. My arms 
were hurting like the very devil 
where my captors' fingers were digging in, and I was sick from fright 
and from the dirt I had swallowed. 
I could hardly hear for the shouting 
and yelling that filled the air, and 1 
could barely see MacDuffie against 
the dazzling glare of a night-light. 

Suddenly, though, diere was Doc 
Crocker, standing beside MacDuffie 
and squinting down at us. Abruptly 
the noise stopped, and my ears rang 
in the silence. 

"Hello, Sam," he said, his voice 
tired. He scanned the crowd. *Ts 
there a fellow here by the name of 
Sol Aronson?" 

"So what ?" came a growled reply. 

MacDuffie was fidgctting, uncer


EPIDEMIC ON VENUS 



39 



tain, his hand on a machine -gunner's shoulder. 

"Are you Aranson ?" called 
Crocker. 

"Yeah. So what?" 

"Go take a look at your wife." 

"My wife's dead by now," came 
the snarling reply. "You killed her, 
with your stupid — '* 

Crocker smiled patiently. "She's 
in the ambulance, Sol, parked back 
here. Why not go to her? She needs 
you. She's still a little weak." 

"Doc !" I screamed. "Doc— I 
checked Mrs. Aronson in myself — " 

Doc scowled. "You men let him 
go. There's somebody'd like to see 
him, too." 

Aconson was clambering over the 
edge now, and Crocker turned and 
watched him as he ran to the parked 
ambulance we could not see from 
the pit. 

An eternity seemed to pass. 

"Well?" called Crocker. 

"Yes !" Aronson's voice was 
shrill. "It's true! It's true! She — " 

The hands fell away from my 
arms. I scrambled toward Doc. 
"Janie, Doc . . . the others ..." 

Crocker put his hand on my 
shoulder. "They're all right, son, all 
right. And so is Janie." Once again 
he faced the crowd of men, now beginning to mill around excitedly. 
"I'm sorry we couldn't save them 
all. I remember a Mrs. Lewis. She's 
all right, too. At the hospital, Then 
there was Tom Longbow. He has a 
brother here, I think. He's doing 
well—" 

That did it They went nuts. 



That's the only word for it. They 
scattered in all directions. They 
streamed past us, a flood of excruciatingly happy men. 

DC 

It didn't take much pumping to 
get Crocker to tell me how he had 
cracked mysleriosa. He got most of 
it out, too, by the time we were back 
at the hospital, and I assure you I 
moved at a good clip. 

"Oh, there's lots of angles,' ' 
Crocker said, "angles we never even 
thought of. What a bunch of saps 
we were. 'Earth,' Janie said. 'I want 
to go back to Earth.' Like when 
Naguti and I were in Nigeria — " 

"All right, all right, get to the 
point," 1 growled. "A lot of them 
said that." 

"Absolutely. But when she said 
it, something about the context or 
the way she spoke — I don't know. 
But it hit me. So I checked. I found 
a few things which made my hunch 
seem more than just a hunch. For 
example, how many children came 
down with mysteriosa?" 

"Why—" I stopped short. "Why, 
none! You know, it never occurred — " 

His head bobbed. I plucked at his 
arm and we continued walking. "I 
hadn't thought about it either. Question number two: how many of the 
leaders, the people who really wanted the colony to succeed came down 
with it?" Before I could reply, he 
said decisively; "Same answer; 
none!" 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



30 

Crocker ticked his fingers. "Question number three: when did the 
last outburst occur?" 

"Just after the trouble at the 
mines began," I managed to reply, 
I put on speed, because the hospital 
was looming directly ahead. 

"Right, Sam. 1 observed, too, that 
most of the cases -were women, outside of those among the strikers. 
Not too important, but a factor. 
But here was the clincher. How long 
did it take for mysteriosa to strike? 
Four years. And when it did the 
first victims were the people who 
had been here the longest." 

We were at the entrance to the 
hospital. "Doc, I never did like 
mystery stories. Where's Janie?" 

"In her room." 

We went through the swinging 
doors. Doc went on: "Back in the 
old days, Kreitcher and I did some 
experimental work with hypnosis. 
In connection with specific neuroses. 
Nothing came of it. But that set me 
to thinking about that research." He 
grinned. "I'll wait," he said as I 
rushed into Janie's room. 

She was sitting, wrapped in a 
blanket and looking pale and weak. 
But she was alive and I knew she 
was going to be all right. 
• I put my arms around her and 
lifted her up to me. "janie," I cried, 
"Janie." 

"Sam," she said, after a while, 
"God bless Dr. Crocker, he's wonderful." 

"Yes. Wonderful." I eased her 
back into the chair. 

Doc came into the room and 



chuckled. "I was wondering if you'd 
forgotten about me. Poor Shaeffer. 
He's trying to handle the miners. 
They want to see — " 

"Doc," I said, "I didn't like mystery stories." 

"I hypnotized her.** 
"You hypnotized Janie.*" 
"Yep. At first my method was 
too crude and direct. I just tried 
convincing her she was on Earth. 
That didn't take. It gave me some 
bad moments, too. But I got Alliens 
and some of his boys to rig up some 
special equipment. We tried to synthesize what we could of a Terrestrial environment. Then I sort of 
plugged that into the hypnosis. That 
worked." 

"Doc, are you trying to tell 
me — *' 

"We made recordings of the hypnotic patter and the sound effects 
we used, and rigged the other effects so they'd be automatic. We 
started giving the treatment to all 
the cases in the hospital, and especially to the new cases. It takes time, 
though. And some we just didn't 
get to in time. But the rest, like 
Janie, will come out of it perfectly 
fit. Maybe a little exhausted, but fit 
as a fiddle." 

There was a noise outside. "Sam, 
I think we'd better help Hans," he 
said. 

"Yes." I kissed Janie again and 
followed Crocker out of the room. 
I put my hand out and caught him. 
"just one second, Doc, your dumb 
assistant doesn't get it. / dtm't get 
it!" 



EPIDEMIC ON VENUS 



3* 



M Damn it, man, how plain do I 
have to spell it? In the old days we 
used to talk about melancholia. A 
particular psychosis. It struck me 
how much like symptomatic melancholia mysteriosa was. Every symptom was present, except the history. 
These were well-balanced, hardworking people. But when I thought 
about what Janie said, I suddenly 
realized there was a history, an 
identical history for every victim." 

He swept his hand in a wide arc. 
"This monotonous, dull, utilitarian 
society Gordon's constructed here, 
and which all of his imitators in the 
other colonies have copied, plus this 
alien environment, plus little nuances like slightly lesser gravity, the 
somewhat higher carbon dioxide 
percentage — all those things. The 
presence of the patient on Venus 
was the history!'' 

The switchboard was buzzing; 
and I went over and switched it on. 
It was Sparks, frantically calling 
from the tower. "Get me Crocker!" 
he gasped. "Gordon's ship is approaching. He wants to talk to 
Crocker — " 

Doc overheard, and -brushed me 
aside. "Sparks, tell him Dr. Nathan 



Crocker is too damned busy to talk 
to him. You may pass on my recommendation, however, that he take 
his fancy scientists back where he 
got them and bring instead some 
fragments of Earth to these poor 
souls. A couple of movie tlxeatres, 
for example, and a. little wasteful 
beauty instead of . . . oh, just tell 
him I said his people aren't ill. 
They're homesick." 

\n a few years Hulbert, Venus, 
was a near metropolis of fifteen 
thousand people, the central city in 
a chain of towns scattered throughout American Venus, a jewel of 
colorful beauty blossoming in the 
midst of the jungle clearing that 
stretched for miles in all directions, 
a place of human beings and human 
hopes and the vacation spot for the 
wealthy of Earth, a transplanted bit 
of Earth whose charm was that it 
remained distinctly Venusian. 

Janie and I returned to Earth 
right away, where we were married. 
But human nature is funny. We 
didn't stay long on Earth. Before 
the year was out, we were back on 
Venus. 

Homesick . . . 



free 
will 



by . . . Dal Stivens 



A ROBOT was trundling along to 
its cubicle one night in 2500 A.D. 
when it met a ghost. The color of 
Ihe ghost was not remarkable but 
was merely the traditional vapory 
gray. What was unusual was its 
shape. It was that of a robot with 
a cylindrical body and round, segmented limbs. 

The ghost crooked a claw at the 
robot and cried: "Hey, bud, I want 
a word with you !" 

"Not with me!" said the robot 
quickly and took to its wheels. 

When it had clanked a good 
three hundred yards away it slowed 
and confided to itself, "Well, that 
certainly was odd and I did right 
to run as my makers intended me 
to do when confronted with anything strange. A human ghost is 
all very well, hut who ever heard 
of a robot ghost? Only things with 
souls are supposed to have ghosts 
and robots have no souls — or so 1 
No stranger ghost had ever walked have been ° ( coursc . il 



a dalTydill lane in search of 



would be interesting if robots had 
souls


chum. But the robot wasn't buying. The robot had not observed that 
the ghost had flitted ahead and 
taken up a fresh position directly 
in his path. 



We've mentioned before that Dal Stivens seems to have snatched the clo.ik 
of La Fontaine and donned tl with a wry chuckle, whistling the meanwhile 
to lure winsome little animals and "tough g/iy" goblins from the enchanttd 
glow of twenikth-cen'.tny magic casements. It's conceivable that Air. Stivens' 
boy-rneets-gn! audience—he's crashed a major "slick paper" publication — 
would be a little siitnmd by a robot ghost. But ue prefer to be audacious. 



32 



FREE WILL 



33 



"You don't get rid of me as 
easily as all that, bud!" The ghost 
waved his claw at the robot. "You're 
a scatey type, aren't you?" 

"Why shouldn't I be?" asked 
the robot. He whirred up, preparatory to taking off again. "You aren't 
supposed to exist and — " 

"I do, bud," said the ghost, "and 
that's all that counts. Don't move 
off, bud. Harmless as a kitten, that's 
me. I wouldn't harm a single coil. 
I've got a proposition for you — 
that's all." 

The robot fed all this through 
his photo-electric cells and then 
announced, "All right, I'll listen. 
Besides, I don't think my batteries 
could stand another sprint. But before you start talking, I must say 
tfaat I am greatly puzzled. Robots 
don't have souls — " 

"That's what you think, bud," 
said the ghost. "I was a robot and 
now I'm a ghost. Therefore, pally, 
I must have had a soul. Cor, you 
talk like a schoolmaster. Still, I can't 
be choosy." 

"Granting that you exist, for the 
basis of our discussion," said the 
robot. "What's your proposition?" 

"Just tliis, bud. I'm lonely. I 
want a pal, I'm the only robot ghost 
and it's lonesome." 

"I am distressed for you," said 
the robot. "But what can I possibly 
do to help?" 

"Just this, bud, and I'm asking 
it as a favor — you become a ghost 
and join me." 

"Not on your life," said the robot, indignantly. "I'm not taking 



any risks." He added reflectively, 
"Though, mind you, the notion of 
having a soul docs appeal to me. 
But suppose I just found myself on 
the junk heap without a soul. I'd 
feel a bit silly, wouldn't I? A lot 
of robots have to die, come to the 
end of the period of their usefulness. But you are the only one to 
my knowledge to have acquired a 
soul." 

"That's a bit of a curly one, 
bud," said the ghost, on reflection. 
"I can't have you taking unnecessary risks on my behalf." 

"Mind you, I must say I'm almost tempted to take the risk," said 
the robot. "I'd like to think there 
was more to life than my dreary 
mechanical existence. The notion of 
being a ghost and having, ipso facto, a soul tempts me." 

"Can't let you take any risks, 
bud," said the ghost, shaking his 
head. "Wouldn't be right. There 
must be a safe way if I'm not too 
thick in the nut." He faded until 
he was almost lost against the night. 
He was thinking hard and the concentration lessened the intensity of 
his ectoplasm. After half a minute 
the outline of the robot ghost grew 
firmer. 

"Got it all figured out, bud!" he 
cried. "Easy as E. S. P. All you've 
got to do is get yourself murdered 
by your boss,- same as me, and then 
you can't miss on being a ghost. 
Simple as anything why I'm here. 
It's so I can haunt him. Frighten 
hell out of him every night." The 
robot spirit chuckled. 



34 FANTASTIC 

"My owner is a nice man," said 
the robot. "It mightn't be easy to 
get him to murder me." 

"So was my boss until I decided 
not to do what he told me and 
handed him a few home truths as 
well." 

"You must have developed free 
will." 

"Of course, bud," said the ghost 
scornfully. 

The robot scratched his head until it rang. "I don't know that I 
could do that. It sec-ns rather impossible." 

"Not if you want to," said the 
ghost. "Nothing is but wishing 
nukes it so." 

"It's not as easy as you make it 
sound." 

The ghost who had grown quite 
bright now faded until he was a 
dim outline and stayed that way for 
over a minute. Then he grew almost incandescent. 

"Got it, pally!" he cried. "I'll 
tamper with your photo-electric 
cells and make you go haywire. 
Keep still and I'll do it now!" 

He wavered up to the robot and 
put out a limb. It passed right 
through the robot. He tried again 
three times and then went and sat 
down on the ground. He shone 
very brightly as he sighed, "I 
should have realized that. You'll 
have to do it yourself. Self help is 
the best." 

"These words are strange to me 
but I like the sound of them," said 
the robot. "1 will get myself murdered !" 



UNIVERSE 

"Atta, boy!" said the robot 
ghost. 

After a few more words the robot and the ghost parted, agreeing 
to meet at the same place on the 
f ol lowi ng evening. 

"You don't have to tell me you 
have failed," the ghost greeted the 
robot the next night. "I can sic 
that for myself." 

"I did my best and it was a 
damned good best," said the robot. 
"I told my master that I was tired 
of working for him, that I had a 
will of my own and that I intended 
to please myself and get a bit of 
fun out of life. I added that 1 wa< 
no mechanical being but a creatine 
with a soul. I also told him that I 
was fed up with listening to his 
whining voice and looking at his 
undistinguished face, and th.it 
though I might have no ancestors 
I was spared the knowledge that 
they had swung by tbcil tails." 

"That should have fixed him!" 
said the ghost admiringly. "He 
ought to have attacked you straight ■ 
way. Mine did before 1 said half 
as much." 

"You don't know my owner." 
said the robot. "He was delighted. 
He shook me by the hand and he is 
going to take me to the authorities. 
He says it's the greatest thing that 
has ever happened in robot mechanics!" 

"That's torn it!" said the ghost. 

"I am afraid so," said the robot. 
"There are owners and owners." 

The ghost faded almost away and 



FREE 

then reappeared. "Has your boss a 
wife, bud ?" he asked. 
"Of course." 

"You could make him mad if 
you hung your hat up there." 

"I'll try, but I hope I'm not getting too ambitious," said the robot, 

"Wishing makes it so, bud," said 
the ghost. "It's sewn up, now." 

They parted, agreeing to meet 
twenty-four hours later. 

During the day, however, the 
ghost grew impatient. He transported himself to the robot and asked: 
"What joy, bud?" 

"She likes me," said the robot, 
a little shortly. "It is all rather 
extraordinary." 

"How do you mean, bud?" 

"The feeling." said the robot. "I 
think I like it too. Very unusual." 



will 35 

"I told you you could do it, bud," 
said the ghost, and vanished. 

"Don't tell me you've failed 
again, bud," the ghost greeted the 
robot that night. 

"I succeeded and the boss was 
delighted," said the robot tersely. 
"His scientific interest has got the 
best of his other interests." 

"We are beaten, aren't we?" said 
the ghost. 

"You are," said the robot. "I'm 
not. I like it the way it is. I have 
no intention of becoming a ghost 
now. Things just couldn't be any 
better!" 

And he turned on his wheel and 
clunked off very fast with the help 
of the extra batteries he had fitted 
that day, while the ghost shouted 
ineffectually after him. 




IN ONLY 30 DAYS YOU'LL READ THESE HEADLINE STORIES 

THE CARTELS JUNCLB by IRVING K. COX, JR. 
OPERATION EARTHWORM by JOE ARCHIBALD 
THE HOOFER by WALTER M. MILLER, JR. 
THE UNDISCOVERED COUNTRY by ALCIS BUDRVS 
THE SUN HUNTERS by JOE L. HENSLEY 

Houlihan's equation by walt sheldon 



operation 
triplan 

by .. . Mack Reynolds 



He had made ihe first Lunar trip 
and at thirty he was a legendary 
figure. But to a legend may come 
a summons beyond the call of duty. 



J-| AROLD HOTCHKISS, SO-ClIIcd 

hntchctman of President Corcoran, 
waved Jeff Stevens toward a chair 
at the heavy conference table. He 
said, "Back during the war the joke 
was to point out several men and 
say, 'I want volunteers — you, you 
and you.' I'm afraid that's the situation you now find yourself in; 
Major." 

Stevens said, "I wondered what 
this was all about. Now I know. 
I've volunteered for something," 
He paused, before adding, "I would 
have thought I'd done my share of 
volunteering." 

Hotdikiss nodded his agreement, 
and stared at the other earnestly, 
almost pleadingly. "You're our 
most experienced man, Major. We 
find ourselves in a position . . ." 
He cut it off. 

Jeff Stevens looked at him. 

The general, seated off to the 
side, cleared his throat apologelically as if to say that this was not 
of his doing. 

The president's right-hand man 
came to his feet and approached a 
large scale mcrcator projection of 
the world which hung on an otherwise bare wall. His buck to the 



Having gained considerable distinction as a collaborator with Frtdric 
Brown and other top-echelon experts in interstellar exploration and the 
mystery-writing craft Mack Reynolds is singularly equipped to shine in 
bis own light as an accor/i phthed science fantasy u titer. And shine he 
does in this fast-paced, starkly realistic saga of space hazards incalculable. 



36 



OPERATION TRIPLAM 



37 



other two, he regarded it momentarily and then said, as though to 
himself, "There have been a good 
many changes here in less than two 
decades." 

He turned and faced them. "The 
second world war has never really 
ended. Hardly had the common 
enemies collapsed than the United 
Nations split into two camps and 
entered into what was termed a 
cold war.'* 

''Frigid fracas the tabloids are 
calling it now," Jeff Stevens said, 
bu't without unbending. 

"At any rate, the situation continues and possibly it is best that 
our world has split so evenly into 
the Eastern Confederation and the 
Western Alliance. Now we are so 
balanced that neither of us has the 
advantage. Neither of us seems to 
be able to achieve the prestige 
which would bring the few remaining neutrals to his side and thus 
gain dominant strength and the confidence to initiate armed conflict on 
a world scale." 

Stevens shifted his slight body 
in hts chair. 

Harold Hotchkiss looked from 
Stevens to the general and then 
back again, and continued to cover 
ground as familiar to his listeners 
as to himself. 

"Both sides are developing their 
science, their industry. Both camps 
trying to impress the neutrals, the 
all-important neutrals. A few years 
ago the Eastern Confederation 
established the first space station 
and temporarily led in scientific 



prestige. However, within weeks we 
were able to counteract their moves 
by establishing the first Lunar base, 
as you well know, Major." 

Stevens stirred again, not concealing his irritation. Who was telling 
whom what? 

"But now they are about to reach 
out Ntill further. The totally unexpected his happened." 

Major Jeff Stevens sat suddenly 
erect. "How was that?" 

Hotchkiss took out his handkerchief and held it to his mouth momentarily, then replaced it in his 
pocket. "The Confederation is 
about to send out an exploring expedition to the other planets." 

"Then they've got atomic propulsion !" 

"And arc years ahead of us," 
the general added, tonelessly, speaking for the first time since Stevens' 
entrance. 

"The thing I want to stress," 
Hotchkiss went on, "is that if they 
are successful in being the first to 
reach Mars or Venus, their presttqc 
will shoot sky-high. Man has 
dreamed of reaching out into space 
for so long that such an achievement would have far-reaching 
effect. We can't afford to have them 
precede us." 

He came to his feet and stared 
down at the diminutive spaceman 
for a long silent moment. 

"You're our most experienced 
man," he said, and then he added, 
"General Smyth will take over from 
here." He turned and shuffled from 
the room, an aged and tired man. 



38 FANTASTIC 

The New Mexican spaceport was 
familiar. 

Almost, Jeff Stevens felt a stimulation at the sight of the concrete 
aprons with their Neptunes nestled 
hi their two step rockets and waiting to be fired spaceward. It 
seemed such a short time ago that 
he, with five others, each in Ins 
own ship, had blasted off for the 
first attempt at Lunar. He alone, 
of the six of them, had made it. 

He alone had returned. 

For a moment the vexation arose 
in him again. That they had the 
gall to call on him once more. He 
suppressed his resentment only with 
an effort. 

There had been considerable development in the past few years. 
The Lunar base now supported a 
do2en men, and, circling the Larth 
was a space station, an artificial 
Satellite, with its own crew of ten 
or more. At least once or twice a 
month a craft took off for one or 
the other of the Space Services two 
bases. 

Yes, things had developed but 
not to the point where an attempt 
at Mars and Venus was practical. 
It was an act of desperation, and 
.the rhetoric of a Harold Hotchkiss, 
and the brisk efficiency of a General Smyth couldn't disguise that 
fact. Nor was Jeff Stevens kidding 
himself. 

Upon his arrival at the spaceport 
he was immediately hustled through 
all gates, past all guards, and assigned to a Neptune for the trip to 
the space station. The messenger 



UNIVERSE 

who came scooting up on a motorcycle all hut missed him. 

He saluted and said breathlessly, 
"Package for Major Stevens." 

Jeff Stevens weighed it in his 
hand, frowning. It was about the 
size of a shocbox and there was an 
envelope attached, He opened it 
and read: To be opened and used 
in case of extreme emergency during Operation Tviphin, Good luck! 
Harold Hotchkiss. 

"Probably a dehydrated lifeboat 
or some such," he growled inwardly. Then he turned to the pilot. 
"Come on, Lieutenant, let's go." 

He didn't recognize the pilot. 
That was the Space Service for you, 
expanding so rapidly you couldn't 
keep traik of them all. 

The lieutenant gave him detailed 
instruction on belting himself into 
his ginibal-surrounded acceleration 
chair. Then he said, "We'll be 
spaceborne in a moment, sir. You'll 
probably black out for a few minutes, but it won't make any difference. We'll have a little more than 
four G's for a period of perhaps 
eight minutes before reaching 
Brennscbluss. Then we'll hit free 
fall. Now that's where it's going to 
bother you at first, Major. You . . ." 

"Listen," Jeff Stevens growled. 
"My name is Stevens. Didn't you 
know?" 

"Stevens ?" 

Jeff Stevens had to grin, in spite 
of himself. "I made the first Lunar 
trip, Lieutenant." 

The eyes of the pilot widened. 



OPERATION 

"Oh. Oh, that Major Stevens." He 
stared, unbelievingly. 

What was he, an historic personage already, Jeff Smith thought 
bitterly. Hell, he was barely in his 
middle thirties. 

That first thrill he'd had of taking off into space for the initial 
i i mo was returning now. Jeff 
Stevens could almost feel valves 
opening, pumps beginning to stir, 
the liquid hydrogen and the ozone 
beginning to gush into the booster 
which would lift tlie ship off the 
ground. 

A low roar began, audible even 
within the titanium alloy hull. It 
swelled ponderously, thunderously, 
penetratingly. 

The pilot said, under his breath, 
"Rocket away!" as their acceleration chairs gave easily beneath 
them. 

The booster device was lifting 
the heavy mass of the N-eptune and 
its two step rockets sluggishly from 
the ;ipron. In seconds it would fall 
away and the first step would take 
over. 

Uneasy fear washed over them, 
brought on by the subsonic vibrations. The rocket motors set up 
sounds from all the registers the 
ear could detect, but it hadn't halted 
(here. The human ear couldn't pick 
up the subsonic notes but the fear 
that accompanies them was present. 

Jeff Stevens, with the experience 
of the veteran, remained impassive, 
but the face of the young pilot went 
ashen, Stevens wanted to shout to 
him, "It'll be over in a few min


TIUPLAN 39 

utes." But he restrained himself. 
It would only embarrass the fledgling. 

They felt the rockets diminish in 
sound, then swell again, even as 
they slipped into a gray-out from 
the acceleration. Step rocket one 
had reached its Brennschluss and 
fallen away, and step rocket two 
had taken over. It wouldn't be long 
now. They must have already 
reached the point where Earth's atmosphere had thinned out to nothingness. They were theoretically in 
space. 

The Western Alliance's space station was located approximately 22,300 miles above the surface of the 
Earth — located at that distance so 
that it "circled" the world once in 
twenty-four hours, or, in other 
words, remained above the same 
spot, since the Earth's revolution 
exactly offset it. It would take them 
less than an hour in free fall before 
they reached their destination. 

Jeff Stevens appreciated that. At 
least they wouldn't have the full 
four days in free fall that it took 
to make Lunar. Then he caught 
himself. Lunar? He wasn't going 
to Lunar. He had a year and a half 
of free fall before him. lie wondered whether or not the human 
body could stand that. There was 
no particular reason to think it 
wouldn't. But, on the other hand, 
no particular reason . to think it 
would. 

He felt the familiar sensation 
beginning to come over him. They'd 
reached Brennschluss of the ~Nep


40 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



tune now. The acceleration was 
falling off, not all at once, of course, 
but rapidly. The grayness swept 
.iway and breathing became easier. 
The free fall was upon them. 

He said, "I should have enjoyed 
[hat four gravities while it lasted. 
It's the last gravity I'm going to 
feel for a long time." 

The pilot looked at him questioningly. "Where are you going, sir? 
There's gravity on Lunar. Not 
much, I grant you, but gravity." 

Jeff Stevens had said too much. 
"Top secret, Lieutenant. Very hush, 
hush." His tone didn't invite further questioning. 

He was sorry he'd made that slip. 
It wouldn't do for the pilot to be 
curious. General Smyth had made 
it clear that if it became known the 
attempt was being made, and it then 
failed, instead of prestige there 
would be an unfortunate negative 
effect. If he failed, the world would 
never know of his attempt, he realized, and the realization didn't improve his bitterness about the whole 
project. 

As a matter of fact, the Alice 
was somewhat more than Jeff 
Stevens had expected, but still considerably less than he had hoped 
for. The spaceship was more advanced in several respects than anything else the service had developed 
thus far. But it was still pitifully 
inadequate for the job at hand. 

It was somewhat larger than the 
Nepitwc in which he'd arrived at 
the space station, but not outstand


ingly so. After all, the Alice had 
had to lift herself from Earth before she could reach this space station at all, and that had limited her 
size and capacity. Only minor alterations had been possible here. 

To his surprise, one of the 
changes made in her, out here in 
space, had been to rip out two of 
the fuel tanks. One of the engineers 
explained it to him. Actually, less 
fuel would be needed for the full 
year and a half trip than it had 
taken to make the initial flight from 
Earth to the station. The idea was 
that you pointed yourself in the direction of your goal, blasted for a 
lew minutes and then "coasted" 
the rest of fche way. 

The space formerly utilized for 
fuel was converted to pumpkin 
plants and hydroponic tanks, and, 
to a small extent, to living quarters. 
It was the size of the living quarters that made Stevens inwardly 
cjuail and curse himself for ever 
accepting the assignment Hotchkiss 
and Smyth had offered. 

The compartment was about the 
size of a Pullman bedroom, and in 
it were crowded a bunk, a chair, a 
tiny f ol d ing table, cook i n g and 
toilet facilities. All over the walls 
were gauges, instruments, radio and 
navigational equipment. The only 
possible escape would be back into 
the narrow aisles between the 
growing plants in the hydroponic 
tanks. 

A year and a half of this ! 
He inspected the Alice together 
with three of the Space station's 



OPERATION 

technicians and its commanding officer and there was largely silence 
between them. 

He said finally, sourly, "Snug, 
isn't it?" 

The colonel had remained quiet 
thus far. Now he said softly, 
"There's still time to back out, Major. Maybe it's a little late, but it's 
still possible, l-'rom what the general said, all that would happen is 
that they'd have to keep you under 
wraps until they released the information that the trip was being 
made. They'd find somebody else." 
He didn't seem to be very convinced about it himself. 

Jeff Stevens said disgustedly, 
"No. I'm going. My roof must be 
leaking, but I'm going." 

The hydroponic expert had left 
them to give the tanks a checking. 
He called back from the inner 
chamber, "I hope you like corn, 
peas and stringbcans, Major, because your diet is going to consist 
of just that almost exclusively for 
some time." 

"I'm a meat and potatoes man," 
Stevens growled unhappily. 

Why was he doing this? Why? 
Hadn't he taken his chance on the 
Lunar venture? Why should he risk 
his neck again? Before, six men 
had started out and he alone had 
survived. If anything, the odds 
looked worse this time. 

He shrugged it off. "All right," 
he said suddenly. "Let's find out 
what's holding us up." 

The astrogator, an old-timer who 
had known him for years, looked 



TR1PLAN 41 

up from his perusal of the pocket 
sized books of the meager library. 
They were made of tissue-thin 
paper and were coverless to conserve weight. "The way it figures 
out, Jeff, you ought to wait another 
twenty-four hours at least. Mars is 
in pretty good opposition this time 
but — " 

Jeff Stevens nodded. "You're the 
boss, Ilay. Twenty-four hours it is. 
Let's get back to the space station 
and sec if you've got any litjuor 
aboard." 

"A very sound plan. Major," the 
colonel told htm. 

Jeff Stevens had hoped that the 
first few month:; would be the hardest and that from then 011 he'd 
settle into a routine undoubtedly 
monotonous but at least bearable. It 
didn't particularly work out that 
way. 

Of course, life did tit into a routine. There was comparatively little 
to do, but he saw it was done. It 
would have been too easy for him 
to have sunk into complete ennui 
had he allowed it. 

There were the hydroponic tanks 
to keep supplied with water and 
chemicals and correctly lighted. 
There were the pumpkin plants to 
be kept controlled in their most 
vital production of oxygen. There 
was the distilling purifier,- which 
over and over again used the moistuxe thrown off by his body to condense from the air, to purify, to 
distill, to return to the water tanks 
to be used again. 

There was the preparation of 



42 FANTASTIC 

meals, and then there was a certain 
amount of astrogation. 

"Actually," his astrogation instructor had told him, "it really isn't 
so far off from the celeStial navigation that they use in ships and aircraft. The variation was worked out 
by a Dr. R. S. Richardson back before the second war. 

"Say we take a star, Rcgulus, for 
instance, a nice first magnitude 
baby which is situated pretty well in 
the Solar System's plane. You measure the angle formed by Regulus, 
the ship, and the sun. The star, of 
course, is motionless as far as we're 
concerned, so the angle gives us 
our position. Next you work out a 
triangle between the sun, the planet 
you're aiming af, and the ship. 

"Okay. Now in the Astrogation 
Almanac here, wc find the distance 
af the planet from the sun fur that 
particular time—- we still have to 
use chronometers, even in interplanetary navigation — and we have 
all the material we need. We know 
one side, and we can figure all the 
•.ngles. Simple geometry gives you 
your distance from your goal. Work 
your triangle around the other way 
and you can find out how far you've 
come from Earth, or, for that matter, how far you are from any body 
in the Solar System." 

There were other things that kept 
him busy. The books, the cards for 
playing solitaire, the music records, 
and his own attempts at drawing, 
music, writing. 

But time was heavy. 

He lay on his bunk, buckled him


UN [VERSE 

self in against the weightlessness, 
stared at the overhead, and debated 
for a full half hour what he'd think 
about. It bad got to that, by now. 
He'd divided his life, his actual 
experiences, his vicarious experiences via books, the theatre, radio, 
the conversation of others, into a 
finite number of cross indexed sections, each very clear in his mind. 
And now he could spend long moments of the dullness just thinking 
about what to recall, what to choose, 
among all the things he'd already 
recalled over and over again. 

Did he feel m the mood for hitler ness? 

There was the fact that Hotchkiss and Smyth had chosen him, 
from the several scores of available 
space pilots, when he'd already done 
iiis share and more. 

Noitaglia? 

There was his childhood. Mother. 
Father, faintly remembered. School 
years" friends. 

Romantic memories? 

There was Alice, for whom he'd 
named the ship. There was always 
Alice, the unattainable Alice. It was 
possible to think of the others who 
had been before her. The casual affairs. The more important ones. A 
girl here, a girl there. This one who 
had been more than avcragely attractive. That one who had been 
particularly frank in bed. But it always came back to Alice. 

He wrenched his mind from that 
trend of thought and decided to go 
back over his scene with General 
Smyth, after Harold Hotdikiss had 



OPERATION 

left them alone — so long ago, it 
seemed, there in the office in the 
Pentagon. 

General Smyth had cleared his 
throat and come to his feet. "As 
Mr. Hotchkiss pointed out. Major, 
the problem is to get there first." 

Jeff Stevens had stared at him. 
He hadn't conditioned himself to 
the idea as yet. "You mean you expect us to reach Mars or Venus with 
no more than our present equipment?" he demanded. "Without 
atomic fuel for power?'" 

"Not us," the general said, without looking at him. "Just you. 
You're going to have to do it alone, 
Major. No room for a larger crew." 
He went to a chart on a wall, a 
blown-up diagram of the Solar System and indicated it with a thumb. 

"This is going to be a bluff, you 
might say. Remember during the 
war when Jimmy Dooliltle bombed 
Tokyo? That was a bluff with more 
value as propaganda both at home 
and abroad than of damage to the 
enemy. It was a quick attack that 
couldn't be followed up and every 
plane that participated was destroyed either by the Japs or in 
landing in China. 

"Frankly, Major, wc can't go 
cither to Mars or Venus, land, and 
then return to Earth. Atomic propulsion would be needed for that 
and all wc have is chemical fuel. 
But wc can go to both Venus and 
Mars, circle them and then return, 
with our present equipment." 

Jeff Stevens protested "I'm confused. What—" 



TR1PLAN 43 

The general said, "You sec, M.ijor, the trip to Mars would take 
about two hundred and fifty-eiglil 
days. But by the time you arrived it 
would not just be a matter of turning about and returning. Earth 
travels faster in its orbit about the 
sun than does Mars. And by the 
time you were ready to return, Earth 
would be on the opposite side of 
Sol. The spaceship would just have 
to wait at Mars until the Earth was 
in opposition again. The wait would 
last four hundred and fifty-five day: . 
Then the return trip would take 
another two hundred and fifty-six 
days." 

Jeff Stevens said, "About two 
years and eight months for Hit 
whole trip." He shook his head. 
"Alone for almost three years. It 
doesn't make any difference how 
much we need prestige, General. It 
couldn't be done. One man couldn't 
take it." 

The general ignored him and 
went on. "A round trip to Venus 
would be somewhat less. The trip 
out would take one hundred and 
forty-six days, then you'd have a 
wait of four hundred and seventy 
days, and then there'd be the one 
hundred and forty-six days to get 
back. Altogether, two years and a 
month." 

Jeff Stevens said slowly but emphatically, "Either trip is impossible. If nothing else, two years is 
too long a period for a man to remain in the cramped quarters; not 
to mention food and oxygen re


4.4 FANTASTIC 

quircments. But to attempt to go to 
both Mars and Venus — " 

The general smiled sourly. "A 
combination of the two would take 
a considerably shorter time, to accomplish than either one alone, Major. 

"You see, we'd use the Walter 
Hohmann Round Trip for Operation Triplan. The ship would first 
proceed to Mars, but it wouldn't 
land, nor would it remain in orbit 
around Mars for the four hundred 
Wid fifty-five days. Instead, it would 
circle Mars for a few weeks and 
then head out for Venus. Venus 
would be circled for a few weeks 
and by then Earth would be in position for a return. The whole 
project would take about a year and 
a half. Dr. Hohmann worked it all 
out in his Die Erreicbbdrkeit cier 
Wmmehki" per long before space 
travel was an actuality." 

It began to sound more possible 
at that. Mars travels slower than 
Earth, Venus travels faster. Since 
Mars is nearer the sun and Venus 
further aw^y than our planet. The 
ship would take advantage of that 
situation. 

Jeff Stevens said, "Wait a minute, now. As I get it, the government wants me to take a ship powered by present fuels and take off 
for a tri-planetary exploration in 
which I'd circle both Mars and 
Venus but land on neither." 

"That's right," the general confirmed. "It would be impossible to 
land and then take off again. You 
wouldn't have the fuel for it." 



UMVEKSIi 

Stevens snorted. "I won't have 
fuel for this deal cither, as far as 
I can see. It's all we can do to get 
a ship to the moon with our present 
fuels." 

General Smyth said v briskly. 
"We've figured it all out, Stevens. 
The craft you use will be taken 
up to our space station and there 
refueled. In that manner we'll 
escape the necessity of burning precious fuel in take-off from Earth, 
which, of course, would ordinarily 
be the main expenditure. You'll also 
have a step rocket for your initial 
velocity. There will be ample fuel. 
None extra, but ample." 

It was still fantastic. "But the 
food, the water, the air?" 

The general smiled. "There will 
be pumpkin plants to produce oxygen, there will be hydroponic tanks 
to augment your dehydrated foods. 
You'll be self-sufficient for the period you're gone." 

He had sat silently then for a 
long time before asking the next 
question. By this time he knew it 
was no mistake, no joke. The Western Alliance was desperate, and he 
was expendable. 

Mars grew slowly in the sky before him, and that, at least, was 
something. Each time he arose from 
his bunk, after sleep, he was able 
to go to the small but powerful 
telescope and decide that for himself. 

"She does seem to be nearer." 
He'd got to that point now. He 
talked to himself. And answered. 



OPERATION TRI PLAN 



■IS 



And the time came when he 
made his observations as usual and 
murmured with some surprise, "I 
thought Mars had only two moons." 

Not that he needed to, the information was branded on his mind 
along with everything else known 
about the red planet. But he went 
to his condensed encyclopedia and 
looked it up. 

"Only two," he grunted in confirmation, "both of them tiny. 
Phobos, nearly six thousand miles 
off Mars, and Deimos, about fourteen thousand five hundred miles 
off. 

"And they're tiny enough," he 
added. "Phobos is only about ten 
miles in diameter, the other one's 
about half of that." 

He went back to the telescope. 
"This one is smaller still. Maybe 
that's why they haven't picked it 
up before." 

Jeff Stevens kept his eye glued 
to the glass for what must have 
been hours. Finally he put it down 
and laughed without humor. "Harold Hotehkiss," he said, "and you, 
General Smyth. I've got bad news 
for you. The Eastern Confederation 
ship is already here and already in 
orbit around Mars." 

The significance of it suddenly 
dawned upon him. They hadn't developed an atomic fuel as had been 
thought. All they had was chemical 
fuel. They, too, were using the 
Hohmann Round Trip for an 
Operation Triplan of their own. 

"They must've started earlier 
than I did," he muttered and took 



up the telescope again. The craft 
seemed larger than his own. 

At least there was time* and time 
aplenty to think everything out. He 
went back to the bunk and 
sprawled there, but instead of constructive thought, waves of bitterness flooded over him. AH this. All 
this he had been through. All he 
had been subjected to I»y Hotehkiss 
and Smyth and their bid for prestige. And what was the result of 
his sacrifices, the endangering of his 
life a thousand times over? This . . . 

He finally shook it off savagely 
and brought himself before his 
radio. He picked up the speaker 
and flicked switches. 

They had anticipated this, those 
in the other ship. A voice immediately came on, a voice heavy wilh 
a middle European accent. 

Calling Western Alliance spaceship. New Petrograd, calling Western Alliance spaceship. Come in. 

Jeff Stevens answered carefully. 
Alice calling New Petregrad. Come 
in, New Petrograd. 

He flicked over and his speaker 
blared. What has taken you so long, 
Alice? According to our agents you 
left weeks before us but we have 
been here already for many days. 
Over. 

Even over the reaches of space, 
the taunt was there in the voice. 

His lips felt tight. He took the 
mike and said. Greetings from the 
crew of the Alice, New Petrograd. 
Your agents must be mistaken. Our 
agents tell us you started considerably sooner. Over. 



46 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Security! He snorted disgustedly. 
The Easterners weren't bluffing. 
They'd known of his attempt and 
had hurried up their own expedition. Damn Horchkiss- and Smyth 
for bunglers! 

The speaker blared. You attempt 
to fool us, Alice. We know you 
started first. Undoubtedly you still 
use the inferior fuels hydrogen and 
ozone. Over. 

A cold finger worked its way up 
his spine. He kept his voice even, 
flicked the set over and said, Don't 
tell us you have developed atomic 
power. If so, you wouldn't have to 
remain in orbit around Mars-. You 
would have enough potter to land 
tind take off again and you would 
have sufficient acceleration to arrive 
here at?d return during o?ie opposition. Over. 

Never had time dragged so slowly as this over the past months. 
Finally came the answer, the other 
voice jovial now. We did not claim 
to hate atomic power, Alice, but 
we have progressed beyond hydrogen and ozone. We hat e developed 
monatomic hydrogen and, we assure 
you, the advantage is impressive. 
Call us again in twenty-four hours, 
Alice. We are both far from home. 
The voice added, maliciously. In a 
way, of course, you are even further 
from home than we since we wilt 
be bad months the sooner. 

Jeff Stevens slumped into his 
chair and stared at the set. His hand 
went out to the encyclopedia. He 
read aloud, "Monatomic hydrogen 
io which each atom is independent 



instead of being tied to another 
hydrogen atom to form a molecule. 
It gives a theoretical exhaust velocity of twenty-one thousand meters a second. Ordinary hydrogen 
has a theoretical exhaust velocity 
of five thousand, one hundred and 
seventy meters per second." 

He put the book carefully in its 
place. 

"They're right," he told himself 
aloud. "Tney'll get home sooner. 
They'll have to wait around Mars 
the same as I will until Venus is in 
the right spot, and then, after they 
get to Venus they'll have to wait 
there until Earth is in line again, 
but it's on the home stretch they'll 
shoot ahead. They might make it 
two months before I do." 

But was there no solution? 

Was there any way of bringing 
them down? 

No. There were no spacecraft, 
as far as he knew, fitted for interspacial warfare. But even if there 
were, the Alice certainly wasn't designed to destroy another space vessel. 

There was no solution, and he 
knew it. And he knew that if the 
New Petrograd returned before 
him, the fact that the Alice had 
also made the trip would be almost 
meaningless. 

He sat there, unthinking, staring 
unseeingly, for what might have 
been hours. Finally, and almost inadvertently, his hand went out to 
open x compartment door. He 
brought forth the package the 
messenger had delivered to him 



OPERATION TRIPl.AN 



4 7 



from Hotchkiss-— to be opened and 
used in case of extreme emergency . . . 

He unwrapped it A bottle of 
stone age cognac. With it VU another note. 

/ 4tn sorry, son. H is not easy 
for a s/ck old man to send a young 
man to his death. Not even for a 
great cmse. Let me say that I am 
very humble, and grateful in the 
name of our people who must never 
know that Operation T riplan was 
attempted, now that it has failed. 
Your death is for us all, but only 
a few can know of it . . . Harold 
Hotchkiss. 

Jeff Stevens grunted. The old 
hoy had guessed that an extreme 
emergency on Operation Triplan 
would mean curtains. Well . . . 

Both ships were in orbit now 
and only a few score miles apart. 
They swung silently around Mars, 
the red planet, waiting for the time 
when Venus would come nearest 
them and they could blast off in 
her direction. And once every 
twenty-four hours they exchanged 
radio messages. 

Jeff Stevens managed to keep it 
on a friendly basis, in spite of their 
thinly-veiled taunts, their boasting, 
their heavy sneering attempts at humor at the expense of the Alice 
and of the Western Alliance. 

There were four of them in the 
crew of the New Petrogtad and 
Jeff Stevens kept up the pretense 
that there were even more than that 
number in the Alice. He didn't exactly know why, but the first ink


lings of a plan were forming in his 
mind. 

As the weeks passed he sipped 
Harold Hotchkiss" cognac very carefully and with appreciation and he 
thought it out very carefully. 

And while he waited he checked, 
to the extent possible with the instruments aboard, rhe surface conditions of the planet beneath him. 
The data accumulated by Earth's 
astronomers over the years was surprisingly accurate. Mass, density, 
volume, diameter, orbital velocity, 
period of rotation. The atmosphere 
was thin, certainly too thin to support human life, but there was 
moisture and a certain amount of 
vegetation. He couldn't tell from 
this distance whether or not there 
was animal life. 

"A helluva spot for either us or 
the Eastern Confederation," he 
snorted aloud. "You'd think both 
sides were nuts for even trying to 
reach the place." 

Slowly, the time for departure 
for Venus approached. Within an 
hour of the time his own calculations called for leaving on the next 
leg of the operation, he detected 
the New Petrograd's jets. 

He flicked on his set and the 
other craft answered almost immediately. You of the West are tardy, 
the voice said, its mockery ill-concealed. Our calculations show it is 
time to leave for Venus. We will 
see you there later, Alice. Over. 

Jeff Stevens took up the mike and 
threw the switch over. Good luck. 
New Pctrograd. Our calculations 



48 FANTASTIC 

are — different. He flicked the switch 
off. 

He stood there a full minute 
looking at the set, "Yeah," he said 
aloud. "Good luck, Niw PelrograJ. 
You're going to need it when you 
get back." 

Talking easily to himself, he sat 
down at the tiny desk to compose 
the message he intended to send to 
Firth. "Let's see. We'll continue in 
this orbit for a few more weeks. 
Long enough so that it would be 
impossible for them to watch us in 
their telescopes. Then . . ." 

He wet the end of the pencil 
and composed the note carefully. 
Security, of course, was out now. 
The fat, so to speak, was in the fire. 
Soon, all Earth would be in the 
know. 

He read the message aloud: 
Have LANDED mars and taken 

POSSESSION IN NAME OF WESTERN 
ALLIANCE STOP AWAIT REINFORCEMENTS STOP SIGNED STEVENS OFFICER COMMANDING FORT MARS 
UNITED STATES SPACE SERVICE. 

He considered it and nodded his 
approval. "Of course, I don't have 



the fuel to take off again, once I 
land, but I should be able to live in 
Alice for a long time, maybe even 
— not very likely, of course — until 
they, somehow, send a ship that can 
land and take off again." 

He reached out for a glass and 
the bottle of cognac and poured 
himself a sparing half ounce. 

"Yes, sir," he said. "In a few 
months the New Pelrograd will be 
making its return to Earth from 
Venus, planning on startling the 
world with the fact that it made a 
trip around Mars and Venus. And 
just about when they're ready to 
land, I'll send this message." 

He sipped his brandy and read 
the message again. 

"Wonderful brandy," he said appreciatively. "Hotchkiss is a man 
of rare understanding. Well, he 
wanted to have prestige to maintain 
peace and the balance of power on 
Earth. So he'll have his prestige. 
Perhaps its first colonist will never 
see his home planet again, but Jeff 
Stevens, old friend, the Western 
Alliance will shortly have the first 
colony of Earth on another world." 



fresh 
pastures 

by . , , Garnett Rddclifje 



The Famine was far more terrible 
than the World Wars which had 
preceded it. But one woman on 
Earth had the bravest of husbands. 



]t was a converted farmhouse 
built before 1950 and its only modernized feature was a raised platform built above the sloping roof 
for the benefit of the tradesmen's 
hover-vans. Inside, one room had 
been rc- wired for dimensional viewing. Apart from those changes the 
house was much as it had been in 
the middle of the twentieth century. 

The day commenced for Hetty 
Marcham, the owner of the house, 
with a minor annoyance. She was a 
young widow and the mother of 
three children. A little more than a 
month previously she had lost her 
husband. 

The minor annoyance concerned 
the milk-van. The pilot told her she 
would be getting a half-pint less in 
the future. He was sorry, but it 
wasn't his fault. 

"It's this World Famine," he explained. "How can cows give milkwhen they're not getting proper 
food?" 

"But according to the Food Distribution Regulations I'm entitled to 
three pints a day!" Hetty protested. 

"Well, I'm afraid the cows can't 
have read the Regulations. But I'm 
sorry. I am really ... I mean, you 



This is a very quiet story. Two isolated ti omen living for the moment in 
the iifiermath of a world tragedy explore relationships ttagically intertwined with a grief, and pain and fear whirh has become almost unendurable 
And out of the quietness emerges drama~a>ul a quality of susprnse so stnrmg 
to the mind and heart that Garnett Radchfje's gift to us will be treasured 



A 1 ) 



50 FANTASTIC 

with three young children and losing the Commander so recently . . . 
He was a fine man . . . Didn't he 
build the platform with his own 
hands? - * 

"Yes," Hetty said proudly. "He 
could do anything." 

"He made a good job of the platform. Well, I must be flapping 
along. I'll have a word with the boss 
to see if he can't let you have anothei half-pint." 

"Thank you," Hetty said. 

After the milk-van had gone 
growling on its way she remained on 
the platform, her eyes following a 
distant bird. When she'd decided it 
really was a bird, she sighed in relief and descended the steps leading 
to the interior of the house. 

Her aunt had got the children up 
and was giving them their breakfast. She was a tiny short-sighted 
woman, as brisk as a bee at seventy. 
She too had known sorrow in her 
youth. Her fiance, a fighter-pilot in 
the Last War, had been another 
who had not returned. 

"Good morning, Hetty," she said. 
"There's mutiny on the lower-detk 
this morning. Douglas won't eat his 
bean-toast." 

"Then he should be put in irons," 
Hetty said. "Why won't you eat 
your nice bean-toast, Douglas?" 

"Wan' bread," said Douglas. He 
was four years old and had his 
father's curly hair and obstinate blue 
eyes. 

"You can't have bread," Valerie, 
who was ten and serious, told him. 



UNIVERSE 

"Bread's rationed because of the 
famine." 

Douglas's retort was to fling a 
piece of bean-toast at his sister. 
Hetty thought He wouldn't have 
done that if Eric bad been here, and 
restored peace by the rather cowardly subterfuge of giving her son a 
piece of her own bread ration. 

When the children had departed 
in the school hover-bus she looked 
at her mail, which was considerable. 
Letters of condolence from people 
she had never heard of were still 
arriving. There was a thick, registered letter from Eric's solicitor 
which she knew would contain 
forms to be filled out m connection 
with her pension. 

A bishop had written making suggestions for a memorial service. The 
Famine Relief Committee had gratefully accepted her offer of Eric's 
clothes. A plane would be calling to 
collect them that morning. 

"I'll see to that," her aunt assured 
her. "What you need is fresh air 
and exercise. Take a walk to the village." 

Hetty shook her head. "I promised Professor Clayton to let him 
have Eric's diaries as soon as possible. I'd better start sorting them 
out." 

Her aunt frowned, and shook her 
head in disapproval. "Your health 
h more important than the diaries. 
But suit yourself." 

The diaries were in Eric's study 
just as he had left them. He had 
dated and arranged them with great 
precision, almost as if he had known 



FRESH PASTURES 



lie would not come back. In addition to the diaries there were several 
graphs, pages of incomprehensible 
mathematical formulae, and photographs of men wearing what looked 
like divers* suits. 

A shadow that momentarily dimmed the room drew her to the window. It was only the Famine Relief 
plane come for Eric's clothes. 

She heard Aunt Hetty's voice and 
sounds of movement in the bedroom 
above. She listened as if it was 
Trie's body they were taking away. 
Presently the plane took off. Her 
aunt appeared in the study, looking 
very determinedly cheerful and matter- of- fact. 

"Well, that's done" she said. 
"She was very grateful, especially 
for the leather shoes. They use 
those, you know, for making meat 
substitutes." 

"So we've to eat Eric's old 
shoes!" Hetty skid. "And this is the 
vaunted twenty-first century!" 

"It's better than the last one," 
her aunt said. "At least we've no 
wars." 

"Wars could be ended, but what's 
going to be the end of the famine? 
The scientists give us eight more 
years at the very most. Douglas will 
be twelve then." 

"The scientists aren't always 
right," her aunt said. "Anyway, I'm 
going to take a taxi to Paris now, to 
see if I can buy a rabbit. Oh, by the 
way, what became of that photograph of you that used to be on the 
mantelpiece in Eric's dressing-room? 
I noticed just now it isn't there." 



51 

"He took it with him," Hetty 
said hoarsely. "He said I was going 
to be the first woman — 

She broke down. Wise from experience, her aunt patted her shoulder, said, "I must be off now, dear," 
and left the room. 

Once alone Hetty quickly recovered. She busied herself making the 
diaries into neat parcels by years. 
Before she did up the most recent 
one, she looked at the last entry her 
husband had made. 

"As far as is humanly possible the 
chances against us have been reduced to a minimum. The rest is in 
the hands of God," he had written. 

The rest is in the hands of God ! 
She looked out the window and saw 
a speck moving above the clouds. 
Knowing she was being ridiculous 
she opened the window and leaned 
out so that she could watch it as 
long as possible. 

This 'sky-gazing' as her aunt 
termed it, was becoming a bad habit, 
like a drug that brought relief at 
first and then an eternity of pain.' 
Resolutely, she turned away and 
tried to decide what she should do 
next. 

There was a lecture on cooking 
she could view in the D.V. room. 
But she was sick of the grim famine 
discussions that had come to dominate people's lives. Despite what 
her aunt had said she still believed 
that even wars must have been 
preferable. Wars blazed and died. 
The famine was a black cloud, slowly, irresistibly creeping over the 
world. 



52 FANTASTIC 

An album of photographs caught 
her eye. She opened it at random 
and saw Eric's father in old-fashioned uniform, with a peaked cap 
that almost hid his eyes. He'd been 
only a little older than Trie was now 
when he had been killed in the 
Last War. 

She turned the page and saw a 
photograph of a girl wearing trousers and smoking a cigarette. Eric's 
grandmother at the age of eighteen! 
A twentieth century Miss who had 
lived before cosmic energy had been 
discovered, but who had had pretty 
nylon and cotton to wear, and real 
soap (o wash widi ! 

"People were happier then," 
Hetty decided. "Men killed each 
other in wars, but the world itself 
hadn't begun to die." 

She thought of her children and 
their future. Her unhappiness and 
nagging anxiety sent her to (he 
viewing-room where she could tunc 
in on the special beam reserved for 
parents to the school dining-room. 
The midday meal was in progress 
and she could see her busily occupied progeny. 

She thought Valeric, the eldest, 
looked sad, as if she missed her 
father. Elspeth, who was seven and 
very pretty, was chatting gaily; and 
Douglas, who sat amongst the infants, was sucking a spoon upsidedown and glaring at the teacher. 

Hetty had a certain distaste for 
spying on her children. She was 
grateful when the beam enlarged 
the day's menu which was chalked 
on a blackboard. Fishcakes, rice


UN IV ERSE 

pudding and stewed apples was 
what they were having. As was only 
right the children got priority for 
food. 

She had started her own lunch of 
bean-toast and watercress sandwiches, when her aunt returned 
from Paris, hot and tired, but 
triumphant because she had secured 
a rabbit. Hetty inspected the emaciated little creature. 

"How much were you obliged to 
give for that?" she asked. 

"Fourteen thousand francs and a 
packet of tea. Do you think I was 
cheated?" 

"No, I don't. You're a better 
shopper than 1 am." 

"That's because I've had more 
experience. Anyway, you're a better 
shopper than Eric was. Do you remember the day he — ?" 

They talked lovingly about Eric 
for the remainder of the meal, and 
Hetty, with great self-control, restrained herself from looking at the 
sky. As a treat because she had been 
to Paris and bought a rabbit, she 
made her aunt a cup of bean-coffee 
with sugar. Then they switched on 
the news and were cheered to hear 
that thanks to cosmic stimulation of 
the soil the Canadian potato crop 
promised to be a record one. 

"The scientists will beat the famine yet," her aunt said quietly. 

In the afternoon Hetty went out 
to mow the lawn that had only been 
preserved as a lawn because the soil 
was too weak to grow anything except grass from cosmic-fertilized 
seed. It wasn't entirely waste, how


FRESH 

ever, since the clippings could be 
used for silage. 

There whs a radar-controlled 
atomic mower th.it would have done 
the job in half-an-hour. For the 
sake of exercise, however, and because Eric had once said it gave a 
closer cut, she used the Little antiquated hand machine she had to 
push herself. The whirr of the 
blades was soothing and she loved 
the scent of the new-cut grass. She 
recalled with a pang that Eric had 
mowed the lawn by hand on the 
day before he went away, possibly 
to divert his thoughts. 

She began to play a game. In 
her imagination she was LawnMower Hetty. Lawn-Mower Hetty 
who mustn't stop because so much 
depended :;pon her. The whirring 
blades were motors, and the grass 
they flung up a shower of green 
meteors through which no living 
thing could pass. Once a bee took 
off with a furious buzzing directly 
before the wheels and floated 
through the meteors apparently unscathed, 

"It's going very fast and there's 
plenty of room if there's nothing 
else!" she could imagine Eric saying. 

The lawn was on a slope. Up the 
slope Lawn-Mower Hetty had to 
labor in a succession of short, fierce 
bursts, her feet boosting the ascent 
like rockets. When she turned and 
began to descend the pull of the 
rose tree at the bottom caught hec 
and she hurtled downwards at 
twenty-five thousand miles an hour. 



istures 53 

Faster and ever faster until she saw 
the gravel path ahead and then her 
h eel s became great parachutes to 
break the shock. Around and then 
up a_gain toward a goal she could 
never reach because the meteors 
were a shower of death, dividing 
her from victory. 

The return of the children 
brought her back to earth. When 
they had been fed and Douglas, 
who was in one of his worst moods, 
had been forcibly put to bed, she 
returned to the mower. 

But somehow the zest had gone 
out of the game. Even as a cutter 
of grass she knew herself to be a 
failure. She had let Eric down. He 
had expected so much of her and 
she had failed. 

The evening was drawing in and 
something she dared not look at 
had appeared in the sky. It was a 
new moon shaped like the hooked 
finger of a witch beckoning men to 
an tcy death in a dark void. They 
floated in the void like drowning 
kittens in a pail of water. They 
clawed each other and suffocated 
slowly, or they were engulfed in 
one flash of fire while the moon 
soared inviolate and serene above 
their puny struggles. 

Tired and with blistered hands 
she took the mower back to its shed. 
When she returned into the house 
it seemed very silent. All the children were in bed now and her aunt 
was watching a play. She went into 
Eric's study, picked up a book at 
random and tried to compose herself to read. 



54 FANTASTIC 

It was .m old book concerned 
wuh the wars of the last century. 
It seemed meaningless to Hetly. 
The people it described had lived 
in a different age "and had faced 
different problems. World Famine 
had not yet crept upon them. Only 
a handful of the wisest scientists 
had even glimpsed the grisly 
shadow of the wolf stalking mankind. 

She was living when the wolf 
had begun taking its toll. It was 
three years now since the World 
Famine had started, and the wolf's 
shadow had encircled the globe and 
all nations were huddled together, 
their animosities forgotten, like animals trapped by a raging forest fire. 

"We'll have to break out," the 
scientists said. But the question 
was, bow? 

Suddenly Hetty, who had been 
half dozing, realized that her aunt 
Ii.nl corae into the room. The older 
woman was very pale, and when 
she spoke her voice sounded 
strange. 

"Hetty, are you asleep? They've 
switched off the television. The .111nouncer said they were going over 
to Universal News and asked everyone to stand by for an important 
announcement." 

Hetty felt her hands go wet and 
her heart start pounding. No, she 
wouldn't allow herself to hope. She 
forced herself to smile. "He's go


UNIVERSE 

ing to tell us that the Assam ricecrop has failed and we mu.sl .ill 

tighten our belts a little more." 
"We ought to listen anyway." 
"All right." 

She switched on her wrist-radio. 
They sat in silence while the tiny 
dial glowed green. There were 
crackling noises and then, suddenly, 
a voice announced: "This is Universal News. For the next four 
hours this, and all other stations 
will bring you on the spot coverage 
of an event which may well be crucial to the future of mankind. 
Sptice-sbiff Hetly, commanded by 
Commander Eric Marcham, thirtyfive days overdue and ofhc ially 
given up as lost, has landed on 
Space Station R. I. 7, after a successful trip to Mars. There were 
no casualties. The crew are all well 
and in high spirits." 

"He's done it!" Hetty cried. 

She began to weep and fumbJe 
for her handkerchief. The night was 
full of cheering. It was as if something that had been pent-up for 
centuries had suddenly been released and was pouring in a shining, golden torrent around the 
globe. But all she was really aware 
of was that Eric had come back 
safe and sound, and that upstairs 
Douglas had woken up and was 
bellowing like a young bull eager 
to give battle to the Universe. 



the 

advantages 
are 

tremendous 

by . . . Curtis W. Casewit 

It was a chemical plan for mass 
destruction, almost as dreadful as 
the Hydrogen Bomb. But its wily 
inventor had an ace up his sleeve. 



Contrary to the rule, Professor Theodor Lindemann had not 
been brought behind the Iron Curtain at gunpoint. 

He went to what he called the 
Barbaren at his own accord and his 
chemical %veapon went with him, 
simply because the barbarians had 
offered him a large sum of money 
for it. But aftcx three months of 
his scientific surrender the Professor 
was sick and tired of his hosts and 
desperately anxious to get back to 
Leonora, his wife, and to the land 
of his birth. He therefore began to 
ask for his return documents, softly, earnestly, as a great pharmacologist well might, his tallncss, enormous forehead and academic looks 
adding a certain persuasiveness to 
his appeal. 

To his astonishment, there came 
an afternoon when Captain Puitov, 
Sergei Puitov, of Chemical Warfare, announced that the Professor's 
return had been foreseen, and that 
the papers were already signed and 
sealed, in the Captain's own tunic, 
under the Captain's resplendent 
medals. To prove his point, Captain Puitov even unbuttoned a 



// you were so unfortunate as to have missed Curtis W. Casewit' s recent 
brilliant lead novelette in ARGOSY or bis original leleplay "Tiger," this 
briefer yarn — his newest — will enable you to discover at fust hand 
just how ternjyingly timely a Casewit story can be. He pulls no punches, 
as you'll see, and doesn't pause for breath, until he scores a dramatic 
triumph heavily underscored with seething, tumultuous currents of dread. 



55 



56 FANTASTIC 

pocket and his tiny pink hands 
emerged with an envelope. 

"Your papers? Right in here," 
Puitov said as if. someone were 
pinching his nostrils. "Right in this 
envelope. But after the experiment, 
understand?" 

Then he turned his wide hips and 
narrow shoulders toward the Top 
Ten. These, Professor Lindemann 
knew, had come to witness the experiment on a live rhesus monkey. 
He also knew that none of the Barbaren had the faintest notion of 
chemical warfare or medicine, 
though they'd somehow been put 
in charge of the Department. 

It was a travesty. 

One of them was a Marshal, a 
man in a medal-bedecked uniform 
with a coarse face, who presently 
grinned so that the General, the 
Colonel and all others, down to the 
automatic-toting sergeant grinned 
also. 

"Before I give you the papers," 
said Captain Puitov, "you will tell 
us about your gas." 

"Jd, Captain Puitov." 

"Well?" 

"The advantages of Tabun 
gas—" 

"Nyel, nyet! No. It's Tabr/iisky 
now — " 

"The advantages of Tabunsky 
are — " 

"Are tremendous!" Captain Puitov pushed himself in front of the 
scientist and addressed the Top Ten 
who were gathered in the front 
room of a farm house — a large, 
ugly room with sullied walls, a 



UNIVERSE 

rusty stove and an empty coal 
bucket. 

"Distinguished officers, tovarhhe, 
comrades," Captain Puitov declaimed in his nasal voice. "I personally will describe Limpclmann's 
gas!" 

Puitov waited until the Marshal, 
the Colonel, and the comrades had 
laughed about the "Limpelmann," 
and then went on pompously: 
"Number one — the tactical viewpoint. What does Tabunsnky do? It 
surprises! Now why should it surprise? Ah, Tdbmunky h colorless, 
odorless, non-corrosive. Number 
two — the medical viewpoint. Advantages again ! Tabumky has no 
latent period. You'll sec that for 
yourselves this afternoon when I 
perform my experiment on the monkey. You'll observe the gas in action." 

Captain Puitov's rimless glasses 
glittered and his tiny chin went up 
and down. "Please imagine, for a 
moment! As little as three drops 
into the pores of an Imperialist's 
skin — and what do wc have? 
Agony! Unendurable agony. And 
death — quick death! Gas masks? 
Completely senseless. Antidotes? 
There are none. Injections of atropine or adrenaline,'' perhaps? Futile, ridiculously futile! Like a 
toothpowder against leukemia!'* 

As the Captain strutted through 
the room, Professor Lindemann 
could hear the envelope and bis 
papers rustling. He was astonished 
that his superior had kept his promise. After the experiment he would 



THE ADVANTAGES 

be free to take a train out of the 
Curtain right into the arms of his 
wife who would cry, with a little 
gasp: "mem Suesser! My sweet 
one!" The thought made Professor 
Lindemann stare through the windows. 

It was nasly weather outside, and 
the trees and hills were heavy with 
snow. But what if Puitov didn't 
provide the papers? The Professor 
discarded the idea, but it forced 
itself back into his mind. If Puitov 
should make difficulties, it would 
he too bad for Puitov. 

Everything the Captain knew 
about Tabumky, he knew first 
hand, of course. But there was one 
important thing the pompous little 
man did not even suspect. If Puitov 
stayed in character, that one small, 
missing piece of information might 
well break the Captain's pink neck. 

For the time being, Puitov stayed 
in character. He elaborated on bis 
experiments on albino rabbits and 
dwelt on bis ideas on how to disperse the gas by means of 
aerosol clouds from innocent-looking planes, ostensibly sent out on 
a benevolent mission to kill insects. 
With an odious little smile, he 
added that the Imperialists were 
indeed no better than common lice, 
or beetles. 

Me went on to explain how be, 
Puitov, had scattered the labs over 
a wide area — Pathology II, North, 
Gas Physics, Colloid Chemistry, 
South, and Neurology, 1 km West — 
and how adroitly he had directed 



ARE TREMENDOUS 57 

research in Organic and Inorganic 
Chemistry. He, the great Puitov in 
person. 

He ended by stressing the fact 
that he had found that one hundred 
percent secrecy was absolutely essential for this afternoon's project. He 
even boasted about the loneliness 
of the house, a loneliness which had 
been achieved by simply sending its 
previous inhabitants on a Northeastern trip, by which, of course, 
he meant Siberia. 

"And now, comrades, I will show 
you the laboratory," he announced. 
"It is behind this wall. You, too, 
Limpelmann! Come vith mc!" 

The Professor followed his superior into the kitchen. Advancing to a table near the door, Captain Puitov removed a circular 
mirror from above a smaller wooden 
square. Directly beneath the square, 
there was a reversible switch, and 
as his comrades watched he quickly 
proceeded to turn the device, first 
to the left, then to the right. 

Back in the main room, a motor 
hummed. There was a sudden click, 
a faint rattle, and as Puitov blared: 
"Comrades, watch the wall in front 
of you!'' a massive section of tiling 
rolled smoothly upwards. A slot 
formed under the ceiling, and into 
it the wall vanished and also a part 
of the roof. The Professor knew 
the mystery. 

Captain Puitov '5 eyes glowed 
with pride. "A complicated process," he exclaimed. "Especially to 
fasten the wall onto a metal sheet. 
But I overcame all the technical 



58 FANTASTIC 

difficulties, and here is the laboratory in front of you!" 

The Top Ten entered, their 
medals clinking against their 
chests. 

"It is well concealed," Captain 
Puitov continued. "It is hidden like 
our thermo-nuclear labs behind the 
Urals, completely unsuspected by 
our enemies." He pointed to a 
table which was covered by a maze 
of instruments and test tubes. 
"Here I performed my final experimen is," lie boasted. But Lindemann knew that the equipment was 
new, freshly out of packing cases, 
and that the Professor had remembered to place it on the table solely 
to impress his official visitors. 

"And here is the glass cage." 
Puitov strutted toward a huge contraption which looked like a coffin 
for a giant, and stroked its surface 
with his tiny hand. "Now I beg 
you to understand, comrades, that 
this is a most unusual kind of glass. 
It can neither be broken or melted 
by extremes of heat. It is even one 
hundred percent bullet proof. You 
see the small cot? The animal will 
lie on that — or to be more precise 
— on this rubber mat, with its wrists 
tightly chained to these hooks. Its 
feet will be cuffed down also, but 
not its entire body. Why, you may 
ask. Why shouldn't the entire monkey be chained down? Ah, he must 
have mobility, to survive the terrible 
convulsions!" 

Puitov wrinkled his nose, so that 
the spectacles moved up and down. 
"These convulsions are unique, and 



UNIVERSE 

therefore worth studying. Have you 
ever seen an epileptic? That is how 
the monkey will toss and twist himsejf about and tremble." 

The Captain stared at his audience, eager for approval. 

The Marshal nodded, and the 
others followed suit. 

"Now here against the wall are 
the centrifugal pumps, and over 
there, the labyrinth of pipes. Here 
on the ground, you can observe the 
tanks. Both hold five liters of the 
liquid. Five liters is all we've fabricated so far. Still, it is enough to 
kill one division of our despicable 
enemy. Tdbunsky streams swiftly 
through the network of pipes and 
gathers within another tank which 
you cannot see because it is hidden 
in the wall . . . Limpelmann!" 

n ]a, I icrr Captain." 

There was a gentle murmur of 
amusement, which pleased Puitov. 

"Everything in the laboratory," 
he said, "works by push-button! 
And I will let Limpelmann activate 
the buttons !" 

The murmur turned into an outburst of hilarity. The Brtrbaren 
stood in one block, the- Marshal 
and the General with their peasant 
faces well out in front, and the 
others on tiptoe behind. 

"Now here is the panel which I 
designed," Puitov went on quickly. 
"These buttons correspond to the 
various phases of my experiment. 
Most important is the dispersion 
unit. Its purpose? The distribution 
of the liquid. Limpelmann! Activate button A!" 



THE ADVANTAGES 

The Professor's slender fingers 
moved. 

A metal tube darted out of the 
wall like a suddenly aroused snake, 
and entered the glass cage through 
a narrow aperture. Unfolding over 
the cot the flexible metal piping 
seemed like a large shower noxzle. 

T!ie Chemical Warfare Council 
pressed closer. 

"Down these steps we will take 
the monkey. He has not been drugged, so that we can do the experiment full justice. You see the steps, 
loxdfhhe? And the small corridor, 
along which the animal will walk? 
Good. Now if you will come a little 
closer, you can observe the trap 
door, through which he gets into 
the cage. Ingenious, is it not?" 

Hp turned toward the Professor. 
"Button B!" 

The trap door grated upwards. 
"Leave it open," warned Puitov. 
"Another minute and we will have 
the monkey. Meanwhile, a question, comrade* Should we not be 
proud of all this? Does not my 
work please you?" 

Go right ahead, thought the Professor bitterly. Call it your work. 
Forget that you begged me for the 
idea. Forget how humble you were 
when you pleaded with me for information, so that you could conduct the experiment before the 
Barbaren and boast of your cleverness. You may boast now. Yon may 
think you know as much as I do 
about the outcome. But you don't. 
That is where you're mistaken. 1 
still have one superiority over you. 



ARE TREMENDOUS 5<) 

The doer opened and two guards 
entered with the monkey. It was a 
small male rhesus with a pink posterior, a short tail and a ludicrously 
deadpan face. One guard had the 
animal on a chain and pulled him 
forward by the neck while the other 
nudged him from behind, using the 
barrel ot his tommy-^un. 

Ca p ta i n P u 1 tov f ol 1 owed them 
pridcfully into the cage. The monkey kept attempting to bite but his 
struggles were of no avail and he 
was speedily fastened to the cot. 
The Professor watched his limited 
acrobatics with ill-concealed impatience until the guards went out. 
The small group was completely 
alone now. Even the driver that had 
brought the Marshal was in the city 
awaiting orders. 

The Professor was taken to a 
blackboard and Puitov said: "Very 
well, Limpelmann ! Write down 
your equations — " 

The Professor put down the Tabunsky formula. He wrote slowly, 
conscientiously, thinking: Let thij 
Dummkopf show off to his heart's 
content. Let him brag, and use chicanery now. He will soon have a 
rude awakening. 

When the Professor had finished, 
Puitov cried in feigned outrage: 
"Illegible! Give me the chalk. I 
will write the equations, personally." 

Captain Puitov elevated himself 
on his toes, erased the formula from 
the board, and re-wrote the same 
figures. Then he addressed the Top 
Ten, his small eyes sparkling be


6o 



PANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



hind thick glasses. "Can you read it 
now?" 

After they had all nodded, he 
turned toward the tall Professor. 
*Tve studied your 'notes. They're 
safe in our archives. You will now 
repeat them to — " 

"fa, Captain Puitov." 

"For your toxicity figures. Which 
formula?" demanded Puitov. 

"The Habcr formula." 

"Give it!" 

"C x t equal to ct." 

"Which means?" 

"C is the concentration expressed 
in milligrams per m 3 or mm 3 — " 

"Nyet, nyet!" Captain Puitov 
shook his head. "Not mV he corrected. "But cubic meters! And cubic millimeters." 

Professor Lindcmann smiled, 
without contradicting his superior 
who had simply repealed the same 
formula, thus revealing the fact that 
he knew that m J meant cubic meters. 

"Limpclmann is too slow for us," 
he said, scornfully. "I will continue, 
personally. That is the time of exposure in minutes, ct the lethal close 
resulting." Captain Puitov now recited I dozen figures, molecular 
weight of Tabunsny, boiling point, 
volatility. 

"And another thing!" He turned 
abruptly. "Do you hear this screaming and retching from the cage? 
Docs it disturb you, comrades?" He 
strutted toward the panel, followed 
by the Professor. "Well, here is 
our silencer button. How does it 
work? How did we get a sudden 



absolute silence after Limpehnann 
pressed it for us? Asbestos layers, 
of course, lining the bottom of the 
cage. But it also cuts off the ani* 
mal's air. 

"So — wc will start now! / will 
press the buttons. Dispersion first. 
You've seen how it telescoped out 
of the wall ? It docs so again. Watch 
closely. It fans out. As for the gas, 
three drops are enough. I mentioned that before." 

The Captain waved a pink hand 
at his colleagues, then concentrated 
on his instruments. "However, we 
will give hkn twenty drops. And / 
personally will now turn (he wheel. 
Watch the flowmeters. There, slowly. Twenty drops are gone." 

At the same time the Professor 
heard a humming of pumps, and 
the clucking noise of the gas streaming through the pipes. Then the 
drops gathered under the dispersion 
unit. For a moment they hung suspended, collecting in glittering 
beads. Then they came down, reached the monkey's face, and ran over 
his body. 

Puitov was pressed against the 
glass cage. "The light you just saw, 
comes out of bhe dispersion unit. It 
goes on automatically when the 
liquid is released. Come closer, 
comrades. Study the clinical drama 
which commences. I will explain 
the medical symptoms." 

That is fine, thought the Professor. Explain tbt medical symptoms. 
I taught f/jertt to you. Except one. 

Puitov paused until the bemedaled ten stared into the cage. 



THE ADVANTA02S ART! TREMEXDOUS 



"There now," he began in his 
nasal voice. "The animal opens his 
eyes. The cornea is sensitive to the 
light — a very interesting symptom. 
He cannot focus his eyes. He already has a peculiar pain behind 
the eyeballs. In a moment, we shall 
sec pinpoint pupils, then inhibition 
of his optical nerves. The consequence? Total blindness. 

"Ah, a pressure in his neck now. 
Observe the discharge from the 
nose, the trace of saliva on the lips. 
Observe it, comrades. Another few 
seconds and salivation will be quite 
prof use. The blood-pressure will 
sink to shock levels in a moment. 
Tabunsky, as you know, ovtrstimulatcs the parasympathetic nerve endings, which, in turn, control the 
respiration. Notice his first breathing difficulties. The broncho-spasms 
are setting in. The monkey is now 
— if you will permit. my inadequate 
comparison — like a fish out of 
water. He cannot inhale, though he 
tries frantically, ltxhalation? That, 
too, is impossible." 

The Captain's pink face was 
glued to the glass. He spoke without turning so that he would miss 
nothing. "Ah, at this stage, he becomes confused. His facial muscles 
are working as if he were about to 
go completely mad. He has swallowed the contaminated saliv.i. Do 
you not see? His bowels have lost 
control. At the same time, there is 
an almost unbearable distention of 
his urethra. The bladder, natural
tr-" 

He turned to stare at his au


6l 

diencc. They were watching the 
cage in tight-lipped horror. Satisfied, Captain Puitov went on: "Notice the discoloration of his lips. 
It is the direct result of his pulmonary difficulties. The nails will turn 
blue later. See there!" Puitov went 
on, his body with its large hips, 
and small shoulders, pressed against 
the rounded cage like the body of 
a woman, 

1 'There ! The climax ! And so 
quickly! Here come the convulsions 
I spoke of. The animal literally 
undies, twists itself into knots. 
Amazing, is it not? What causes 
the convulsions? A violent contraction of the muscle fibers. See his 
sweat glands laboring ? He must 
have lost a minimum of one liter. 
We'll (heck on that in a moment. 
Here's the last symptom. It's 
unique. Watch!" 

The Captain turned, his pink 
face gleaming with perspiration, his 
tunic soaked. "Sec it ?' ' he cried, 
"his hair— .-erected I It virtually 
stands up!" 

The Professor stood back against 
the panel, quietly watching the 
dead monkey. Outside, snow whipped against the house. In the room, 
they gloated. 

Captain Puitov approached him. 
"A masterpiece!" he exclaimed. 
"A work of genius!" He looked toward the others. They were in a 
paroxysm of joy, sharing Puitov's 
perversity. 

When they all nodded. Professor 
Linuenunn said simply, and with 
a modesty that came easy to him. "1 



62 



FANTASTIC UNIVBRSE 



am glid. Captain Puitov. And I 
shall welcome my return papers 
now — " 

"Your papers? Papers? But 
Limpclmann, a irun Of your caliber — how could I possibly release 
you today." 

"You promised, Captain.** 

"Of course! Your papers are 
right here." Puitov pulled out the 
envelope as he spoke, nodding. 
"See? I have them. But certainly 
not today. A few more weeks with 
us and then — " 

Captain Puitov." Professor 
Lindemann bowed, realizing that he 
had no alternative but to use his 
pl.jn. "I admired your knowledge," 
he went on with modesty again. 
"And I will Jet you therefore perform the autopsy." 

The Captain could have asked 
for nothing more to his liking. Button E was pressed for decontamination, and a device cjuickly dried the 
Tabunsky inside the cage, sending 
a bubbling shower of chlorinated 
lime over floor and monkey. The 
Professor then brought the bag with 
his instruments from the corner — 
rubber-gloves, stethoscopes, and a 
half-dozen small, sharp knives. The 
trap door came open and Captain 
Puitov stayed in character. 

"Marshal, General, TovarisbeP' 
he announced. "I personally will 
handle the post-mortem examination. Please watch !" 

They all went inside the cage. 
Lindemann could have pressed Puitov's ridiculous burtons, but that 
would have been far too dangerous. 



He still had an hour to get to the 
train and his plan required only i 
few minutes. He therefore stationed 
himself cautiously near the trap 
'loor, and while the Top Ten leaned 
over the monkey's cadaver to watch 
Captain Puitov's prowess with the 
scalpel and thumb-forceps, Profcisor Lindemann listened to Puitov's 
explanations. 

Puitov had meanwhile taken 
knives and rib-cutters out of the 
Professor's bag. After a while, his 
nasal voice stopped. There were 
fewer and fewer words. Then none 
at all. 

The Professor stepped quickly 
forward, and took an alkali-soaked 
rag from his bag. The rag protected 
his nose and mouth as he went toward Puitov. He experienced no 
difficulty in extracting the papers 
cut of his superior's tunic. Then 
he left the cage, alone. By the time 
he pressed button B that brought 
the trap door down, the convulsions 
had started inside the cage. 

The Professor smiled. He had 
counted on Puitov's desire to perform the autopsy. Naturally, Puitov 
did not know that one had to wait 
considerable time until such an 
operation could be risked. The 
pompous Puitov was a chemist — 
and a bad one at that. He did not 
know that the monkey's temperature evaporated the gas, so that it 
became a highly noxious vapor 
when it left the lungs of the animal. 

Professor Theodor Lindemann 
went to the panel, pressed the but


THE ADVANTAGES 

tons until Tabunsky flowed into the 
dispersion unit, and then dripped, 
and splashed, a> shower of a thousand drops, ten thousand, one hundred and seventy-live thousand. 
Presently one tank was empty. 
Grimly, working against time, he 
emptied the other tank, pressed the 
button for silence, and the switch 
(hat brought the wall down. 

Then, the Professor went to the 
back of the house, and managed to 
break into the archives, which he 
destroyed. Everything worked to his 
satisfaction. He got around the 
sentry — there was only one — and 
to the road, walking first swiftly up 
a hill, and then down. 

It was a pity, he thought an hour 
and twenty minutes later, that he 
had never been paid for his services. 
But he could relax now, for he was 
sitting in a train that was carrying 
him to safety. 

He fingered the documents and 
started to think of Leonora, his wife 
who would be waiting for him at 
the border. He dreamed of her until the train stopped, and the sol


ARE TREMENDOUS 63 

dicrs came to check his papers. 
Calmly, the envelope came out of 
his pocket. He watched the soldiers 
as they exchanged glances, then 
stared at him. 

Finally they said, "Nyet, nyet." 
No, he couldn't get through. 

He reached for the papers, all 
red stars, and black signatures, and 
read: 

"hi view of your scientific superiority, we have decided upon a 
transfer for you. Upon receipt of 
this order, you will report to a special laboratory in Moscow where, 
apart from teaching at our Academy 
of Sciences, you will perform a 
Tabunsky experiment on one hundred humans — " 

Professor Lindemann shut his 
eyes. 

Just then he heard Leonora his 
wife outside the train. As he had 
expected, she was crying: "Theo, 
Thco! Miin Suesser, my sweet 
one!" It was his turn to gasp, not 
hers, because the soldiers pushed 
him out of the compartment and 
dragged him away toward Moscow. 




a 

new 
world 

by . . . Richard R. Smith 



The Abstractions could dissolve 
•teel and concrete with the power 
of thought alone. But human minds 
have a stubborn survival capacity. 



The fi-aturfi.kss steel door 
whispered tonclcssly in his mind. 
Director, Concentration Department, 

The door opened and he stepped 
inside. He had cxpecled a receptionist's office or at least a waiting 
room. Instead, he found himself 
standing in an amazingly spacious 
central office luxuriously furnished 
with teakwood chairs, oriental rugs, 
multidimensional paintings and 
floor-to-teiling mirrors. 

The famous Alice Barlow smiled 
at him from behind a small, ebonyblack desk. She rose and seemed 
almost to glide across the floor toward him, her slender young body 
moving with incredible grace. 

"Welcome to the Department, 
Mr. Jones," she said. 

"Thank you," he replied. 

She extended her hand and he 
shook it, briefly amazed at the 
warmth and softness of it. He wondered if she was an exceptional 
woman, or if he had been in Concentration School so long he'd forgotten what women were really 
like. 

"Nervous on your first day of 



If you've unwisely allowed yourself to believe thai intelligence and 
biological life are inextricably linked in Space and Time a surprise 
awaits you here. For Richard R. Smith is prepared to convince you that 
an abstract design — a drawing, a painting or even a complex mathematical 
figure — can have a terrifying life of its own. All he asks is a reasonable suspension of disbelief, anJ an attentive ear as his daring soars. 



A NEW 

work here?" Miss Barlow inquired. 
"Slightly." 

She was neither beautiful or 
plain, he decided as he glanced at 
her face. Her nose was a trifle too 
large, and her lips just a little too 
full, marring the perfection of an 
otherwise beautiful face. 

Miss Barlow studied his face intently as she spoke. "There isn't 
much to explain, Mr. Jones," she 
said. "You know what your duties 
will be. All you have to do is sit 
and concentrate. Your examinations 
indicate that you have quite exceptional gifts in that respect. I think 
you'll go far in the Department." 
She paused, then smiled as she 
added, "Of course, there is one important thing I should remind you 
of. Don't talk to the Abstractions! 
Be very careful about that." 

They both laughed at the witticism. 

"Good luck," she said. 

They shook hands once more. 
The formality of the brief interview completed, he left immediately for his Station. 

A half hour later another featureless steel door in another building 
closed soundlessly behind him, and 
he was alone with his thoughts. He 
glanced at the empty room, his eyes 
passing slowly over the slanting 
concrete walls, and domed ceiling. 
Pride came upon him as he looked 
at the single large chair in the metal 
dais. My job, he thought. 

He sat in the comfortable chair 
and the dais began to turn slowly. 
As the chair revolved, he stared 



WORLD 65 

at the floor and thought — Concrete 
. . . concrete . . . 

While he concentrated, a far 
corner of his mind wandered. Hefound himself speculating as to 
what his precise position in life 
would have been if his ancestors 
had conquered space or Henderson 
had failed to find a way to enter 
another dimension decades ago. 
Where would he be now if the 
teeming billions of Harth hadn' t 
populated the new dimension? 

Abruptly, he discarded the questions as unanswerable and foolish. 

Concrete . . . concrete . . . His 
teeth clenched slightly as he brought 
all of his thoughts to bear on the 
floor's rough surface. 

"Hello!" 

The voice roared in his mind and 
shook him physically. Never before 
had he met anyone with such a violent telepathic contact faculty. Purely from automatic reflexes, he 
glanced about the empty room as 
if expecting to see the intruder. 

"Go away. I'm working. I have 
to concentrate!" Concrete . . . concrete . . . His invisible, powerfully 
directed thoughts flowed toward the 
floor. 

"What are you doing?" the 
stranger inquired. 

"I'm concentrating on the floor. 
Will you please break contact. Interruptions can be dangerous." 

"Precisely why are you thinking 
about the floor?" the mental voice 
asked. 

It must be a child, Jones decided. 
Or an idiot totally unfamiliar v.iih 



66 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



the proprieties. He ignored the 
question. 

"Will you please explain?" the 
voice persisted. 

Sweat trickled down his face. 
Nervously, he pushed a button on 
the chair arm, and lifted a glass of 
water from the depositor. He drank 
quickly, his uneasiness sharply increasing. What a ghastly thing to 
happen on my first day! he thought 
wildly. 

For two hours, he ignored the 
telepathic voice. For two hours, it 
repeated monotonously, "Will you 
please explain?" At the end of that 
nerve-wracking period, it had asked 
the same question at least five hundred times. 

Well, why not? It shouldn't take 
long to explain, and he could think 
of no other way of silencing the 
voice. 

"I'm concentrating on the floor 
to keep it there," he said. 

"To keep it there?" 

"Yes, If I don't think about it, 
it will dissolve." 

"But why?" the voice demanded. 

Jones' lips tightened impatiently. 
"Don't you understand? The Abstractions will dissolve it with their 
thoughts." 

'"Why should they do that?" 

"Because they don't want us in 
their dimension." 

"Why?'' 

He realized suddenly that he 
could hardly hope to explain without going back and telling the 
entire story from its beginning to 
the present moment. 



He altered his mind in such a 
way that a certain portion of it 
automatically and unconsciously 
concentrated on the concrete floor. 
Then, with the remaining conscious 
portion, he explained to the inquiring stranger with telepathic illustrations. 

He painted a grim and starkly 
tragic mental picture of an overpopulated Earth, with its billions 
of people crowded together and 
growing constantly more crowded 
with every passing day. He dwelt 
on the invisible, fatal radiomagnetic rays in outer space that would 
have made space-flight and colonization of other planets suicidal. 

A man named Henderson had 
discovered a way to enter another 
dimension . . . the solution to the 
population-space problem. Million* 
had entered the alien dimension. 
The extra-dimension was empty and 
they had been compelled to construct a steel and concrete foundation to build their homes upon. 

The native inhabitants of the 
dimension were not physical — no 
one could sec or hear them. They 
talked to men's minds and drove 
them insane. Somehow, they dis* 
solved sections of mankind's concrete and steel foundation in the 
new dimension and men were 
trapped and probably killed inside 
the disappearing structures. At any 
rate, they were never heard from 
again. 

"Do you understand?" he asked, 
when he had withdrawn the last 
mental projection. "A group of us 



A NEW 

arc distributed over the Foundation. So long as we concentrate on 
the foundation, it cannot be dissolved by the Abstractions and the 
people living in the Dimension will 
be safe." 

"What are Abstractions?" 

"The natives of this dimension!" 
Jones exclaimed impatiently, 

Hie invisible entity was silent. 

Jones regained conscious control of the portion of his mind that 
had automatically concentrated on 
the floor, stared at the concrete and 
thought distinctly — Concrete. 

Anxiously, he glanced at the Indicator on one arm of the chair. No, 
the needle had not wavered. 

"Who are you?" he asked the 
now silent stranger. 

"An Abstraction." 

Pours later, a fellow worker 
arrived to relieve him, and without 
a woid ascended the dais and took 
his place in the slowly revolving 
chair. 

Jones left the Station and wandered aimlessly down the street. 
Thinking about concrete for hours 
at a time was unnerving and now 
that his mind was free of the task, 
he felt as if a great weight had been 
lifted from him. 

He glanced at the low, scattered 
buildings and wondered how many 
people lived in just that one scjuare 
mile Area. Two thousand? It was 
a frightening responsibility. His 
thoughts protected the very material 
they walked on from the horrifying 
creatures of an alien dimension. 



world 67 

Sometimes he wondered how a 
Concentrator's thoughts could protect the Foundation. Did they act 
as an impenetrable shield? Or merely as a tenuous mental safeguard, 
warning away intruders? He didn't 
know. Even in Concentration 
School, the instructors hadn't informed them exactly bow the protection worked. They had stated 
only that thought-concentration did 
work. 

He glanced up uneasily at the 
artificial sky thousands of feet above 
him. Did the Concentration Department have men up there too, to 
prevent the Abstractions from dissolving the Ceiling barrier ? Or 
could the aliens only attack from 
beneath the Foundation? 

A husky uniformed man blocked 
his path. "I guess I'd better have a 
look at your identification papers," 
he said. 

Jones handed the policeman his 
wallet, and for the first time heard 
the dull hum of machinery that had 
passed unnoticed before. He looked 
beyond the policeman's shoulder 
and saw — the Edge. 

Fascinated, he stared at the huge 
energy converters. The Dimension 
was filed with raw energy and converters worked continuously at the 
Foundation's Edge, changing energy 
into oxygen, concrete, steel and 
other substances. He knew of the 
machines but had never seen them 
before. 

The policeman returned the wallet. "Your papers are in order. But 



63 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



don't you know you're not allowed 
this close to the Edge?" 

"I'm sorry, officer. I was preoccupied and didn't notice where I — " 
He faltered abruptly, realizing that 
lie had committed bis second lawviolation of the day. He had not 
only conversed with an Abstraction, 
he had committed the almost equally 
serious offence of going too close to 
chc Edge. Was he a subconsciouslymotivated criminal? 

"You were day-dreaming, eh?" 
The policeman laughed, "What do 
you think that red line is for?" 

He pointed a stubby finger. Jones 
glanced behind him, and saw the 
bright red line several blocks away. 
It gleamed in the sunlight. 

"To warn people not to — " 

The policeman waved his hand. 
"Okay. Notice it next time." 

Jones turned and almost ran away 
from die Edge. 

AFTER the fourth drink, his 
nerves quieted and he could think 
rationally. It had been a rough day 
— his first experience with a responsible job and an unlawful conversation with an Abstraction. He shuddered inwardly when he realized 
what would happen to him if anyone discovered he had talked with 
an Abstraction. 

He sipped his drink and stared 
through the tavern's glass wall at 
fchc artificial sunset, rejoicing at the 
light of widely dispersed buildings, 
green lawns and wide streets. It 
gave him a lift to see so much spact 
where people were not crowded. 



He remembered his childhood on 
Earth, with its crowded apartments, 
schools and playgrounds. He remembered especially the swimming 
pools where there had been no room 
to swim — only barely enough space 
in which to stand erect and allow 
one's self to be pushed, first one 
way and then another, by a horde of 
ha! f -naked bodies. Hundreds of 
people had eaten in the "Dining 
Rooms" and the noise had been almost unbearable even to those who 
had known no other way of life. He 
recalled the lack of privacy, the endless, millions of inquisitive eyes in 
strange, hostile faces that had seemed to be everywhere. 

But here, in the Dimension, there 
was unlimited space. The Dimension had no boundaries. It stretched 
into infinity in every direction and 
mankind's protective shell of steel 
and concrete could expand indefinitely. 

There was no limiting factor. 

He wondered what the Abstraction lie had talked to looked like. 
But that was an absurd thought. 
Abbies didn't look like anything. 
They weren't physical. They were 
totally alien. 

He swung the bar stool around 
and glanced at the customers in the 
dimly lit booths, searching for a 
familiar face. He wanted to talk to 
someone, anyone. 

He straightened in sudden relief 
as he noticed a familiar face. 

A few seconds later, Alice Barlow glanced up at the man what 
stood beside her tabic. 



A NEW 

"Do you mind if I sit with you?" 
he asked. 

"Please do, Mr. Jones." 

He ordered drinks and emboldened by the warmth and confidenceinspiring afterglow of his four previous drinks said, "Call me Harvey." 

She smiled graciously. "All right. 
And you may call me Alice." 

The elimination of formal names 
pleased him. But he realized that 
tomorrow, when he was sober, he 
would regret this familiarity with 
his superior. 

While he sipped his drink and 
studied her, he considered dispassionately the insurmountable difference in social standing between 
them. In her office, she had worn an 
ordinary women's business suit and 
had been without makeup. Now she 
wore a filmy blue dress that accentuated her slender grace and with 
only a small amount of makeup her 
face seemed strangely like that of a 
beautiful angel widi moist red lips. 
He kept looking at her. 

"This is only your third day in 
the Dimension, isn't it?" she inquired. 

"Yes." 

"How do you like it ?" 

"I like it very much. It's a lot less 
crowded dian Earth." He laughed 
nervously as if he had violated an 
unspoken rule by mentioning the 
deplorable population problem on 
Earth. "So far, I don't know many 
people here. In fact, I'm totally unfamiliar with the local customs. 
But, I'll make friends as the weeks 



WORLD 69 

go by and sooner or later, I won't 
feel like a stranger at all." 

"I'm sure you won't" 

They talked several minutes about 
trivialities and at the right time, 
when it fitted neatly into the conversation, he inquired, "What are the 
Abbies like, Alice?" 

She grimaced. "Like nothing on 
Earth. They're completely alien — 
not physical at all," 

"Are they mental entities?" 

"Not exactly. They're composed 
of an alien energy. Maybe that's the 
best way to think of them." 

"Why is everyone forbidden to 
converse with them? Are they that 
dangerous?" 

She paused, her cool grey eyes 
searching his face. "No, they're not 
exactly dangerous anymore. We 
have a perfect defense — the Concentration Department. So long as 
the CD functions, they can't damage 
our Foundation. The only danger is 
that Abstractions might contact individuals and convert them." 

"Convert them?" His jaw sagged 
at the word. "Convert them to 
what?" 

Alice drained her glass and signaled for another. "Their own way 
of life. You see, it's happened before. Abbies have telepathed to humans and converted them to the 
Abstraction life-form." 

Jones could almost feel his mind 
grapple with the concept. 

"But why would any man in his 
right mind allow himself to be cooverted into an . . . Abstraction?" 

"It would mean a new and differ


70 FANTASTIC 

cnt life," she informed him. "A release from all psychological and 
physical problems. Some people 
would jump at a chance to have the 
excitement of an 'entirely alien way 
of life. Occasionally, someone h 
ton verted. Almost always, we locate 
the person before the change is 
completed and . . ." 

She did not finish the sentence, 
hut moved her hands expressively. 
The gesture seemed to imply the 
words eliminate /hem. "When people are converted, there isn't much 
loss. The Abbies only contact the 
weakest minds." 

He decided he would have to stop 
asking questions before she became 
suspicious. Perhaps one more : 
"What happens to a human when 
he's converted to the Abstraction 
life-form?" 

His companion smiled qucerly. 
"The Abbies convert his entire body 
into their form of energy and transmit him to their — " she hesitated, 
then said quickly — "dimension." 

Concrete . . . concrete . . . 

It was hard to concentrate on his 
job. His mind kept wandering to 
the Abstraction he had met the previous day. 

"Helio." There ! Somehow, he 
had known the Abbie would communicate with him again. 

"Hello," Jones replied, noticing 
that the alien's mental voice was 
now more attuned to his own telepathy plane. 

He waited for the alien to ply 
bin with questions as it had done 



UNIVERSE 

the previous day and grew irritated 

when it remained silent. 

"If you're an Abstraction," he 
asked, "why did you ask all those 
questions yesterday ? Didn't you 
know?" 

"All of my race does not know 
about humans. As for myself, I had 
just returned from a distant part of 
our dimension where there is no 
knowledge of your people." 

"What's your name?" Jones asked. 

"You would not understand it. It 
cannot be translated into your language." 

"Hmmm. I'll call you AB. AB 
for Abstraction. Is that all right?" 

He detected laughter in the 
alien's mental reply, "AB is satisfactory." 

"What does your dimension look 
like?" Jones asked the alien. 

"Do you want to sec it?" 

He glanced apprehensively at the 
dial on the chair arm. The instrument was designed to indicate the 
composition of the Foundation's 
mass. If he neglected his duty anil 
Abbies attacked the concrete, dissolving it with their thoughts, the 
dial's needle would move. A similar 
needle in CD Headquarters would 
move too — and he would lose his 
job. 

"I'd like to but I can't leave my 
job. I have to stay here and concentrate on every — " 

"Do not worry," the Abstraction 
interrupted. "I will concentrate for 
you while you are away." 



A NEW 

Abruptly, Jones was in the alien 
dimension. 

When a child, he had looked up 
at the stars and sensed the vastness 
of the universe. It had not prepared 
him for this. With his mind, he saw 
that the alien dimension stretched 
into eternity in every direction. And 
yet it wasn't space that reached towards infinity. It was the strange 
substance of an even stranger dimension. There were no solid objects. Energy flowed and swirled 
across the vastness with the frantic 
movement of an endless angry sea 
and struck islands of static energy 
with the gentleness of a soft breeze. 

The land was filled with things 
that grew. Energy fed their roots 
and throbbed through multitudinous branches of warped space. The 
fruit of the growing things was 
composed of vibrations more harmonic than man's most beautiful 
music and colors more exciting than 
the most imaginative kaleidoscopes. 

It was an alien terrain without 
definite sizes. Things were not large 
or small. Their size depended on the 
viewing entity's perspective. Weird 
mountain-like formations and luxuriant growths blended with an incredible smoothness. 

Living things danced, cavorted 
and ran across the cosmic land, their 
movement more exotic and complex 
than any dance he had ever seen, 
their voices more harmonic than 
great orchestras, their bodies more 
intricate than that of a thousand 
divergently-evolved Earth matures. 

He last all sense of time. Some


WORU) 7 1 

how, it seemed as if centuries had 
passed before the alien inquired, 
"Would you like to become one of 

us?" 
"YesP' 

The alien extended a slender tentacle of radiant force to a myriad 
brilliant energy-growths that seemed miles in the distance. Then it 
quickly withdrew the extension and 
held a glittering, pulsating object 
before Jones. 

"Here is the Seed," the alien informed him. "I will implant it in 
your mind. You must remain in 
your dimension until the Seed takes 
root. In twelve hours, the Seed will 
convert you." 

The operation was swift, painless. 

Jones awoke in the chair in his 
Station. He whirled to face the 
mass-indicator dial. No. It hadn't 
moved. 

When his relief came, he went 
directly to a bar, selected a darkened 
booth and ordered a double rye Collins. His hand trembled when he 
lifted the glass to his lips. 

As he drank, he occasionally 
glanced at his watch, hi twelve 
hours, the Abstraction had informed him. He had regained consciousness in the Station at one o'clock. It 
was now six-fifteen. Five hours and 
fifteen minutes of the required period had passed. The change would 
be completed at one o'clock in the 
morn ing. At one o'clock in the 
morning, he would be an Abstraction ! 

Already, he could sense the invisible, intangible Seed in his mind. 



73 FANTASTIC 

As it grew, soft, tingling tendrils 
reached out along the neural patterns of his brain and h is mind was 
changing. Changing into what? Although he had seen the alien form 
of life, had admired it fend wanted 
to join them, he did not know what 
to expect. 

A man and woman walked by his 
table, sat in a booth across the narrow aisle. 

He paid no attention to their conversation until he overheard the 
words "Abbie lover." 

Then, he ignored the other multitude sounds of the room and heard 
the bald-headed man say, "I don't 
know why anyone would want to be 
an Abbie. I think it's revolting!" 

The blonde-haired woman leaned 
forward confidingly. ' 'You know 
that Helene Summers? She said — " 
A sudden flurry of noise from another section of the room drowned 
the sentence. 

Jones sipped his drink and tried 
to keep his eyes from wandering in 
their direction while he listened intently. 

From the corner of an eye, he saw 
the bald-headed man pause to gulp 
a glass of beer. 13 ill told me," he 
informed his woman companion. 
"He said they knew there was an 
Abbie lover around here somewhere. He said they have machines 
that detect them and track them 
down. I pity that guy when they 
catch him!" 

"He deserves it," the woman 
stated bitterly. "Anyone who would 
want to join a pack of aliens who 



UNIVERSE 

killed thousands of us when wc first 
came here deserves what he'll get. 
And what's the matter with Abbie 
lovers anyway? Isn't the human race 
— their own race — good enough for 
them?" 

Jones shivered as if the room had 
suddenly become cold. He had 
known of the general hatred for 
anyone who associated with Abstractions. It was natural. People feared 
and therefore hated unknown quantities. He hadn't known the police 
or CD could detect an "Abbie 
lover" with machines. 

Had he made a mistake? When 
he saw the Abstractions' wonderful 
dimension, their magnificent form 
of life, he had been unable to refuse the alien's offer, Would yon 
like to become one of us? 

He had been overcome with the 
kaleidoscopic beauty, the harmonic 
vibrations, the wondrous sights and 
had answered purely from an emotional viewpoint, Yes. 

But now, in the cold world of 
reality where facts were as hard and 
definite as the table before him, he 
knew it had been a wrong decision. 
A wrong decision because Alice had 
hinted that almost all Abstraction 
converts were located and killed before the change took place. She had 
only hinted but it had been as obvious as if she had shouted, "We kill 
all Abbie converts !" 

He finished his drink and wandered about the streets for hours. 
Several times he tried to contact the 
Abstractions telepathically but was 
unable to do so. 



A V!?W WORLD 



73 



He was alone. Deserted by the 
aliens who had invited him to join 
them. Deserted? How could he be 
sure of that? The universe didn't revolve around him. For all he knew, 
the Abstractions might be performing necessary duties that required all 
their attention. They might be 
equivalently sleeping. And the most 
logical possibility of all: now that 
they had planted the Seed and it was 
only a matter of hours before he 
joined them, perhaps they were no 
longer interested in him as a human. Perhaps they had somehow 
blocked their minds against his telepathy while they awaited his arrival. 

His head spun with the totally 
alien concepts until he thought he 
would go mad. 

The Seed in his mind grew constantly. At first, he had sensed it 
only in his brain but now, he felt 
alien energy particles move down 
his throat toward his chest. 

The sight of a squad car filled 
with stern-faced policemen reminded him, He should take some sort of 
evasive action." He had broken the 
law. They would try to find him. He 
saw no need to surrender. His own 
opinion was that it hurt no one if a 
man or woman decided to become 
an Abstraction. 

In one of the larger automatic 
department stores, he bought a pair 
of glasses, false eyebrows, a blond 
wig and various other items of disguise. 

After disguising himself as effectively as possible, he rented a small 



apartment near his home with the 
theory that the police or CD authorities would take it for granted 
that he would leave his immediate 
neighborhood. 

Alone in the shabby apartment, 
he reclined on the bed and waited. 
The hours dragged by with tormenting slowness. At twelve- thirty, with 
only half an hour remaining before 
the conversion would be completed, 
the door to his room opened. 

Alice Barlow walked into the 
room and smiled pleasantly as if she 
was performing a social visit 

"So you found the Abbie lover?" 
Jones said. 

Her grey eyes studied the sweating man on the rumpled bed, a 
strange expression on her face. 
"Yes, we found the Abbie lover." 

"How?" 

She shrugged her shoulders negligently. "Machines. Does it really 
matter ?" 

"No." He closed his eyes. The 
Seed had taken root in every cell of 
his body and his flesh tingled warmly as strange, invisible roots altered 
his flesh in some incomprehensible 
way. 

He wanted to rise and make one 
last struggle for his life but realized 
the Seed had weakened his muscles 
grievously. 

"Are you going to execute me 
yourself?" he asked, wondering if 
the elimination had to remain so 
vitally cloaked in secrecy that only 
the top member of the CD could 
perform the duty. 

"Before I answer that question," 



74 FANTASTIC 

she replied, "let me explain something. First, the general public has 
several misconceptions. The greatest 
of these is that the Abstractions are 
constantly attacking our Foundation 
in their Dimension and that the CD 
is necessary to defend the Foundation, Both conceptions are carefully 
told lies." 

"The Abstractions aren't attacking our Foundation?" Jones repeated incredulously. "They aren't our 
enemies?" 

"No. Years ago, we communicated with them and they agreed not 
to attack our Foundation. Now, the 
human race and the Abstractions arc 
on very friendly terms." 

Unable to believe his ears, Jones 
stared at the woman and wondered 
if he had gone mad. "Then why 
does the CD—?" 

"Why does the CD still function 
as if the Abbies were our enemies? 
Why does the CD allow hundreds 
of men to sit in little Stations and 
concentrate uselessly on a mass of 
concrete? To answer those questions, another misconception has to 
be eliminated. Remember, I told 
you yesterday that the Abbies only 
contacted the weakest minds of our 
race?" 

. "You mean — ?" He hesitated 
when he happened to glance at his 
limp right arm and noticed the hand 
was transparent. Through the translucent flesh, he saw the outline of 
bones and veins as if someone had 
focused an X-ray machine on his 
body. 

"That was another He the general 



UNIVERSE 

public believes. The Abbies do not 
contact only the weakest minds. 
They contact only the strongest 
minds. Only the strongest human 
mentalities are able to communicate 
with them at all. And we want 
members of our race to communicate with Abstractions. That is why 
the CD sends men and women to 
the Stations where they have absolute solitude and can concentrate 
freely." 

"You Want people to communicate with the Abbies?" he repeated 
unbelievingly. As he watched her, 
something happened to his eyes. 
The room seemed to darken and her 
body became only a shadowy blur 
against the darker inkiness. 

"Exactly. The Abstractions' dimension is like a new world. We 
want to send human explorers into 
the new land. Some who have firsthand knowledge of the existing situation claim the alien existence is a 
better way of life than ours. Others 
say it is only different and completely alien. We want to send men into 
this different life-form and evaluate 
it." 

"But why is all this kept secret?" 
Jones queried. "Why not tell everyone the truth?" He could not see 
her now as he spoke for his voice 
had become a faraway hollow sound 
ill the impenetrable darkness. 

She laughed at the question. 
"Everyone? All the billions on 
Earth? If we told the truth, hundreds of thousands of men and 
women would want to enter the Abstractions' dimension. The result 



A NEW 

WOUld be a mass stampede, a chaos. 
No. We are careful to Mod only Ihc 
best of our race into their dimension. For the time being, at least." 

Her words carried assurance. 

He did not hear the last of the 
explanation. The Seed had sent 



world 75 

swirling tendrils into every cell of 
his body. The cells had altered and 
formed something that did not exist 
in a physical world but only in. an 
alien dimension. 

When Alice Barlow glanced at 
the bed again, it was empty. 



now is the time — ;/ you want the greatest possible variety within the 
entire range of fantasy and science fiction by the most imaginative and capable 
writers, the old favorites and new discoveries — to subscribe to 

. . . FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 

now is the time — if ynu want to ditcuss with your friends the exc-tmg new stories in every breathtaking! j new issue while they, too, are still 
under the enchanting spell of its prophetic magic—to subscribe to 

...FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 

now is the time— if tables of contents multiple-starred with the namrs 
of such greats as Irving E. Cox, Jr., fohn Wyndham, foe Archibald, W.ilt 
Sheldon, Aigis Budrys, Walter M. Miller, jr., Evelyn E. Smith, Dal Slivetis, 
give you an anticipatory thrill — to subscribe to 

. . . FANTASTIC UNIVER'R 

you are having trouble finding fantastic universe on your newsstand, and you want to be sure of getsing us regularly . . . just clip the coupon 
and mail it to us — with your check or money order — and fantastic univer:.E 
will arrive on time. 



KING-SIZE PUBLICATIONS, Inc. 
471 Park Avenue, New York 22. N. V. 

I i>n< tnge 13.75 (check or money ortler) for which pleitse send me a yenr's aub■crlption to FANTASTIC UNIVKIIKM. 

Name , 



the 
good 
husband 

by . . . Evelyn E. Smith 



Ellen's husband was so quiet and 
self-effacing she could almost 
picture him apologizing for the 
inscription on his own tombstone. 



When Ellen had been twenty, 
even twenty-five, she would never 
have considered John as a matrimonial prospect. He would have 
been too dull, too stuffy, and — for 
ten years was a great span of time 
then — too old. Now that she was 
thirty-three, forty-three didn't seem 
old at all, and John was, as far as 
she could determine, dependable 
and steady. 

So she agreed to marry him. 
With a romantic impetuousness that 
she had not thought him capable of, 
he had insisted upon an elopement 
— not that there was anyone to care 
whether or not they lived in "sin." 
They were married one fall evening in a small town where marriages could be arranged hastily, 
and ever since then — six months it 
had been — they had been living in 
John's little Greenwich Village 
apartment. 

Once she had wondered whether 
she ever could grow fond of him. 
Now, looking at him as he sat reading near the fire, his bald spot shining, his rimless spectacles nickering 
with reflected flame, she wondered 
how she could ever do without him. 



// is commonly assumed that an alert and discerning editor will snap up a 
manuscript from a very talented writer the instant it is presented. Unhappily the assumption is unwarranted, for few indeed are the writers who tan 
be depended upon to maintain a uniform level of excellence with every story 
submitted. But we're becoming convinced that Evelyn Smith is one of the rare 
and gratifying exceptions, in her chosen realm of science-fantasy resplendent. 



76 



THE COOD 

Affectionately she got up and rearranged the muffler he wore indoors 
and out; he was always cold. 

John looked up at her and smiled. His teeth were excellent, a feature she liked to dwell upon, because otherwise he was such a 
commonplace little man. 

"You've been coming home later 
and later every evening," she remarked in a tone which she tried 
to keep from being querulous, 
rather bright and interested as if 
she wanted to know everything he 
did. Not that she knew anything — 
really. He never told her what his 
business was and she was afraid to 
press him, afraid of being thought 
a nagging wife, afraid of sketching the tenuous substance of her 
dearly-won marriage. 

But his coming home later and 
later had been hard on her, especially when he worked Saturdays 
and Sundays too. She had come to 
rely upon his company so much. 

He sighed. "As I told you, dear, 
a lot of people are beginning to 
take their vacations, so I have to 
stay later to do their work." 

She returned to her book, trying 
to give the appearance of satisfaction. But she was not satisfied. Poor 
John ! Everybody pushed their work 
off on him — he was such a meek 
Utile fellow. Yet there was an undercurrent of strength in him too. 
She never could get him to answer 
her questions. Should she try again? 

No. He was such a good husband. He never went out evenings 
by himself, although he often went 



HUSBAND 77 

for a walk late at night. Soon after 
their marriage, she had been startled to awaken, and find the bed 
empty. When he came back, however, he explained to her that he 
was subject to claustrophobia and 
sometimes had to get up and go out 
for air. Since he always did look 
much the better for his outings, she 
never complained. 

Her friends, when they dropped 
in for bridge or a quiet evening, 
were almost openly contemptuous 
of John. Still, she would far rather 
have had him than Madge's handsome Bill, who chased after women, 
and had even been known to try 
to kiss Ellen herself in the kitchen 
... or Peter, Lillian's husband, 
who drank. 

Moreover, John had his family 
tree. "Our branch of the Carruthcrs 
family," he would inform guests in 
his dry, precise way, "has been in 
New York ever since the British 
took it from the Dutch. Some of my 
ancestors are buried out there." 

And he would gesture toward 
the window that looked out on the 
graveyard. Behind the old brownstone was a forgotten little old 
cemetery. At first Ellen had thought 
the outlook macabre, but she soon 
grew used to it. Moreover, the 
apartment was comfortable and furnished with handsome old pieces 
that gave John's claims for his 
family a solid foundation. 

Her guests would smile when he 
gave his little talks; yet she resented 
neither their merriment nor his 
pompousness. He made her feel as 



78 FANTASTIC 

if she belonged not only to him but 
to a -whole tradition. Wanting to 
belong, to be part of something had 
been one of the major obsessions in 
her life. 

And his prosiness was less objectionable than Madge's detailed nari.itives of her bouts with the doctor. 
Madge had a tendency to hypochondria. Recently she had added 
anemia to her ailments and Lillian, 
al ways the copycat, had likewise 
professed a drop in her blood 
count. 

When John would go out to the 
kitchen for more ice, Madge would 
ask, slanting her eyes, "But just 
what does John do for a living, 
Ellen?" and Ellen would have to 
admit she had no idea. 

Then Lillian would say, giggling 
and fingering one of the dog collars 
both she and Lillian had begun to 
affect, "Maybe he's a bookie." 

And everyone would laugh, because the idea of John's being anything outside the law was so absurd. 

But this night, brooding over her 
book, Ellen found her curiosity irrepressible. During fall and winter 
John had been a model husband. 
Now that spring was here, he was 
coming home later and later. "In 
the spring, a young man's fancy..." 
And in the spring all men thought 
they were young. Could there be 
another woman ? 

And, after all, what did John do 
during the day that he was so reluctant to disclose? Didn't he know 
that she wouldn't mind even if he 
were a — a butcher? 



UNIVERSE 

When he got up very early the 
next morning, she got up too. She 
dressed quickly and quietly behind 
the closet door while he was putting 
on his rubbers and wrapping his 
muffler around his meagre throat 
and tucking his umbrella under his 
arm. 

On rubber-soled feet she crept 
downstairs behind him. He didn't 
go out into the street at all. He 
went into the narrow side alley and, 
with a big wrought iron key from 
his pocket, opened the gate leading 
into the graveyard. There he went 
to a gravestone behind the big tree 
that concealed most of the cemetery 
from the overlooking windows and 
disappeared into the grave. 

Not a minute too soon cither, for 
dawn broke immediately afterward. 
There, in the watery light, was his 
umbrella leaning against the stone. 
Evidently he'd forgotten to take it 
in with him. She had thought he 
was getting a little absent-minded 
recently. 

The inscription on the tomb said: 
"Sacred to the Memory of John 
Gaylord Carruthers, 1720-1763." 
He hadn't been lying about his 
family. 

The thing to do, she knew, was 
to dig him up and plunge a stake 
through his heart. But she would 
find life lonely without John. Anyhow, now she knew he wasn't carrying on with another woman. 

As she tenderly carried his umbrella upstairs, she thought of 
Madge's and Lillian's anemia — 
their dog collars — and laughed. 



escape 
mechanism 

by . . . Arthur Sellings 



The little man who wasn't there 
could have taken lessons from 
Dr. Jessup's most amazing patient. 
For Saunders was there— and how! 



The distinguished Dr. Jessup 
riffled impatiently through the case 
history, then smacked it back on 
his desk with a "Pah!" of annoyance. 

Why was that fool Nyren always 
sending him cases like this? Did he 
think the Jessup Foundation had 
nothing better to do? He scanned 
the note pinned to the history: 

/ think this case has some interesting aspects which might be of 
use for your book. By the way, 
bow's it coming? 

The hypocritical impertinence of 
it! So that was the idea. That was 
why, ever since their first meeting 
at the reception for Neurath, the 
Viennese analyst, he hadn't been 
able to get the fellow out of his 
hair. He was trying to worm his 
way on to the acknowledgments 
page of the great work, Deephr 
Analysis by Jessup. What did he 
expect? "/ must thank my learned 
colleague, Dr. Nyren, for his invaluable assistance?'' What outrageous 
effrontery. 

It wasn't as if the cises he planted on him were of the slightest 
complexity or interest. There had 



Here tie have the kind of merriment that makes for good fellowship wherever 
fantasy lovers congregate, with flagons of nut-brown ale, to hearken to 
green-haired maidens thrumming zit'iers all day long. You won't quickly 
forget the tragicomic woes of henpecked little Mr. Saunders nor the strange 
and really terrifying avenue of escape through which he parses to crown 
Arthnr Sellings a royal princel'tne of science fantasy at its most engaging. 



n 



So 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



been, for instance, that nymphomaniacal and very persistent burlesque dancer. He winced at the 
memory of the odor of cheap perfume which had hung around the 
consulting room for days. And that 
elderly professor with the persecution complex who had been convinced that he, Dr. Jessup, was the 
head of an investigating committee. 
And— 

He broke off his train of thought 
with a snap. He'd be developing a 
persecution complex himself if he 
went on in this fashion. 

But the case which lay before 
him now was the limit. Henry 
Saunders, Age 32, Married, No 
Children, History: — Why, it was 
the simplest and most obvious case 
of paranoia. He would have to write 
Nyren a short and most unprofessional note. 

And to cap it all, the case was 
already five minutes late. 

A gleam came into his eye. He 
would put the delay to profitable 
use by composing a devastating 
note, which Nyren could not possibly misunderstand. The words 
must be carefully chosen. It must 
be brief, meaningful, and — final. 
He reached for his pen. 

He was beginning to turn over 
some appropriate and expressive adjectives in his mind when the desk 
intercom buzzed. 

"Mr. Saunders, doctor,*' came the 
crisp voice of Miss Coad, his secretary. 

"Send him in," said the head of 
the Jessup Foundation grimly. 



The door opened and Henry 
Saunders entered, rather tentatively. 
He was large and plump and carried about him an air of cheerfullyendured discomfort. 

"Good morning, sir," he said in 
a voice that seemed to apologize 
for his being there at all. 

"It is eleven thirty-six, and thirty 
seconds," said Dr. Jessup. "Good 
morning. Take a seat. No, not there. 
Here, at my desk. Now, let me see. 
Your appointment was for eleventhirty precisely. In other words, Mr. 
Saunders, for six and a half minutes the whole intricate mechanism 
of the Jessup Foundation has been 
waiting upon your arrival— completely immobilized. For six and a 
half minutes the monster of man's 
mental distress has been grinding 
on like a Moloch of destruction, 
while the Jessup Foundation has 
had to stand by, helpless to check 
its ravaging." 

"My wife, sir," said Henry, 
squirming. "I'm very sorry, but 
really — " 

"Your wife!" expostulated the 
great analyst. But the other's face 
bore such a look of pained sincerity, such a look of hopelessly frustrated goodwill, that he could not 
help changing the exclamation to a 
sympathetic question. "Your wife?" 

"Yes," said Henry eagerly. 
"That's all the trouble. That's why 
I'm late, and I'm sure that's why 
I'm here anyway. I always have to 
tell my wife where I'm going, and 
1 couldn't very well tell her I was 
coming here because she doesn't 



ESCAPE MECHANISM 



Hi 



believe there's anything wrong with 
me at all, and I know there is 
something wrong with me, very 
wrong, and — " 

"All right, all right," said Dr. 
Jcssup, raising one hand and making a note With the other. "Your 
wife doesn't understand. But we 
understand your kind of trouble 
here. I'm sure we'll soon have you 
right." 

"You mean you have other people coming here with the same kind 
of thing I'm suffering from?" 

"Hundreds, my dear fellow." 

"I've never seen anyone with the 
same kind of trouble I've got," said 
Henry dubiously. 

"But then," said the doctor urbanely, "your complaint is not one 
to be seen, is it?" 

"But — well no, I suppose you're 
right. You mean, like you can see 
a hole and yet you can't?" 

The doctor looked at his patient 
quizzically for a moment. ""Well, 
something like that. Now, Mr. 
Saunders, tell me your story 
briefly." 

"Well, doctor, the first time it 
happened was three weeks ago. My 
wife is a little woman, I must impress that upon you. In fact — " 

"Mr. Saunders, let me hear your 
case," interrupted Dr. Jessup. "I 
am concerned with your mind, not 
your wife's physique." 

"I'm sorry," said Henry hastily, 
"but that's at the root of it all. 1 
stand head and shoulders above my 
wife. Now, if I was one of those 
little men with a straggly mustache, 



like in those 'life with father' pictures, and she was a huge woman, 
it would be different, wouldn't it? 
More natural. But when you get a 
little woman with a tongue as sharp 
as a woodpecker's beak and — " 

The great Dr. Jessup was becoming increasingly perturbed at the 
failure of his renowned professional 
manner to contain his patient's 
apologetic lamentations. But on the 
other hand, he thought, regarding 
the entire matter with the objectivity he prided himself on, perhaps 
he was being a trifle unjust. Perhaps he was transferring some of 
his impatience with Nyren to the 
case which the fool had sent him. 

"Mr. Saunders, please. Let us 
have brevity. The term you seek is 
flagging, I believe. Your wife nags 
you. Discounting the fact that every 
wife nags her husband in greater 
or less degree, I recognize that in 
your case it may have some bearing 
on your trouble. Nagging tvije. See, 
I have written it down. 

"Now I want you to tell mc what 
has happened to you. But \ also 
want you to keep to the point, Mr. 
Saunders. Afterwards, I shall encourage you to talk to me freely, 
as a necessary preliminary to your 
cure. But first of all the foundations, the map of the country, so to 
speak. Go on." 

Henry beamed gratefully. "You 
make it sound so straightforward, 
doctor." Then his face reassurned 
its previous tragicomic aspect and 
he sighed. "Well, we were going 
to buy a suit. Perhaps it would be 



Hi 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



more correct to say, my wife was 
talcing me to buy me a suit. That's 
the way it is. I like tweedy clothes, 
you see, and my wife thinks I only 
like tweedy clothes so I can make 
an impression on women. And 
really, I don't want to do that at 
all. I love my wife. Or I did. I still 
would — if only she could stop being suspicious of me." 

He suddenly caught the look in 
Dr. Jessup's eye. "All right, I'm 
coming to the point now. Well, we 
got me a suit — if you can call it 
that It was dark gray, with bright 
black stripes. We were walking 
away from the store when I saw a 
necktie I liked in another window. 
It was an orange-colored tie that I 
thought was just the thing to liven 
up that terrible suit — if anything 
could. 

"I suppose I must have craned 
my neck a little to look at this necktic. And just then a blonde passed. 
At least, my wife said a blonde 
passed. I didn't see any blonde. I 
just turned to look at the tie. And 
that started it. 

"My wife stopped dead in her 
tracks and accused me of ogling 
other women. I denied I'd even noticed the blonde, but that only made 
matters worse. Right in the middle 
of the sidewalk, this was. The things 
she called me in that high-pitched 
voice of hers. To think that before 
we were married she sang in a choir, 
and I used to think what a lovely 
soprano voice she had! It's funny 
bow things — okay, doctor, I'm 



right there now. It's just going to 
happen. 

"There we were in the middle 
of the sidewalk, with everybody 
stopping to stare and wink and 
nudge one another. It was terrible, 
believe me." He squirmed at the 
memory of it. "And then — everything disappeared ! The street disappeared, and the people, taking 
my wife with them. Even the sun 
disappeared." 

"A poetic description, Mr. Saunders. You fainted?" 

"No, I didn't. I was in a different place entirely. Not only different 
from the place I'd been in the second before, but different from any 
place I'd ever visited in my life, or 
any place I'd seen at the movies or 
in maga2ines. 

"The sun was double, for one 
thing, and — well, it was like looking at a 3-D picture without glasses. 
There was a blue sun and a yellow 
sun, set close together and casting 
a queer kind of double shadow. I 
was standing on the edge of a forest of blue plants, and the ground 
was soft and reddish-brown like a 
carpet of little curled-up ferns." 

"Yes, I sec. There is a mention 
of it in your history. There is also 
the statement that you are a nondrinker. Is that strictly true, Mr. 
Saunders ? Answer me frankly, 
please. I am here to help you." 

"The most I ever have is a glass 
□f beer on a hot day. Wait a minute! You're not trying to convince 
me I was drunk, are you?" 

"Now, now. Nothing of the kind. 



ESCAPE M 

I just have to make sure of the 
facts." 

"Well, that's all right. I suppose 
it does sound as if I was drunk. 
But I wasn't. I was dead! sober." 

"Then may 1 compliment you on 
a very vivid imagination?" said Dr. 
Jessup. 

"But it isn't imagination," Henry 
wailed. "You told me you were used 
to cases like mine. Now you try 
and tell me it's all imagination." 

"Come, come, Mr. Saunders. 
Why do you lake my attribution to 
you of a vivid imagination as something derogatory? Why, the power 
of imagination has shaped history." 

"But I was there. I know — because first of all I looked all round 
and couldn't believe it myself. The 
first thing I thought of was that it 
was some kind of advertising stunt. 
1 mean, ever since I saw a tank full 
of mermaids coming down the street 
to advertise somebody's bathing 
suits, I've learned not to be surprised at anything. But I was standing there all alone. I looked down 
at myself, and there I was. Just me, 
standing on the edge of this blue 
forest. 

"And then I thought that if I 
was there, wherever it was, then I 
couldn't be with my wife, and 
goodness knows what she would be 
thinking, and that started to get me 
scared. Then — I was suddenly back 
in the street again." 

"Standing?" 

"Eh, Oh, there you go again. 
You don't believe me, do you? You 
think I fainted or something, and 



ECHANISM 83 

dreamed it all. Well, I was standing;. I can tell you, it shook my 
wife. It's the first time I'd left her 
speechless for years. She didn't say 
another word all the way home. I 
only saw her out of the corner of 
my eye, looking at mc (jueerly every 
now and then. 

"But as soon as we got home she 
became something lik6 her old self. 
She said she'd have to be more 
careful than ever, because I was 
obviously even more cunning than 
she'd thought. She was convinced 
I'd slipped away somehow into the 
crowd." 

"Yes, yes," said Dr. Jessup. It 
fell into a familiar pattern. "Now, 
have you had another of these attacks since then?" 

"Two more," Henry said. "I've 
had another one since I last saw 
Dr. Nyren." 

"And were all three of them preceded by your wife's tirades?" 

"No. But the next one was. She 
was carrying on as usual with some 
fantastic accusation when I pretended I was going out of the door to 
escape her voice — and I did. I walked out of the door and seemed to 
walk straight into this other place." 

"And the last time?" 

"I was sitting at home. My wife 
was out shopping. I was feeling 
horribly strung about the things 
that had been happening to me — 
this trouble, I mean, and it just 
happened." 

"And you see the same landscape 
every time?" 

"Yes, I did. From different 



84 FANTASTIC 

angles, but it's always the same 
place. There's a stream there I saw 
once, and the last couple of times 
I've seen a woman. The first time 
from a distance, and when she saw 
me she ran back into the forest. 
But the second time I turned up 
almost beside her, and she didn't 
run away. We even held a conversation, if you can call it that. I 
said 'Good morning,' and she 
laughed a deep chuckling laugh and 
said something in a strange language. And then I talked to her a 
bit more. She seemed quite — er, 
friendly." 

"Ah!" said Dr. Jessup. "A beautiful woman?" 

"Yes, 1 suppose you could call 
her that. She was a bit different 
from ordinary women, though. She 
had honey-colored skin, and bright 
copper-colored hair. And she wore 
a sort of tennis frock, though it 
was green, not white." 

"And she had a deep voice, you 
say?" 

"Yes, sir." 

"Tell me, what is the color of 
your wife's hair?" 

"Uh — dark brown, brunette," 
said Henry, bewildered. 

"The whole thing is crystaldear," said the great doctor urbanely. 

"It is?" said Henry. "Well, it 
certainly takes a weight off my mind 
to hear you say that." 

"Yes, yours is a quite straightforward case of paranoid dementia. 
It is nothing to be alarmed about, 
and I am quite confident that we 



UNIVERSE 

shall have you cured in a short 
time. What has happened is this: 

"Under the stress of marital disharmony you have sought refuge in 
another world, a world of your own 
creating. You love bright colors, for 
instance. So — the world you create 
is a brightly-colored one. Similarly, 
the woman you create there is the 
exact opposite of your wife. Brunette — redhead. High, piercing 
voice — low, melodious voice. This 
other woman speaks a language you 
do not understand, in contrast to 
the language of your wife which 
you understand only too well. Isn't 
that correct?" 

"Yes — I mean no, no." 

"Ah, you fear I have brought the 
truth too brutally to the surface. 
You refuse to recognize these fantasies for wlut they arc. But try to 
see the truth, Mr. Saunders, As the 
proud motto of this Foundation 
proclaims, truth is the beginning of 
healing." 

"I won't admit it." Henry 
writhed in his seat. "It isn't true. 
What you say about high voice 
and low voice, and all that, may be 
right — but I don't imagine it." 

"No, Mr. Saunders? But we can 
prove it. For your delusion carries 
within itself the image of its unreality. In the sky of your imagining hangs the very symbol of your 
dilemma. A double sun. Two suns 
of complimentary colors, the image 
of the double nature of your existence. One might say, the image of 
your guilt. For you cannot overcome a sense of guilt that you are 



ESCAPE MECHANISM 



retreating from reality, and that 
guilt obtrudes in visual symbolic 
terms, until its menacing presence 
compels you to return." 

In his eloquence the great Dr. 
Jessup had raised himself from his 
Chair and leaned over the desk so 
that his face was very close to 
Henry's. Henry bad become increasingly agitated at the analyst's delineation of his case. He, too, rose to 
his feet, but in fear and bewilderment. 

"No," he cried. 

Dr. Jessup was used to the effects 
of exposition on patients. He advanced round the desk to Henry to 
reassure him. But Henry backed 
away in panic. 

"Don't come near me/' he cried. 

And then it happened. 

He disappeared. 

Dr. Jessup's eyes popped in as' tonishment. He groped his way back 
to his chair, flopped down and 
poured himself a stiff jigger of 
whiskey. 
Delusions ? 

He would have thought so and 
ordered himself a complete and 
long rest — if he hadn't been a witness to Henry's own tenacious defense of the reality of his translation. He pulled himself together 
quickly with the reminder that his 
life had been dedicated to sanity, 
and to logic. And logic in this case 
pointed in only one direction. That 
his patient had, in cold fact, disappeared — bodily. There was only 
one thing to do. He must wait for 
his return. 



8 5 

He flipped the intercom switch. 

"Miss Coad, I am under no circumstances to be disturbed, not even 
by yourself." 

Then he settled back in his chair 
and waited. 

Six . . . seven minutes passed. 
Then as suddenly as he had vanished, Henry returned in all of his 
indubitable solidity, 

He jerked at his jacket with an 
air of injured dignity restored, and 
asked: "Well, now do you believe 
me?" 

"Amazing," said Dr. Jessup. 
"Truly amazing. I've never heard 
of a case like yours in all of my 
experience. Could you stay here at 
the Foundation for a few days for 
observation?" 

"Oh, no," said Henry quickly. 
"I couldn't do that. I just wouldn't be able to explain it to my 
wife." 

"A pity. You are something 
unique, you know. Do you think if 
/ explained — ?" 

"Impossible," Henry said firmly. 
He was beginning to feel an unusual sense of confidence. He had 
succeeded in refuting this doctor '$ 
allegations that he was crazy. Not 
only that, his case — however disturbing — was unique. Still, his confidence was not strong enough to 
bear the thought of his wife being 
acquainted with the situation. 

"Well," said Dr. Jessup, "you'll 
have to give me time to consider 
your case. Come back the day after 
tomorrow. At — ahem, any time to 
suit your convenience." 



86 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"But isn't there anything you can 
do now?'' 

Even the great Dr. Jessup was 
reduced to a routine procedure. 
"Take these," he said abstractedly, 
counting out ten plieno-barb pills 
into u box. "One, three times a 
day." 

"Well, all right," said Henry 
dubiously. He made for the door, 
then turned back. 

"Oh, just in case you might let 
second thoughts convince you that 
we both imagined it." And he 
placed on the desk a curled fern of 
a curiously bright reddish-brown 
color. 

Dr. Jessup pkked it up and 
turned it over in his lund as his 
patient departed. He was no botanist, but he knew this hadn't come 
from anywhere on Earth. 

He gazed at it for long minutes 
in utter silence. Then a gleam came 
into his eye. He buzzed the outer 
office again. 

"Miss toad, come in here immediately. I have a little job for 
j(0di." 

Henry Saunders did not come 
back until the afternoon of the appointed day. But Dr. Jessup had 
cancelled all his engagements for 
the day, anyway. 

"Well ?" he said as soon as 
Henry entered. "How have you 
been '!" 

"I've been all right, thanks,'' 
said Henry. "I haven't gone over 
to the other place once. It must be 
those pills you gave me. But my 



wife's been worse than ever. I don't 
understand what's been happening. 
She says that women have been 
phoning up and asking for me. My 
life these last couple of days has 
been an absolute nightmare." 

"A case of clinical experiment, 
I'm afraid," said Dr. Jessup urbanely. "It had to be done." 

"You mean you — ?" 

"My secretary, Miss Coad, was 
merely phoning to wish you well. 
It was essential to — ah — hot up 
your environment." 

"But I don't see — " 

"My dear fellow," the analyst 
interrupted him, "your worries arc 
over. Your problem is solved — 
really solved this time. When you 
left here 1 gave you an ordinary 
sedative before I realized what your 
trouble was. When I did realize it, 
and at the same time realized that 
a simple sedative might well be 
the cure, I had to ensure that your 
nerves received optimum jangling, 
so to speak. They obviously did. 
But the sedative worked, and prevented your suffering a four-dimensional spasm." 

"A wbdi?" 

"Yes, it is rather a clumsy name, 
I must admit. I must go through 
the Greek dictionary and find something belter. But it does express 
what in fact has been happening to 
you. Under powerful emotional 
stress you twitch. Simply that. But 
instead of an ordinary twitch, yours 
is a four-dimensional one. In olhcr 
words, instead of merely twitching 
in this world, in three dimensions. 



ESCAPE MECHANISM 



you somehow twitch yourself right 
out of it into another world next 
door to this one in a higher dimension. 

"In some way the translation 
temporarily relieves the tension, but 
before long you begin to feel agitated again at the consequences — 
and you twitch back. It seems that 
all your condition needs is a sedative taken regularly. Here's a prescription for a hundred pills. Carry 
on with your three a day. I'll renew 
the prescription every time you run 
low." 

"Thanks," said Henry, taking 
the prescription. "Thanks a lot. I'm 
very grateful." 

"We are here to serve," said Dr. 
Jessup avuncularly. "There is just 
one other point, though. Because 
your case is absolutely unique, you 
will appreciate that 1 am most anxious to report it to the medical 
world. I should therefore be most 
obliged if you would give me a 
detailed account of your experience, 
and of this other world. 

"I also hope that at some date 
in the near future you will consent 
to dispense with the sedative, here 
under observation, and give a demonstration of your remarkable 
ability before selected colleagues." 

"Sure, doctor. Anything. But I 
can't stop now. I must get back 
home. You know how it is." 

Henry was thinking hard as he 
handed the prescription over the 
drugstore counter. He was thinking 
about the other world that now he 



would never see again, and of the 
long years that stretched in front of 
him. He had had an adventure, a 
strange and disturbing one it was 
true, but he had had precious few 
adventures in his life. And now 
that it was all over he felt regretful 
and miserable. Then he suddenly 
brightened. He jerked out his pen 
and made a rapid calculation. 

"Say, can you let me have another fifty thousand of those?" he 
said as the clerk returned to the 
counter with the pills. 

"Fifty thousand! Are you crazy? 
That's enough to commit suicide 
live hundred times over? Anyway, 
they're on prescription only." 

"But I'm — cr — going on a long 
trip." 

The clerk regarded him quizzically. "It must be some trip if you 
want fifty thousand of these. Anyway, you can get them anywhere 
in the world on doctor's orders." 

"But — but I'm going to the 
jungle,'' said Henry despairingly. 

"An explorer, eh?" said the clerk, 
looking Henry up and down in obvious disbelief. "You don't look 
(he explorer type to me. But look, 
what you want them for is none of 
my business. Bromide has the same 
effect and you don't have to have 
a prescription. You can have a million pot bromides if you like." 

"Fifty thousand will do," said 
Henry, breathing a sigh of relief. 
"You're sure they're the same." 

"They're not the same. But as I 
said, they have the same effect. 
They're sedative." 



88 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSR 



"Sedative? Yes, that's right. How 
much will that be?" 

On his way home he stopped at 
a bar and ordered a whiskey — 
something he'd never, done before 
in his life. He was about to swallow it, when the thought struck him 
it might somehow affect what he 
had in mind. It was best to be on 
the safe side. He took the whiskey 
to the wash room, swilled the fiery 
liquor around in his mouth, and 
then spat it out. He didn't like the 
taste of the stuff, but he was sure 
that it had alcoholized his breath 
satisfactorily. 

He greeted his wife warmly the 
moment he got in. That warmth 
alone was enough to have put her 
on bet guard. But when she smelt 
his breath as he bent to kiss her, 
her worse suspicions were confirmed. 

Such a tirade ensued as Henry 
had never heard before. 

He waited. He hadn't taken a 
pill. He waited patiently. The tirade 
mounted higher and higher, but 
nothing happened. He was being 
too deliberate about it, he realized, 
far too calm. He plucked up every 
shred of his resolution, and ad


vanced upon his wife fearlessly. 

"Don't talk to me like that, woman," he thundered. His own 
temerity frightened him, and it 
worked . , , 

He was standing on reddishbrown fern, with a double sun of 
blue and yellow shining down on 
him. He opened the sizeable package of bromide pills and took one. 
Then he sat down on the ferny 
carpet and waited. He looked at his 
watch. Ten minutes ticked by. 
Twenty. 

That was that That was twice 
as long as he'd ever stayed before. 
So the tablets did work just as well 
on this side. He felt a sudden pang 
on realizing that he'd never be able 
now to give Dr. Jessup the cooperation he'd asked for. But he 
easily put the thought from his 
head. Perhaps another case would 
turn up to give the doctor the confirmation he wanted. 

He rose and called out. 

An answering cry came from the 
blue forest — a low, sweet voice. He 
saw a flash of green leaping towards him through the leaves. 

Henry heaved a deep sigh of contentment. 



grand 
rounds 



by . . . Alan E. Nourse 



It's hard on a doctor when his 
patient has almost every disease 
known to man— in short jumps and 
spasms. But the Cliicf was wise! 



[T was a gray day at the office. 

The Vice-Prcsidcnt-in-chargc-ofPromotion met Accounts-Outstanding as he bustled down North Corridor and fell in step with him with 
a weary shrug. "Trouble again?" 
he asked. 

Accounts-Outstanding nodded. 
"The Old Man really blew his lid. 
Heads are falling right and left 
down there." He glanced at his 
watch with a worried sigh. "And 
with business the way it is — " 

"Wonder what the trouble is this 
time?" 

"Is it ever any different? Delinquencies, always delinquencies — " 

"Well, at least Promotion is in 
the clear." 

"The way your boys handled that 
last campaign ? Hah !" Accounts 
tapped his heels nervously on the 
shiny red floor. They reached the 
elevators, and stepped aboard an 
Express. "And late for the meeting, 
too. Oh, I don't like it a bit — " 
Accounts nodded sharply to the elevator operator. "Executive Suite," 
he said. 

The operator scowled, and flicked his tail. The elevator rocketed 
downward. 



If you've ever had a desire to visit one of oar great modern hospitals 
and accompany a bead surgeon on his daity rounds here's your chance to 
do just that. We're not quite sure, though, that the hospital won't collapse 
suddenly with a dull, appalling roar and that you won't find yourself in 
the debris staring up at Black John himself. But be that as it may, Alan fit 
iSourse does guarantee you high-voltage entertainment. And many a chuckle. 



8g 



90 FANTASTIC 

In the meeting hall, the silence 
was tomblike. They were late indeed—three tides by the clock as 
they slid into their places at the 
long red table. From his seat at the 
end the Old Man favored them 
with a glare. Then he swept the 
glare around the room, taking pains 
to spare no one. 

"There's one thing around here 
that I don't like," the Old Man 
grated. The glare swung back to 
Accounts-Outstanding. "Do you 
know what that is?" 

Accounts nodded unhappily. He 
wriggled like a trapped mouse. "Delinquencies," he said in a tiny voice. 

"Delinquencies." The word hung 
pregnant in the room. Then : 
"Well?" 

Accounts squirmed. "I — I'm certain we have no delinquent accounts 
on the books — " 

The Old Man snarled. "You're 
certain, arc you? Let's have a report on Account Number — " He 
cleared his throat, and gave the exact file number. It was 32664910773. 

There was a wild flurry of underlings about the room. Reams of 
paper were riffled; file cards descended like a snowstorm. From 
the bottom of a huge pile a clerk 
dug out a sheet of legal foolscap 
and thrust it into Accounts' trembling hand. 

Accounts read it. He looked up 
pathetically. "There's been a mistake, sir." 

"The Account is delinquent!" 

Accounts shook his head miser


VNIVERSE 

ably. "That Account is not Closed, 
lir." 

The Old Man leaned forward 
slowly. "It was scheduled to Close 
last night. Coronary thrombosis. I 
arranged the circumstances personally—" 

"It's that man. They called that 
man again." 

At the end of the table the Old 
Man seemed to swell visibly. "The 
same one who interfered last time?" 

"Yes, sir." 

There was silence for a long, 
long moment. Then the Old Man 
said : "T don't like him. He meddles. 
Three times in one month now. 
How many times in a year? Thirty? 
Forty? Or four hundred ?" He 
paused, glaring around the table. 
"And every time we've lo^t the Account altogether. I don't like that 
man. I want him stopped." 

Accounts-Outs tandmg wiped 
droplets from his forehead. His 
palms were damp. "What can 1 
do?" he whimpered. "We've tried 
everything." 

"Enlist him!" the Old Man 
roared. 

"He won't enlist." 

"Then buy him off]" 

"He's already rich. And he hates 
women." 

"Destroy bim!" 

"Sir, you know we can't tamper — " 

The Old Man let out a howl, 
and sank back in his chair. Two 
small red underlings hovered at 
either side, watching him jealously. 
His eyes roamed the room, then lit 



CRAND 

on a srrull, brown, gopher-faced individual sitting in a shadowy corner. "You!" 

Gopher Face took another pull 
at his cigar, and looked up indifferently. "Yeah, Boss?" 

"You've handled some nasty 
ones before. What do you have on 
this meddler?" 

Gopher Face pulled a grubby 
note- sheet from his vest pocket. 
"John Ross McEwcn, M.D.," he 
read, slurring his syllables a little. 
"Chief of Medical Services at 
St. Christopher's Hospital. Alias 
'Chief.' Alias "The Professor." Alias 
'Black John.' Alias Old Angina." 
Et cetera . , . Knows his medicine, 
bat nobody loves him. Quite a 
prima donna. Crotchety old coot. 
Thinks he's God. When il comes 
to diagnosis, he's damned near 
right. Students hate his guts. Interns 
hide when they sec him coming. 
Pathologists been trying to hang 
him for forty-seven years, and never 
got close. Beat out four top staff 
men for the Professorship five years 
ago. Four top staff men hate his 
guts — " Gopher Face sighed. "Et 
cetera, et cetera." 

The Old Man's eyes flickered. 
"You're not impressed?" 

"Not much." 

"How would you stop him?" 
"Discredit him," Gopher Face 
said. . 

Accounts-Outstanding choked. 
"Ridiculous. He knows his medicine. He doesn't make mistakes — " 

Gopher Face sneered. 

The Old Man leaned forward. 



ROUNDS 91 

"I want it done right. No nonsense. 

Can you handle it?" 

"It's a cinch." 

"All right. Gel him." 

Gopher Face put down his cigar 
and stretched lazily to his feet. 
"Anything you say, Boss," he said. 

The INTERN on Receiving Ward 
saw him first. 

It had been a long, hard day, and 
the intern was in no mood for any 
nonsense. He had finally waded 
through the evening's lineup of 
spells and miseries, and was heading for some sack time when the 
police ambulance drew up. 

The intern sighed wearily, and 
swore to Aesculapius that if this 
was another long-winded lady with 
a neurotic gall bladder, he would 
personally throw her out on her 
ear. 

But it wasn't. The patient wis a 
little brown-skinned man with a 
gopher face, carried into a cubicle 
by two burly policemen. He was 
doubled up in a ball, clutching his 
middle as though his life depended 
on it, and groaning in agony, 

"Found him down on Market 
Street," the officer volunteered. 
"He was walking up from the subway, and all of a sudden it hit him. 
Doubled him up like a jackknife — " 

The little man lay very still on 
the cot, panting. He was thin as a 
skeleton; his clothes hung from his 
legs like torn cobwebs. Under a 
four-day beard, his face was twisted in agony. 



Q2 FANTASTIC 

"Please don't touch me, Doc," 
he moaned. "Oh, I'm dying — " 

"Started suddenly, eh?" 

The little man nodded painfully. 
"Just like somebody stabbed me, I 
think I passed out — " 

"Does it hurt when you rriove?" 

"Oh, my, yes. It's not so bad if 
I can hold still — " 

The intern nodded. Carefully, he 
began the examination. The man's 
abdomen was rigid as a board. His 
pulse was thready; perspiration 
rolled from his forehead. The intern felt a warm sensation at the 
back of his neck. A few pointed 
questions, a quick examination — 
why couldn't they all be like this? 
Whistling cheerfully, he picked up 
the telephone and buzzed the surgical resident. 

"Got some work for you, buster," 
he said. "Duodenal ulcer — perforated about half an hour ago. I'll admit him and send him up." 

Feeling vastly pleased with himself, the intern wrote a brief admission history, sent the patient up 
to surgical ward, and retired to a 
rear examining room for an hour 
or two of much needed shut-eye. 

• He didn't sleep long. 

The chief surgical resident was 
shaking him roughly by the shoulder. "Get up," he said. 

"Wha-wha-wha — oh! You." The 
intern blinked. "You see that patient all right?" 

The surgical resident leaned 
over him menacingly. He sniffed. 
"You been drinking?" 



UNIVERSE 

The intern jolted upright. 
"Huh?" 

"That patient. Did you admit 
him to surgical ward?" 

"Of course I did." 

"Surgical ward?" 

"Why, my God yes! With a 
stomach like that—" 

"Where did you learn your 
surgery, Bud?" The resident slapped a chart down on his lap. "You 
write up this history?" 

The intern stared at him. "Certainly I did. Perforated ulcer. A 
textbook case if I ever saw one." 
He looked bewildered. "What's 
wrong ? ' ' 

The resident gave him a long, 
compassionate look. "Let's take a 
little walk," he said. 

In the ward they found the patient, propped up against four pillows, gasping and blue. Every 
breath was an effort, punctuated 
with desperate groans. From clear 
across the room the intern could 
hear bubbling sounds. Slowly his 
ears began to redden. 

The surgical resident handed him 
a stethoscope. "Listen to his 
chest." 

The intern listened. It sounded 
like Niagara Falls in there. 

"Now put your hand on his 
stomach." 

The intern obeyed. 

' 'You see ? No rig idity. No 
pain." 

The intern swallowed hard. 

"Duodenal ulcer, huh? Perforated, yet! Four years of medical 
school, and you need a surgeon to 



GRAND ROUNDS 



93 



diagnose heart failure for you." 
The resident looked at him in disgust. "Go on back to bed." 

A red-eared intern spent the rest 
of the night trying to find out who 
was on third — 

In the morning a red- eared surgical resident joined him in the search. 
It wasn't that he had done anything wrong, exactly. He had personally supervised the patient's 
transfer to ;he medical ward, and 
had called Dr. Porter, the junior 
medical ward chief, himsel f . He 
couldn't help it if Dr. Porter felt 
a trifle bilious at being jerked out 
of bed at four in the morning. It 
would be the resident's neck if the 
patient should expire before a staff 
man had a look at him. 

And anyway, he had no way of 
knowing that Dr. Porter would 
arrive at full tilt to examine a patient in cardiac failure and find himself, quite suddenly, dealing with 
a thin, voluble brown-skinned little 
man with quite a different diagnosis indeed. 

When Dr. Porter finally got the 
surgical resident on the phone, he 
didn't waste time with politeness. 
He indicated that the resident's 
presence was desired up on medical 
ward, in terms that were clear, not 
to say pithy. Dr. Porter bore nu 
love for surgical residents on any 
account. Surgeons were a smug, 
self-satisfied lot. 

Dr. Por'.cr had heard too many 
times that unpleasant little fiction 
that the surgeons "walk a little 
faster, work a little harder, and 



practice a little better grade of 
medicine than the oilier side of the 
house." He snorted, and paced the 
chart-room floor. The sort of thing 
that Black John McEwcn might 
say, he thought sourly. Why couldn't that old goat have been a surgeon? He fitted the mold — 

The surgical resident arrived, redfaced and panting. Dr.. Porter 
smiled a nasty little smile, and 
thrust a chart into the resident's 
hand. "Doctor, do you mean to tell 
me you diagnosed this case as congestive heart failure?" 

Something inside the resident 
went cold. "I — I — yes, sir." 

"With an abdomen like that?" 

"Abdomen ?" 

"With a white blood count like 
that?" 
"I— I—" 

"How long have you been a 
surgeon, Doctor?" 
"I— I—" 

Dr. Porter snorted again. "Too 
busy to examine the patients these 
days, eh? When I was in medical 
school they taught us a few elements of physical diagnosis. But 
then I guess medical education is 
different now." 

The resident was staring at the 
chart in horror. "But this is ridiculous !" 

"You're telling me," said Dr. 
Porter. "Perhaps you know the extension number for the Operating 
Room, Doctor?" 

"Of course I do." 

"Then I suggest you call them 
up and tell them to schedule an 



94 FANTASTIC 

emergency appendectomy, Doctor. 
Your patient is about to rupture." 

Dr. Porter had just reached the 
cafeteria for a cup of coffee -when 
the call came for him. All was politeness and deference in the junior 
Board surgeon's voice as he .called 
Dr. Porter's attention to the patient 
they ha d just wheeled into the 
Operating Room corridor. 

Was Dr. Porter quite sure lie 
had sent up the right patient? Oh, 
no, nothing irregular. There just 
seemed to be a difference of opinion about the diagnosis. Of course, 
it might be a hot appendix, but it 
seemed much more like a strangulated hernia. Would Dr. Porter 
care to come up and corroborate 
the findings? 

Dr. Porter set his coffee cup 
down with a trembling hand, and 
headed at a dead run for the Operating Room . . . 

But the uneasiness at St. Christopher's Hospital was not relieved 
in the Operating Room. A certain 
complacent anaesthetist lost a degree of complacency when he found 
himself anaesthetizing a patient 
who simply didn't anaesthetize. 

. The Board surgeon paced the 
Operating Room floor, gowned and 
gloved, glaring first at the patient, 
then at the anaesthetist, while the 
latter felt rows of wet beads forming under his scrub cap. For half 
an hour he had fiddled with the 
dials. Now the gauge of the cyclopropane machine was open to the 
hilt, and the anaesthetist covered 



U NI VERSE 

the dial nervously with his hand 
for fear someone would see it. 

Minutes passed. Finally the surgeon strode across the room to 
pinch the patient's stomach experimentally. The patient cried 
"Ouch!" and jumped a foot off 
the table. 

The surgeon swore. "Doctor, 
can't you do something to anaesthetize this man ?" 

In desperation the anaesthetist 
shot fifteen cc's of intravenous pentothal into the patient's arm. They 
waited patiently for the snores to 
begin. Then, as the surgeon poised 
for the coup d'essai, the little 
brown man hiccupped, and complained that if they didn't do something about that throbbing, he 
thought his head would split open. 

The surgeon withdrew in a pique, 
belaboring the anaesthetist's ancestry, while the anaesthetist burst into 
tears of frustration and retired his 
staff position on the spot. 

Later, the senior medical ward 
chief, an internist by specialty, 
clarified the patient's diagnosis in 
a live-minute examination. "Throbbing occipital headaches? Light 
flashes in the eyes? Good heavens, 
Doctor, haven't you taken this man's 
blood pressure yet? 290 over 175, 
you say?" 

A hasty administration of apresoline took care of that, all right, as 
the patient abruptly went into 
shock, his blood pressure dropping 
below measurable levels — 

There was talk. Not very much, ■ 
and very, very quiet. But the word 



GRAND ROUNDS 



95 



got around the hospital. Of all 
things painful to I physician, admitting a diagnostic blooper is the 
most agonizing. The little brown 
man with the gopher face became 
as popular as a drunken house guest. 
Or just a little more so. 

"Take a look at him? Not me! 
Let somebody up the ladder worry 
about him." A visiting staff man 
shook; his head vehemently as the 
topic arose in a corridor conference. 
"Although I must say the diagnosis 
seems perfectly obvious. I read 
about a case just like it in the Journal of Endocrinology last May. 
Parkinson at Harvard reported it. 
Functional pheochromocytoma of 
the left adrenal — " 

"But it might have been a dissecting aneurysm. Of course you know 
40 percent of the time they'll give 
an atypical history — " 

" — conversion hysteria, plain and 
simple. Get a good psychiatrist to 
talk to the man." 

"But what are they going to do 
with him?" 

"Doctor, the management of a 
case like this presents many problems. Now, if / were handling the 
case — " 

" — not me, thank god. Dusscldorf is the ward chief handling him 
now. I hear he's been spiking a 
105° fever." 

Somebody said : "Maybe they 
should present him at Grand 
Rounds." 

There was silence in the circle. 

Little smiles appeared. 

"Say! Grand Rounds — " 



"Now there is a pregnant suggestion!" 

"Turn Old Angina loose on 
him." 

"Or vice versa. Say! Wouldn't 
tbcii make the old goat squirm? 
Where's Dussehlorf ? He'd be glad 
to get off the hook. He can let his 
resident present the case. And I 
can just see Black John McEwen 
putting his foot in it this time." 

Heads drew closer together. Ten 
minutes later an emissary hurried 
off to find Dr. Dusseldorf . . . 

Grand Rounds were the tradition at St. Christopher's Hospital, 
They had been held at 8:00 on 
alternate Thursday mornings foi 
years before John Ross McEwen 
had become Chief of Medicine 
there. The tradition was maintained. 
He had never missed a session; indeed, it was whispered about the 
hospital corridors that the day he 
missed Grand Rounds would be the 
day he dropped dead. 

But tradition alone couldn't account for his faithfulness. John 
Ross McEwen was not a modest 
man. He had enjoyed the center of 
the stage when he fust began to 
establish himself as "that smart 
young diagnostician from Boston" 
so many years before and the passing years had merely whetted his 
appetite. On Grand Rounds he held 
the center of the stage, alone and 
undisputed. 

He loved it. He fairly wallowed 
in it. Nothing could delight his 
crabbed old soul more than a tense, 



96 FANTASTIC 

vibrating Thursday morning session as he stood at a bedside dismssing a difficult case, surrounded 
by the eyes of his colleagues, 
watchful and eager. He knew what 
I hey were waiting for, all right. He 
knew they were waiting for the 
Chief to put his foot in it as he 
turned to a patient with a problem 
in diagnosis. He knew, and took 
all the more pleasure in burning the 
Lars off the intern, resident, or staff 
man unfortunate enougli to have 
blundered. 

But the eager eyes had waited in 
vain. Week after week, year after 
year, they had waited and hoped. 
And waited, and waited. Because 
the Chief didn't put his foot in it. 
That was why he had his reputation. 

The underlings were patient. 
He'll get old, they told themselves, 
Those quick, sly eyes will lose their 
sharpness. He'll misread a history, 
someday, misinterpret a sign. He 
can't go on forever. Someday, they 
said — 

And John Ross McEwcn, Chief 
of Medicine at St. Christopher's 
Hospital, laughed in their faces. 
And went on forever. 

He was early this particular 
morning, Grand Rounds started at 
eight o'clock on the dot— but this 
morning they started at five minutes 
before the hour. The great doctor 
walked briskly into the medical 
ward ante-room, rubbing his hands 
in anticipation. His white hair was 
slicked back against his temples and 
his cheeks gleamed from the chill 



UNIVERSE 

morning air— he walked the mile to 
the hospital each day, to the distress of his housekeeper, who 
feared for his coronaries— and the 
old, chipped stethoscope peered 
from the pocket of his long white 
clinical coat. 

If he could surprise the staff by 
starting a bit early now and then, 
all the better. It put the shoe on 
the right foot to start with. And 
this way, too, he could indulge in 
his favorite sport. He could stop 
short in the middle of an examination, when some ill-advised intern 
drifted in, and glare over his silverrimmed spectacles until everybody 
present knew, beyond doubt, that 
An Intern Had Come Late To 
Grand Rounds. 

But this week no one was late. 
They stood, chatting quietly in the 
ante-room: four senior staff men, 
three junior staff men, ten residents, five interns, three medical 
students, and two nurses, standing 
in groups, whispering and laughing. When he walked into the room, 
silence fell like a shroud. 

He eyed the group sharply. He 
hadn't diagnosed for forty-seven 
years without learning to read faces. 
There was tension here, an anlaipation stronger than he had ever 
remembered. He rubbed his hands 
together, perhaps a trifle nervously. Something was in the wind. 

His greetings were brief, as always. An instant later he was flying 
down the ward, his cortege following like a plague of locusts, white 
coats flapping. Around the first bed 



O.RANL) ROUNDS 



07 



they gathered — senior staff men in 
the inner circle, flanked by theic 
junior assistants and chief residents. Crowding close behind, like 
liycrs of an onion, were the junior 
residents and interns. And far out 
on the periphery the medical students scribbled in their notebooks 
and tried desperately to heat what 
was going on. 

It was routine, at first. An aged 
lady in uremia; an old man with a 
swollen liver; a young man with 
puzzling cardiac findings. 

"You've never heard of bcri-beri, 
Doctor ? You think just because you 
eat well that everybody else does 
too? Look at his tongue! Look at 
his lips! Doctor, when you hear 
heart sounds like that you must not 
rest until you have a definitive diagnosis! Your patient may die if you 
do." 

Dr. McEwen rubbed his hands 
together and marched on to the 
nc xt bed , wa rm i rig to his task. 
Faces flushed, ears turned red. The 
great doctor smiled to himself and 
hurried on down the ward. And 
the tension rose — ■ 

He reached the bed at the end of 
the ward. A small, gopher-faced, 
brown-skinned man looked up at 
him and blinked. Dr. McEwen took 
his professorial stance at the foot of 
the bed, closed his eyes, and waited. 

Nothing happened. He looked 
around sharply, storm clouds gathering. "Well ? Who's presenting 
this patient?" 

A very green young intern clear


ed his throat. "I — I guess I am, 
sir." 

"You guess ! Come, now, Doctor 
— either you are or you aren't. 
Speak up! We can't spend all 
morning here. What is your diagnosis of this patient?" 

"I — we don't — that is, there 
seems to be some difference of opinion, sir." 

Someone in the rear circle choked 
back a laugh. Dr. McEwen leaned 
forward slowly. He took the chart. 
"Is there, now! Are you saying that 
this man has been in the hospital 
for five days, and no diagnosis has 
been made?" 

"Oh, no, sir. That is, several 
diagnoses have been made." 

The circle of eyes were watching 
him now, waiting. Something deep 
in the great doctor's mind whispered a warning as he stared down 
at the patient in the bed. An odd 
looking man. Almost the image of 
old Mr. Barnard — but that was last 
week. Still, the resemblanca was 
remarkable, in a subtle sort of way. 
He snorted, and started flipping 
pages on the chart. 

He stopped at page four, and 
read for a moment. Then he reread. Then he shuffled back to page 
two, and read some more. 

The chill deepened. He had been 
practicing clinical medicine for 
forty-seven years. In these hospital 
beds he had seen, diagnosed and 
treated every condition in Cecil's 
Textbook of Medicine. He had reviewed histories of every description and complexity. He had more 



98 FANTASTIC 

clinical experience than any other 
man in the room. 

But he had never seen a history 
like this. 

Slowly he set the chart down, 
and walked to the patient. His head 
was high; long years of experience 
had taught him to keep his thoughts 
from reflecting in his face, and his 
lips by habit curled into a small, 
confident smile. 

He looked down at the patient. 
Browner than old Barnard, thinner 
by far. A more — crafty — face than 
old Barnard, but the resemblance 
clung to his mind. He stared at the 
patient. 

The little brown man also had 
a small, confident smile. 

He took the patient's pulse. 
Then he said, "How arc you feeling now?" 

"Oh, I don't feel so good, Doc." 
The patient's voice was weak and 
squeaky. 

"What seems to be bothering 
you?" 

"Doc, I don't know. I been awful sick, lately. Can't seem to hold 
down my meals." 

"Is thai so! All your meals?" 

The patient's eyes were wide md 
innocent. "Oh, no, Doc Just break" fast." 

Something congealed in the great 
doctor's chest. "Anything else troubling you at the moment?" 

"Well, sometimes Z get dizzy 
spells. And then there's my pain." 
He patted his abdomen feebly. 

"You have pain down there?" 

•Well, I couldu't really call it 



UNIVERSE 

pain, Doc." The smile was wider 
now, showing little yellow teeth. 
"It's a sort of heaviness — " He 
made vague gestures in the air. 

Dr. Mciiwen took a deep 
breath. The circle of doctors was 
closer now, hanging on every word. 
The eyes were no longer so malignant. They, were waiting, true, 
but now ihey were puzzled and interested as well. 

Too damned interested. 

Suddenly, frantically, he wanted 
to think. He removed the patient's 
night shirt, and brought his 
stethoscope down to the scrawny 
brown chest. He didn't listen. He 
knew that he had forty long, unchallengable seconds to think in, 
and he used them. Then, slowly, 
reluctantly, he went on to complete 
the physical examination. It confirmed his deepest fear. 

It was ridiculous and impossible. 
It was fiendish. 

The man was pregnant. 

For one horrible instant Dr. McF.wen saw a mental picture of the 
faces around him when he said, 
"Gentlemen, we are dealing with 
a case of pregnancy — " He shuddered, and bit his tongue just in 
time. That would be all he'd need 
to say. They'd take over from there. 

"The old goat went balmy," 
they'd say. "Cracked up right in 
the middle of Grand Rounds !" And 
ten years later they'd still be laughing. 

But it was true. Ridiculous — but 
there the patient was, grinning up 
at him. 



GRAND ROUNDS 



no 



Fiendish. More than unnerving. 

He handed the chart to the intern, trying to quiet his trembling 
hand. Time! He had to have time. 
Something was wrong here, something just out of his grasp, if only 
he had time to think— 

"Doctor," he said. "I'd be pleased 
if you would review this history in 
detail." 

The intern started reading. Dr. 
McEwcn stared hard at the patient. 
There was no doubt of it. He lay 
t liere, Ih m and brown an d very 
pregnant. His grin was suddenly a 
malignant smirk. 

No man ever got pregnant. It 
Just didn't happen. Oh, there were 
cases— unpleasant things that the 
tabloids loved — but they were never 
I he real thing. But then, no man 
<-vcr had a history like this. That, 
too, was impossible. But that could 
only mean — 

He was treading thin ice with 
that train of thought, and he knew 
it. There was no place in medicine 
for wild speculation. His colleagues 
in the circle around him knew that. 
They could think clearly within the 
limits of hard, established fact, and 
not one centimeter farther. And 
they had not made a diagnosis. 

An impossible problem. Then 
why not an impossible solution? 

Carefully, he let his mind drift 
back, groping for something. Old 
Mr. Barnard. The resemblance 
couldn't be denied. As though, 
somehow, he were being taunted 
with the face. But Barnard hadn't 
died. He would have died, if die 



diagnosis hadn't been made. Funny 
guy, old Barnard. Got religion since 
that tight squeeze last week. 

"Thought the Devil had me sure 
that time, Doc," he'd said and he'd 
grinned through his beard. "Figure 
I'd better square things away a 
bit— " 

Ah, yes, old Barnard. Like lots 
of old folks, lasting on beyond 
their time. Tight squeezes nowadays 
often ended up in the patient's favor. Not like the old days, when 
they died young, in the height of 
their sinfulness. He pulled his 
lower lip thoughtfully. Pickings 
must be getting slimmer and slimmer down below, with so many 
folks having twenty years of old 
age to repent in. 

He felt something catch in his 
mind. Ridiculous? Maybe. Fiendish? Beyond doubt. He gave the 
patient a long, long look. Then, 
suddenly, he roared with laughter, 

"A curious history," he cried, 
cutting off the intern in mid-sentence, "Curious indeed. The most 
remarkable patient I've seen in 
years." He wiped tears from his 
eyes as he faced the circle of doctors. "Of course, the diagnosis is 
perfectly clear." 

Jaws sagged. Smiles faded, and 
the chuckle in the back row slithered into a curious bubbling sound. 
McFwen leaned forward, smiling 
slyly at the intern. "Well, Doctor ?" 

The intern struggled for words. 
"Perhaps — perhaps a few more 
days observation — " 



IOO 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"Observation? Bah! You've had 
five days too Jong as it is. Well, 
how about the rest of you? Dr. 
Porter? How would you handle (his 
patient?" 

Dr. Porter sputtered. "Obviously, we're dealing with a most curious picture here. I'm afraid the 
psychosomatic overtones have obscured the true picture so completely — " 

Dr. McEwen chuckled. "Psychosomatic overtones, eh? I see. Well, 
what do the surgeons have to say?" 

The surgeons scuffed their feet. 
Nobody said a word. Dr. McEwen 
turned slowly to the man in bed. 
Tile patient's smile wasn't as broad 
now. His eyes held a hint of uneasiness. 

Dr. McEwen beamed, and said, 
"Relax, my friend. Don't worry 
about a thing. We know all about 
yon." He whipped a prescription 
pad from his pocket, scribbled 
something on it, and handed it to 
the intern. "Take this to Dr. Arnham's lab downstairs, and get it 
filled. And make it fast." 

The intern read the sheet. His 
eyes bugged. He hesitated a moment, then gulped, and took off. 

"I'm sure," Dr. McEwen said, 
"'that we can dispose of this case 
without any difficulty. Heroic therapy, but very effective." 

He looked up as the intern hurried back, clutching a small, extremely heavy box containing a vial 
of fluid. Carefully the great doctor 
filled a syringe, turning to the bed. 
"Now, if you'll just hold out your 



arm — gel htm, boys! Don't let him 
run?' 

For a sick man. Gopher Face had 
become suddenly agile. He got one 
close look at the heavy box, let out 
a terrified squeak, and pilt-J through 
the circle of doctors in wild panic. 

They caught him finally, kicking 
and screaming, and piled him back 
into bed. Then, as they held him in 
a hammer-lock, John Ross McEwen himself made the intravenous 
injection. 

"There," he murmured. "You're 
going to be a popular fellow when 
you get home." 

The result was most curious. The 
little man clutched at his arm, his 
face drawn with horror* Then, with 
a howl of frustrated rage, he began to dwindle and shrivel like 
paper in a flame, his howls growing 
fainter and fainter, until with i 
barely perceptible shudder, he disappeared in a puff of smoke . . . 

The case was never reported in 
the literature. Nothing much was 
said about it at the hospital, and 
not a word leaked to the outside 
world. From time to time curiosity 
gets the better of a junior staff man, 
and he raises the question on Grand 
Rounds. But Dr. McEwen merely 
looks pained and says, "Really, Doctor, I shouldn't have to explain 
such a case to a clinician of your 
stature — " and lets the nutter drop. 

And a bewildered intern is still 
trying to find out what condition 
of human pathology can be treated 
so effectively with seventy-five milligrams of radioactive silver. 



Still <Jtaue ^itne . . . 

—TO COMPLETE YOUR F. U. FILE 
— OF THE FINEST SCIENCE FICTION 
—AND FANTASY BY GREAT WRITERS 

Here's your chance to purchase, all issues 
published to date. A few copies are still 
uvuihible and they are yours by filling in 
the coupon helow. fantastic universe is 
always star-studded by the best writers in 
the field. We are now offering these at bargain prices — single copies at S54; three 
copies at $1 ; me copies at $1.75; and twelve 
copies at $-1.25. When ordering, circle the 
issues desired. 

► Names to conjure with are scattered 
throughout all issues, for the stories are by 
the most competent writers of science fiction 
and fantasy in the genre — such greats as: 
Theodore Sturgeon, Lester del Rey, Isaac 
Asimov, Robert F. Young, Evelyn E. Smith, Poul Anderson, William 
Morrison, Robert Sheckley, F. B. Bryning, Manly Wade Wellman, 
Dal Stivens, Evan Hunter, Sam Merwin, Jr., Algis Hudrys, Irving 
E. Cox, Jr., James Blish, Frank Belknap Long, James E. Gunn, Arthur 
Sellings, Theodore R. Cogswell, Horatio Winslow, Walter M. Miller, Jr., 
Judith Merril, Richard Matheson, Roger Dee, Hal Ellson, John Wyndham, 
Theodore Pratt, Philip Jose Farmer, Philip K. Dick, Ray Bradbury, 
Arthur C. Clarke, Eric Frank Russell, Walt Sheldon, Ray Cummings, 
Robert Blix-h, Margaret St. Clair, and many others. 



KING-SIZE PUBLICATIONS, Inc. 
471 Park Avenue, New York 22, N. Y. 

Kindly tOti me the copies of FANTASTIC UNIVERSE whose iiwies I have circled 
below. OfJ* copy at 35tf, three copies at Jl, six copii-s at $1.75. twelve conies ut $3.25. 
I em-lone J In full payment — no additional chiirgen for postage. 

JUNK '53; AUG. '53; OCT. "53; jXN. '54; MARUH '54; MAY '54; 
JULY '54; SEPT. *54 ; OCT. 'M; NOV. 54; DBG '54; JAN. '55; 
FEU. 50; MAR. '55; APRIL '55; MAY *55; JUNE '55; JULY "55. 

Name , 

Add re mb , 

City, BOB* State PU68 




homesick 
lake 

by . . . 'Norman Arkawy 
and Stanley Henig 



Homesickness can be a grievous 
malady to a wayfarer in Space 
and Time. Especially if you've 
been cruelly torn up by the roots. 



Homesick Lake is not a large 
body of water. It is perfectly circular and barely three hundred yardt 
across. The water is not very deep 
and it etapor.ites almost completely 
during the dry season, which probably accounts for the fact thai t/u 
lake remained undiscovered until 
only a few years ago. 

Us existence was first suspected 
when a hunting party selected the 
tire* for a camp site and found 
water where the map said thete 
was only forest. That was in r <68. 
It's easy to remember the date because in that same year the It ■: 
Venus expedition went out . . . 

Colonel Bersik nodded wiih 
satisfaction when he read the 
astrogator's report. ETA was 1 1 50, 
less than forty minutes away. He 
flipped the switch on the intercom 
and contacted the radio room of 
the Magellan. Instantly, the squawk 
boxes all over the ship blared forth 
the commander's order. 

"Stand by for landing! All hands 
stand by for landing!" 

The crew strapped themselves in 
at their stations and double checked 



Norman Arkauy is one of the most gifted of the newer group of science 
fantasy writers and unquestionably one of the most industrious, for bis 
work appears frequently in all of the imaginative fiction magazines. Now 
m able collaboration with the resourceful Stanley Henig be has brought 
u* one of those eerily enchanted glimpses of an alien world quite as 
thrilling as an epic journey by river boat through the Amazonian wilds. 



KM 



HOMESICK LAKE 



the instalment pads on the arms 
of their couches. In the troop compartments, the men donned their 
gear and took their weapons from 
the rack before securing themselves 
in their bunks. 

There was a tense uneasiness 
throughout the ship. In the crowded compartments where the men 
of the Fourth Atomic Infantry 
Platoon wai ted , brows grew wet 
with perspiration and hands toyed 
nervously with the safety locks On 
the AD rifles. 

The strain had become acute. 

Up forward, in s-2, the astrogator put aside his charts and lay 
back against the cushions. He 
glanced across the small cubicle at 
the ship's exec. Major Denn lay 
immobile in his acceleration couch, 
staring at the bulkhead above his 
head. This was the major's first trip 
beyond Lunar. 

The astrogator smiled sympathetically. "Nervous?" he asked. 

Major Denn turned his head toward the older man. Their eyes 
met, and he smiled in sickly fashion. "A little." 

"I know just how you feel/' 
sympathized the astrogator. "I've 
been on nine flights and it still gets 
me — every time just before deceleration." 

"I know," Denn said. "There's 
nothing you can do about it either. 
But that's not what worries me. 
It's those damn clouds! It was different on Mars. At least they could 
see what they were getting into 
there. But with those infernal 



clouds, Heaven only knows what's 
waiting for us !" 

Don' t worry," the astrogator 
said. "Bersik knows what he's — " 

They were pushed back abruptly 
into the pressure cushions as the 
Ship roared into an orbital approach 
and began its deceleration. 

Minutes later, the Magellan 
dropped down through the heavy 
clouds. Falling at controlled planetary speed, the silvery ball slipped 
through the dense atmosphere as 
effortlessly as a terrestrial airliner 
coming in for a landing from forty 
thousand feet. 

When the last of the clouds drifted away behind them, Colonel Bersik stared anxiously out of the command view panel at ■the sloping 
expanse of green below. The 
radoguide had selected for a landing site a wide, flat plain in the 
midst of a steaming jungle. The 
huge spaceship glided gently down 
toward its destination. 

The colonel watched the panorama below gradually narrow as the 
scene rushed up to him. There was 
a puzzled expression on his face. 
The plain below them was almost 
perfectly circular, its green, grasslike vegetation ringed by a vast, 
multi-colored jungle of trees. It was 
unnaturally geometrical. 

A knocking on his door drew his 
attention away from the viewplate. 
"Come in !" he called out and 
turned to see Major Denn step over 
the sill of die doorway. 

Bersik liked Denn . He was 
young — the youngest exec the colo


FANTASTIC L.MVURSE 



ad had ever had. And the best. He 
was the prototype of the clean-cut, 
intelligent young men the Corps 
pointed to with pride in its recruiting propaganda . . . They 
never mentioned the other kinds! 

Dtnn saluted smartly. "Sir," he 
reported, "the ship is ready for 
touch-down. All personnel are belted in. Landing batteries A and B 
and boosters are ready to fire. Activation time-—" he glanced at his 
wrist throno — "one minute, seventeen seconds." 

Several minutes later the Magellan rested on the scorched ground. 
The ship shuddered slightly as the 
power cut off, then was still. 

S-3's analysis was encouraging, 
surprisingly so. The atmosphere was 
similar to Earth's — a bit more oxygen, slightly more CO 1 , less nitrogen — and quite breathable. There 
Was plenty of water vapor, heavily 
laden with strange perfumes, but 
no unknown microorganisms or 
spores. 

The men left their space gear in 
the ship. 

The area around the ship was 
explored carefully. Beyond the bare 
circle which the landing blast had 
burnt clean, the vegetation was 
heavy. Dark green grass lay on the 
land like a tightly-woven carpet. 
No bare ground, not a single rock 
marred the continuous expanse of 
green that stretched to the edge of 
the forest. The grass was wet and 
spongy underfoot. 

The air was warm and dripping 
with moisture. It was thickly scent


ed with a strange floral fragrance. 
The scented air was like a balm to 
the weary men of the Magellan. A 
single breath relaxed tense nerves 
and supplanted fidgety watchfulness 
with a calm, dreamy euphoria. 

It felt wonderful. 

Bersik looked up at the sky, a 
glaring gray dome of thick clou. Is 
that hid the sun and diffused its 
light over the entire heaven. His 
gaze traveled down to the horizon 
where the gray blended into a vivid 
splash of color that was the jungle. 
Red, green, orange, yellow- — the 
multi-colored trees rose high inio 
the air in a tangle of intertwining 
branches and tortuous vines. 

He gazed drowsily at the beautiful colors. He breathed deeply the 
perfumed air. He closed his eyes 
and smiled happily, enjoying the 
sweet peacefulness of this marvelous place. 

Forcing his mind back to 
thoughts of his assignment, Bersik 
pulled himself out of his lethjrgy 
and looked around him at the men 
in his command. They were all 
standing as he had stood, entranced 
by the calm beauty before them. 

Hate to spoil their dreams, he 
thought dryly, but . . . 

He turned to the exec. "Let's 
move the men out, Major." 

Denn was startled by the suddenness of Bersik's voice breaking the 
profound silence and disturbing 
pleasant thoughts. Involuntarily, his 
muscles tensed and be caught his 
breath. 

"I'm sorry, sir," he said, quickly 



HOMESICK LAKE 



regaining his composure. "I guess 
I was daydreaming." 

The colonel smiled sympathetically. "Wake the men up," he said, 
"and move them out. Let's see what 
that forest is like." 

Slowly, the men headed for the 
jungle. The straggling columns of 
troops stretched out across the 
soggy field. They moved cautiously, 
on the alert for unknown dangers, 
but the intervening distance was 
covered without incident. Soon, the 
men in the point of the lead column 
stood in the shadow of the massive 
trees. 

Huge trunks towered heavenward 
in a dazzling array of bright hues. 
Enormous leathery leaves hung 
heavily from majestic branches that 
loomed overhead. Thick vines 
twisted through the jungle, bridging the gaps between the trees and 
making it an impenetrable wall of 
vegetation. 

Bcrsik went over to a tree and 
examined its bark, feeling the texture with his fingertips, tapping it 
with the butt of his gun. 

The sweet odor hung heavily in 
the air. Its -effect was almost overpowering. Bersik struggled to keep 
his mind from drifting off into 
pleasant but irrelevant contemplations. He ordered that a sample of 
the bark be removed for study in 
the lab. 

A detail of men was put to work 
on the tree. Major Denn watched 
them as they hacked at the tough 
bark, and a perplexed frown 



creased his face. He turned to the 

colonel. 

"Sir," he said, "do you notice 
the light that seems to be coming 
from inside the jungle? With such 
dense growth, I don't see how any 
light can filter in, much less out. It 
looks as if there's something in 
there — something white and luminescent." 

Bersik peered into the heavy 
growth. "It's hard to tell with all 
these bright colors," He moved his 
head from side to side to get different lines of vision. "I think you're 
right," he said uneasily. 

"The perfume seems stronger 
here, too," Denn observed. "Did 
you notice?" 

"It might be a good idea to look 
into it," Bersik said. "Move a blaster into position and we'll cut a 
path through these trees." 

A mobile blaster was leveled at 
the forest wall. Colonel Bersik signaled the gunners. There was a 
blinding flash, a zipping sound, a 
smell of ozone in the air, and a 
jagged hole appeared in the formerly solid barrier. 

Bersik and Denn led the men 
through the opening in the jungle 
wall. They stepped into an immense 
field of whiteness, a field of beautiful flowers that extended as far as 
the eye could see. High overhead, 
the trees of the jungle spread their 
limbs and came together to form 
a protective roof that sheltered the 
masses of delicate flowers below. 

Bersik nudged Denn and pointed 
to the leafy canopy above them. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSR 



i o6 

"That explains why wc didn't spot 
this field from the air." 

The major nodded absently and 
continued to gaze at the snow-white 
expanse that rcachcd.to the horizon. 
It was breathtaking! It was like a 
dream, like a trip to the land of Oz ! 

The odor of perfume was overwhelming. Bersik fought to control 
his thoughts. Laiy, sleepy thoughts. 
He struggled against them. 
Thoughts of slow flowing rivers. 
He tried to push them away. 
Thoughts of sailboats on a whiteflecked sea. Thoughts of home. 

The men of the expedition were 
standing at the edge of die field, 
awed by the sight of the flowers, 
intoxicated by their dizzying fragrance. 

Pick one, said the thought. Pick 
a foxier. 

A few of thf men bent down 
and gently plucked some lilies. 

"Water lilies!" Bersik murmured. "But they smell so . . ." 

Pick a flower, the thought repeated more strongly. Pick a flower. 
Pick a flower! 

Bersik obeyed, 

Moving as one person, the men 
stooped and, when they rose again, 
each of them wis holding a blossom and breathirg deeply its exotic 
scent. 

The countehattack was succeeding! The huge fortress barrier 
had been unable to resist the alien 
assault. There hid been a penetration of the defease ring- But the 
counterattack was succeeding! 



There were a few errors, of 
course, but that was inevitable in 
such a large operation. There were 
a few tragic mistakes. They were 
regrettable, but they could not be 
avoided, and, fortunately, they did 
not hamper the defense . . . 

No! No! screamed the lovely 
bloom as the small flower at its side 
was picked. Don't lei them lake my 
baby! 

Help! Let me go! whined the 
yellowish flower as one of the men 
plucked it from the ground. Can't 
you see that I'm not well? 

Not me! cried the fat, bloated 
lily. / didn't volunteer! 

But, despite the few disturbances, 
the thought came through clearly to 
each man. Pick a flower , . . 

Colonel Bersik sniffed at his flower. It was delicious. It was worth 
the trip from Earth just to . • . 

Home. Go home. Home. 

Almost immediately, Bersik gave 
the order to return to the ship, but 
the men had already begun to move 
out even before he spoke. They retreated through the opening in the 
jungle wall and started the trek 
across the rubbery grass, back to 
the Magellan. Each man carried a 
water lily, and occasionally lifted 
the flower to his nose and breathed 
deeply the sweet fragrance that did 
not fade. 

The men filed aboard the Magellan and gingerly went about preparing the ship for departure. They 
strapped themselves into their 
couches. The-y waited. 

Home. Go home. 



HOMESICK LAKE 



i©7 



"Blast off!"' Bersik commanded. 

The great ship's engines roared 
to life, and the Magellan was 
streaking upward through the 
clouds above Venus. Jt spun into 
an orbit around the planet and accelerated until it cxLceded escape 
velocity, then shot off into space on 
Its course for Earth. 

Relax. Smell the pretty flowers. 
Relax. 

Bersik called the astrogator on 
the intercom. "What is our 
course?" he asked, "and estimated 
time of arrival?" 

Silence. 

"Report on course and ETA!" 
lit' repeated into the phone. 

Smell the pretty flowers. Relax. 
Relax. 

Bersik smiled. Once more, he 
spoke into the intercom. "It would 
be nice to walk down to the bay 
this afternoon and watch the gulls 
soar over the white-capped 
water . . ." 

The voyage was a pleasant one. 



Never before had the crew of a 
spaceship in interplanetary flight 
been so happy and so contented. 
Every man was perfectly relaxed. 
At peace. 

Smell the pretty flowers . . . 

Each man on board was dreamily sniffing at a water lily when the 
great ship smashed into the Earth 
and burst apart in a blinding flash 
of light. No one saw the explosion, 
and few people felt the mild earthquake that shook the nearby countryside. 

Nothing remained of the Magellan but dust and a huge crater 
in (he middle of a forest preserve. 

In the rainy season, the lake fills 
with water ana" beautiful lilies grow 
there. The perfume of these flowers, 
they say, is like nothing on this 
Earth. And. they say, if you visit the 
hike when the flowers are in bloom, 
you will feel a strong nostalgic 
yearning to be home. That's why 
they call it Homesick Lake. 



Leading the entertainment parade in the turrent issue — on sale at your 
total newsdealer — of FANTASTIC universe's best friend, the saint detective 
magazine — is a brand-new Saint adventure as stirringly glamorful as 
a drum majorette in full-dress regalia. It's called the golden trog 
and features Leslie Chatteris' fantastic Simon Templar at his very best. 



crazy, 
mixed-up 
planet 

by . , . Charles E. Fritch 

A very superior person was Talus 
and not in the least monkeylike. 
If the pink Earthians thought 
otherwise — it was their funeral. 



Tulus was eighty-seven million 
light years from his home planet, 
Dorca, when the main reactor valve 
on his subspace motor began acting 
up. The ship lurched alarmingly 
and gave several shudders, and before he could cross the full width of 
the pilot's chamber the engines 
coughed and died. The rear reactor 
stem on the vessel's stem twitched 
briefly like a leg of a dying animal 
and (hen subsided. 

Tulus was a patient man. Only 
the great god Greema knew how 
patient he was, and many a Dorcan 
went so far as to claim he was too 
patient for his own peace of mind. 
But (his was too much, even for so 
philosophically resolute a navigator. 
Across millions of light years he 
had traveled for the sole purpose of 
securing for his mate Berba a spool 
of sky-green plastithread of precisely the proper shade, and the reactor 
valve had given him trouble almost 
from the start. It had sputtered and 
trembled and threatened to stop 
completely. 

Once he had been forced to stop 
right in the middle of a great glowing galaxy to adjust the vibrating 



Da you remember Charles E. Fritch's inimitably satiric little yarn — part 
fantasy and part prophetic science fiction — about the brilliant psychiatrist 
and the woman from Mars he couldn't seem to unscramble? W ell, Air. Fritch 
has dorse it again, but this time his protagonist is a hairy individual from 
the interstellar dark with a slight paranoid psychosis and an entire planet 
to unscramble. And thereby hangs a tale — and a tail! — you'll not forget. 



108 



CRAZY, MIX] 

screw so that the ship wouldn't 
shake apart. And now the rebellious 
instrument had succeeded in silencing the engines. 

He meditated upon the tragedy, 
drumming his lingers against the 
dashpanel in growing irritation, his 
tail waving great swishes of annoyance. The delay would almost certainly make him late for work at the 
nuclear fission factory, and he could 
just picture wheezled old Grimus 
consulting his sun watch, and chuckling in glee as the penalties mounted, and the seconds ticked silently 
away. 

Tulus felt the anger surge 
through him like some great flowing river, full of rapids and cataracts and wind-lashed spray plunging against the granitelike barrier of 
his patience. And then the dam 
broke. 

Cursing in seven different languages, Tulus rose. Trembling with 
indignation, he picked up the only 
portable object within reach and 
tossed it furiously against the bulkhead. It was only a spool of memory-recording micro-tape, and it 
clanged harmlessly against the resonant metal barrier, doing no damage. His fingers clenching and unclenching, Tulus looked around for 
something breakable, something that 
would shatter into millions and 
millions of spinning fragments. 
There was nothing of the sort anywhere in the pilot chamber. 

He cursed again even more volubly. He cursed his wife who had 
nagged him into taking the trip, 



-UP PLANET 109 

and he cursed the makers of the 
ship — a Probos Subspacer, last 
year's model — and he even cursed 
the mechanic who had checked the 
vessel and assured him that everything was in splendid shape. Most 
of all, he raged bitterly against (he 
age in which he lived — an age that 
made everything so durable that a 
justifiably angered man couldn't release his pent-up emotions by smashing, breaking, and exulting in the 
sweet, if suicidal music, of irreplaceable things shattering. 

How he raged ! 

And when he could think of 
nothing else that merited vituperation, he drew out his disintegrator 
and blasted a nearby plastimetid 
table into swirling, waltzing motes 
of golden dust. After that, he felt 
better. 

He sat down, suddenly relieved, 
and found that he could think about 
the injustice without becoming 
seethingly furious. Still, it was annoying. He curled his tail comfortably about him and put through an 
urgent telescreen call to Dorca, 

"Hello, Interstellar Service Unit 
77 H. This is Tulus 4713," he said 
the instant an image appeared. **I 
brought my '819 Probos Subspacer 
to your place the other day for a 
checkup. Now the main reactor 
• alve's not working. The job was 
guaranteed, you know?" 

"Our guarantee," the image said 
indifferently and almost insultingly, 
"applies only during a time-period 
of two days or a space-period of 
forty million light years, whichever 



1 1 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



happen s to foe shorter. Have you exceeded either period?" 

"Of course I have," Tulus said, 
beginning to get exasperated. "You 
can go nearly forty million light 
years just by backing the ship out -of 
the hangar." 

"A slight exaggeration," the 
image pointed out. "Nevertheless, 
our guarantee no long applies. 
However, if you'd like space-service — " 

"At your rates," Tulus said, "I 
should say not!" Irritably he cut off. 

He could remember every infuriating aspect of a previous'application for space-service when he had 
been only a few million light years 
out. They had made him sit around 
on his tail for three hours awaiting 
the arrival of a mechanic who had 
made a few minor adjustments that 
had taken only seven minutes of 
actual working time. The bill had 
set him back eighteen depeels. For a 
service call out here, the charge 
would be staggering. The thought 
of what it would be made him angrier still, and he wished again he 
had something breakable in his 
hands. 

He sat down, curling his tail 
uround him again, and impatiently 
scratched the hair below his right 
ear. There was a manual of emergency repairs somewhere on the 
ship, he recalled. Perhaps with luck 
he could fix the reactor valve himself. There could be no harm in 
trying and meanwhile, he'd better 
let his wife Berba know precisely 
where he was in space. 



He put in a telescreen call, and 
when her image appeared, he explained with careful and eloquent 
persuasiveness exactly what had happened. 

"A fine thing," Berba said indignantly, her upper lip curling 
back over her amber-colored teeth 
and gums, "and you don't like it 
when / have a little trouble." 

"When you have a little trouble," 
Tulus reminded her, trying to keep 
his thinning patience intact, "it's 
always because of a speeding violation or a bent reactor stem or something else that's nine-tenths youc 
fault. I'm blameless entirely." 

"Hmpf," Berba said, self-right* 
eously. "Can I help it if those parking hangars are set so close together? And as for speeding — " 

"All right, skip it," Tulus said 
wearily. "Look, while I'm checking 
over the manual, I'd be grateful if 
you'd determine for me exactly 
where in space I am, I may have to 
land somewhere out here for repairs." He gave her his c oord inates. 

"Are you sure you're alone," 
Berba asked, suspiciously. The hairs 
around her nose twitched and she 
twisted her short neck to peer into 
the shadows behind him. 

"Of course, I'm not alone," Tulus 
snapped. "I've got four exquisitely 
beautiful women here with me. 
Now, get busy on those coordinates. 
I don't want to be drifting around 
out here all day !" 

Irritably, he switched the screen 
off. Consign to perdition all suspi


CRAZY, MIXED- UP PLAN ET 



films women, he thought. He found 
himself wishing he did have four 
beautiful women with him, all of 
l hem witli smooth brown hair, delicate flaring nostrils, and shapely 
tails. He sighed in bitter frustration. 
He didn't, so common sense dictated that he hunt up the manual 
and try to make some emergency repairs. 

A wretched sham*! he thought. 

He ambled across the cabin, dragging his hands on the floor in the 
listless fashion which usually indicated that a Dofcan was thinking 
heavily. He found the manual after 
a brief search under a pile of miscellaneous equipment in a closet adjoining the sleeping quarters. The 
excitement of foraging through the 
closet made him forget temporarily 
that he was stranded in space. There 
was a dart ball racket which brought 
back many fond memories. He recalled that his first romantic encounter with Berba had occurred 
during a game under off-gravity. 
They had collided in mid-air, and 
their tails had become accidently 
interwoven. 

It had been embarrassing, of 
course. But it had led to better 
things, and had eventually resulted 
in their marriage. She had possessed 
a really outstanding figure in those 
days, with not a bristly or matted 
hair to spoil her seductively alluring 
contours. And she was so graceful 
that not once during the courtship 
had she accidentally stepped on her 
hands or tripped over her tail. Sighing, he replaced the racket and re


1 1 1 

minded himself that the pleasant 
reminiscences could wait until he 
had repaired the reactor. 

Carefully following the directions 
outlined in chapter five of the emergency repair manual, Tulus disassembled the main reactor valve 
and found that the cause of his 
trouble lay in the inside coating. It 
had worn calamitously thin where 
the terminal wire crossed the relay. 
He knew without looking that he 
didn't have a can of the coating 
handy. He was all set to start cursing again when Berba called. 

"What are you doing out in that 
section," she wanted to know. "The 
General Space-Store is off in the 
other direction. By the way, did you 
get the plastithread ?" 

"Yes, I did," Tulus said irritably. 
"I was taking a shortcut. Never 
mind that now. Am I oear any 
habitable worlds?" 

"There's a small system of nine 
planets nearby," Berba said, "and 
two of them are inhabited — the second and the third. Did you get it in 
sky-green ?" 

"Yes, I got it in sky-green!" 
Tulus almost shouted, mentally cursing the dart ball game that had entangled him so permanently. "What 
are the coordinates?" 

Berba told him. "Fine," he said. 
"Now look up as much data as you 
can on the planets, and see if there's 
anything that resembles the coating 
needed on the inside of a main reactor valve." 

"Why don't you have a mechanic 
look it over," she said doubtfully. 



112 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"It would take only a few minutes — " 

"And pay those pirates a fortune?" Tulus bridled. "I will not. 
I'll be late for work first and even 
let old Grirous dock me all the 
credits he wants. I know what I'm 
doing." 

"I hope so," Berba said, unconvinced. "Don't lose that plastithread. Von can't get sky-green easiljr." 

"I wouldn't dream of losing it," 
Tulus snapped, shutting her off 
with an impatient click. 

He had an almost uncontrollable 
urge to take the plastithread and 
toss it out into space as far as he 
could, which in the frictionless void 
would be a considerable distance. 
But he knew that if he did she 
would only get him to make the trip 
again and she might even go along 
next time. 

Stoically, he adjusted the dials 
for the coordinates she had given 
him, and automatically flipped die 
switch for the subspace drive. When 
the motors remained silent, he remembered the worn valve coating. 
He cursed again and started the 
auxiliary rocket engines. 

In the two years that had elapsed 
since his purchase of the spaceship 
he hadn't used those engines once, 
and the previous owner hadn't 
either. There had been only four 
hundred thousand parsecs registered 
on the mileage dial when Tulus had 
bought the vehicle second-hand 
from his wife's brother who oper


ated a used -spaces hip concession on 
one of the inner planets. 

Tutus had suspected the readings 
had been set back. But he could 
hardly accuse his wife's brother of 
being a crook, even though the rascal probably was . . . Anyway, the 
rocket motor spluttered, flaring 
sparks, and Tulus looked at the 
speedometer dial with open disgust. 

"Four hundred and fifty light 
years an hour," he said in a tone of 
disbelief. "I'm barely moving!" 

Glumly, he settled back on his 
tail and turned on the outer screens 
to view the approaching system. 
Fortunately for what peace of mind 
Tulus had left, the system was only 
about a hundred light years remote. 
He watched it grow swiftly larger. 
It had a medium-sized yellow sun, 
and eleven — no, nine planets. He 
leaned forward and saw that the 
fifth planetary orbit was taken up by 
a mass of asteroids. 

The telescreen buzzer aroused 
him from his preoccupation with 
the system, and he punched a button that brought Berba's face into 
view. 

"Did you get the data?" he asked 
her. 

"Maybe you'd better call the service unit," she suggested hesitantly. 
"They at least could — " 

"They could charge me a month's 
pay for a few seconds' work," he 
said. "I'm not going to give them 
hard-earned credits when I can do 
the job myself. Did you get the information ?" 

"What little there was," Berba 



CRAZY, MIX1 
said. "Actually, the solar system is 
so minor that hardly anything is 
known about the planets. The second is inhabited by green amphibians and the planet Is mostly oceanic. The third is similar to ours, and 
the creatures are almost human." 

"What do you mean by 'almost' 
human?" he asked her. 

"Well, they walk upright like us. 
Only their forearms are much shorter and they're pink-colored and hairless, and — " 

"Pink colored? Hairless?" Tulus 
shuddered, visualizing the combination. And his wife in her incredible, 
naive stupidity had called them "almost human" ! 

Berba nodded innocently. "They 
are really very primitive," she went 
on. "They haven't even developed 
space travel yet." 

"Yes, yes," Tulus said impatiently. "But what about the valve coating? Have they got anything on the 
planet I can use." 

"I don't know," his wife said 
helplessly. "There's no information 
on that. Tulus, why don't you call 
the service unit? Even if it does cost 
a little more than you can afford — " 

"A little more?" Tulus exploded. 
"I'm not paying those robbers a 
single credit. Never mind, I'll find 
the coating on one of the planets." 

"Which one, Tulus?" 

"I'll try the third one," he said. 
"It sounds more promising, somehow. Don't ask me why." 

"But, Tulus — " 

"Make a couple of ergon sandwiches for me," Tulus said, inter


-UP PLANET 113 

rupting her deliberately. I'll eat 
them when I get home. See you 
later." 

He shut the screen off, disconnected the apparatus so that she 
couldn't bother him again, and settled back to watch the solar system 
rising swiftly toward him, paying 
particular attention to the tli i rd 
planet. 

It was green — almost sky-green, 
he thought with some bitterness — 
and it had a single chalky-white 
satellite whirling around it. It was 
just barely conceivable jhat if the 
natives had any intelligence at all 
their best minds might be able to 
help him discover just the one right 
coating for the reactor valve. They 
hadn't space travel, Berba had said. 
Possibly he could even bribe them, 
if necessary, with a few "secrets" in 
return for their help. 

At any rate, he was not going to 
call up the Interstellar Service Unit 
and pay their racketeering prices. 
That much was certain. 

He got up, yawned, stretched 
lazily, and then scratched himself 
where a flea had gotten a foothold 
deep in his fur. He gave his tail a 
few experimental swishes and was 
satisfied that it had retained all of 
its flexibility. While his stomach 
may have gone slightly to pot, he 
was still as agile as ever, and very 
deliberately he hopped up and down 
several times to corroborate this. 
Unaccountably, his thoughts returned to the four non-existent women 
he'd dwelt upon earlier with illicit, 
but very agreeable ardor, Ah, well— 



114 FANTASTIC 

The detectors clanged loud warnings, rudely waking Tulus from his 
reverie. He hopped into the control 
chair and watched the planet dart 
up at him. Frantically, he twisted 
dials, and threw switches, using 
both hands, both feet, and even putting his tail to work. Gradually the 
*8l9 Probos decelerated, pulling his 
stomach into his throat where it 
jii. de unpleasant growling noises. 

The jet tubes shuddered in their 
moorings, and vomited spasmodic 
bursts of flame toward the planet 
below. Tulus had barely time to select a landing spot before he was 
settling rightly into it. His stomach 
retreated to a more normal position, 
but he felt no better for the change. 
He was convinced that his internal 
organs were in new and possible 
dangerous positions and he half* 
w, jhed he had called the service unit 
icr repairs. 

But he'd gone too far now to retreat with dignity. Besides, success 
was almost within his grasp. He'd 
show those mechanics, and his wife 
too, who refused to believe he could 
do it 

Tulus got up from the control 
chair and experienced sudden nausea. His tail shot out expertly, wrapped around the chair, and steadied 
him. In a few seconds, his head 
cleared and the room stopped its 
precarious pin-wheeling. 

"Whew," he breathed. The next 
time his wife wanted sky-green 
plastithread, or purple, for that matter, he'd — 

He left the thought uncompleted, 



UNIVERSE 

his eyes riveted on the nearest porthole. Framed in it was a big stretch 
of sunlit grass with some strange 
square structures obscurely visible 
in the distance. The vista was not at 
all like a housing development area 
on his home planet. There were 
very few trees in evidence, and the 
houses were not built in the trees, 
but right on the ground. That circumstance failed to d isturb him, 
however. He was familiar with the 
customs of other planets, especially 
primitive ones, and he knew that 
they were often strange and unfathomable. 

He checked the air and the gravity and found both reasonably to his 
liking, though the temperature was 
a little low for normal comfort. But 
at least a space suit would not be 
needed, which was a blessing. If 
there was anything he hated it was 
to have a flea take to roaming while 
he was imprisoned in a spacesuit, 
unable to scratch or relieve the torment in any way no matter how 
hard he tried. 

There were few tortures more 
complete. 

He opened the airlock, tossed 
over the ladder, and descended 
hand over hand, dropping nimbly 
from the lowermost rung to the 
giound. Immediately he saw a small 
creature sitting on its haunches a 
short distance away regarding him 
with an unmistakable mixture of 
curiosity and amazement. Mentally, 
Tulus went over Berba's description 
of the planet's predominant animals. Pink and hairless, she'd said. 



CRAZY, MIXED-UP PLANET 



This animal was grey and furry, and 
it had long ears propped up straight 
as though it were listening intently. 
It's nose quivered delicately. 

"Are you intelligent?" Tulus 
asked it in the Basic Language, 
"Can you speak?" 

"Of course not," the animal answered distinctly. "Rabbits can't 
talk." 

"Oh,** Tulus said, considering 
this startling bit of wisdom. "Where 
can I find the dominant species on 
this planet — the pink and hairless 
ones ?" 

"Over there, in that farmhouse," 
the rabbit told him, pointing his 
quivering nose in the proper direction. "I know, because once in a 
while one of them comes out with a 
weapon and tries to shoot me." 

Tulus was shocked. "That seems 
cruel," he said. But then, on second 
thought, he remembered diat other 
worlds had other customs, and what 
right had he to pass judgment on 
them? "Still," he said, "I hope you 
have weapons to fight back with." 

"None at all," the rabbit said 
calmly. "Only my eyes and ears to 
see his approach, and my coloring to 
hide me among the rocks, and my 
speed to enable me to get away." 

'That's not fair at all," Tulus 
said, though a more rational part of 
his mind whispered that it was none 
of his business. "Look," he said on 
impulse, "I have weapons on board 
my spaceship, one so powerful it 
could destroy this whole planet in 
one blow, I could give you one of 
the smaller ones — " 



1*5 

"No, thanks," the rabbit said. 
"We rabbits are a happy lot in general. Having weapons wouldn't 
make us any happier, and it might 
— make us sadder. Thanks, anyway." 

Despite himself, Tulus admired 
the creature's primitive philosophy. 
In his calmer moments, he had often 
thought a similar rudimental acceptance of reality might benefit his own 
society. 

"Well, good luck," he said. 

"I should have," the rabbit said. 
"I have four rabbit's feet," and he 
hopped away to prove it. 

Tulus watched the animal leave. 
After a moment of thoughtful reflection he decided the rabbit's statement was undoubtedly true, but 
wondered what significance it could 
possibly have. Shrugging, he turned 
his attention to his own more immediate problem. 

The pink and hairless ones were 
in that clump of houses over there, 
were they? Well, it wouldn't take 
him long to find out if they could 
help him get back to Dorca. The 
thought of meeting the strange creatures filled Tulus with a sense of 
excitement such as he had never experienced before, and he scampered 
eagerly across the sunlit plain toward the dwellings. 

He had almost reached them when 
he remembered what the rabbit had 
said about a weapon and shooting, 
and he paused briefly, considering 
that disturbing revelation. Then he 
remembered the disintegrator hanging at his side and went on. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



116 

Any weapons the pink ones might 
possess would almost certainly be 
primitive and he was sure that his 
superior intellect could easily overcome them without recourse to force 
or violence. 

There was a small fenced-in area 
Surrounding several animals that 
pushed and squirmed happily in a 
large puddle of mud. They were 
small creatures, but larger than the 
rabbit, and indisputably pink and 
hairless.. 

"At last," Tulus breathed. 

The animals had paid not the 
slightest attention to his approach, 
but suddenly one of them exclaimed, "Oink!" 

"What did you say?" Tulus asked 
in the Basic Language. 

"I wasn't talking to you," the 
creature responded. "I was merely 
sighing. I don't know whether I 
like eating best, or just splashing 
around like this." 

Tulus grimaced, forcing himself 
to remember once again that other 
worlds had different and often quite 
unsanitary customs. Abstractedly he 
searched for an elusive flea. 

"Are you the dominant society on 
this planet?" he asked. 

"I am a pig," the creature said 
proudly. He appeared to ruminate 
for a moment, and then went on, 
"1 don't really know if we pigs arc 
the dominant species or not. I guess 
so. After all, we have tall pink creatures who wait on us and bring us 
our food." He considered this carefully, as if he had just thought of it 
for the first time. "They must be 



Our servants. You know, we're really even luckier than I imagined. I'm 
glad you brought it up." 

"Where are the tall pink creatures ?" Tulus wanted to know, 
"The ones who walk upright?" 

"Over there, in the white house," 
the pig said, lifting a mud-covcrcd 
snout in the proper direction. '"Hie 
woman's at home now." 

"Thanks," Tulus said. All this 
was extremely interesting. But lie 
remembered suddenly that he wasn't 
here on a vacation, and that he had 
to get the main reactor valve coated 
and travel back to Dorca in time to 
go to work. 

So he scampered in earnest over 
to the front porch of the dwelling, 
nearly tripping over his dragging 
arms in his haste, and he burled a 
thought at the door. He was surprised when it failed to open. 

"These people are more primitive 
than I thought," he told himself. 
He searched about for some nontelepathic opening device and, finding none, hammered on the door 
with his hand. If hammering failed, 
he decided, at least there would be 
a noise that might persuade one of 
the pink and hairless ones to open 
it for him. 

The door opened, and Tulus 
shrank back appalled at his first 
sight of die planet's predominant 
animal. It was pink-orange and 
though its body was nearly hairless, 
there was a profusion of wild dark 
hair billowing out from its head. 
The creature's complexion seemed 
to change from pink-orange to a 



CRAZY, MIX I 

greenish hue as it continued to gaze 
on Talus, and it wavered slightly 
and held one hairless arm out to 
steady itself. 

"Good heavens,** it said, "a monkey!" 

Tulus didn't know what a monkey was, but he had a strange feeling that the creature's remark was 
not intended as a compliment 

"Hello,'' he said in the Basic 
Language. "I'm from the planet 
Dorca, and my spaceships — " 

The woman — the pig had called 
it that — gave voice to a sudden 
shriek that turned Tulus' blood 
cold. "George," she cried out, making the shrieking sound again — 
how was he to know it was laughter? — and bending almost double at 
the waist. 

"George, you had me fooled completely. I thought you were a real 
monkey." 

Tulus switched his tail in annoyance. "Woman," he said, in a very 
stern tone, "my name is not George. 
It's Tulus, and I've come to ask 
you — " 

"Okay, I can take a gag," the 
woman .said, "although on second 
thought, it is a pretty hokey costame. How do you work die tail?" 

"The what?" 

"The tail? Just how do you work 
it? It's pretty clever, I must admit, 
but as soon as I heard your voice I 
recognized you. You can't fool your 
own wife." 

' That's true," Tulus admitted 
gkimty, "but I'm afraid — " 

"Come on in," the woman in


•L'P PLANET 117 

vitcd exuberantly, pulling him forward and closing the door firmly behind him. "Where did you get that 
costume — and why? You may as 
well break down and tell me all 
about if 

"Well—'" he began. 

"But first take off the headpiece," 
she insisted. *TCour voice is so 
muffled I can hardly hear you." And 
she proceeded to help him. 

"Be careful! Oh, don't!" Tulus 
cried out But the woman merely 
shrieked again, and seemed maniacally intent on twisting his head 
loose. 

He had not expected such intimate contact, and the closeness of 
the creature did nothing to benefit 
his stomach, even though, combined 
with the woman's natural smells, he 
detected a strange artificial scent 
which smelted rather pleasantly 
flowery. 

Fortunately he managed to loosen 
her grip and scamper onto a nearby 
chandelier which swung like a 
pendulum beneath his weight From 
this relatively secure position he 
looked warily down at the creature, 
and wondered whether it might not 
be advisable to disintegrate her, and 
stop this nonsense. 

"Good heavens," she said in a 
trembling voice. "You — you're not 
George!" She wavered slightly and 
reached out toward the wall to 
steady herself. 

"Exactly, "Tulus said, his temper 
subsiding. "I'm Tulus." 

"Too loose for what?" the 
woman inquired weakly. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"My name," Tulus said with deliberate slowness, "is Tulus. I'm 
from the planet Dorca, and my 
spaceship needs repairing. Now, if 
you could direct me to the nearest 
scientist — " 

"Oh, I get it," the woman said, 
her greenness fading a little. 
"You're a character in a publicity 
stunt for some new science-fiction 
movie." She nodded knowingly. 
"You certainly had me fooled for a 
iDinute. Boy, what a crazy mixed- up 
world this is." 

Tulus was inclined to agree with 
her. He closed his eyes and slowly 
counted to one million, in triple 
decimal units. When he was through 
he felt no calmer. He swung back 
and forth on the chandelier, his tail 
darting to and fro like a great whip. 

He thought about his ship, crippled and useless a short distance 
away. He thought about the InterSteljai Service Unit with its exorbitant rates. He thought about old 
Grimus at the nuclear fission factory and how pleased the old devil 
would be. He thought about his 
wife Bcrba and the nagging she'd 
do. With in him, Tulus felt his 
blood come to a boil :.nd knew that 
something would have to rip. 
' Nimbly, he leaped from the chandelier and drew his disintegrator. 
He opened the door. "Now, watch 
carefully," he directed. 

The woman needed no urging. 
The instant he drew the weapon her 
eyes expanded to several times their 
natural size arid remained riveted on 
him. 



Tulus took careful aim and pulled the trigger. The large red building behind the pig enclosure disappeared in a sudden blinding flash of 
light. Tulus holstered the gun. 

"There," he said triumphantly, 
"Now if you're really interested — " 

Bui he might as well have saved 
his breath, for the woman was 
stretched out on the floor, unconscious, and serenely at peace with 
the world. 

Tulus spluttered at this sudden 
inconvenience, hopping up and 
down and calling the woman unpleasant names in his native Dorcan. When he had finished, she still 
remained supine and unmoving, so 
he determined to let her stay that 
way. He went out on the porch and 
slammed the door angrily behind 
him. 

Now, why couldn't sensible creatures like the rabbit and the pig be 
the dominant species of such an 
otherwise normal-appearing planet, 
he wondered. He shook his head 
sadly at the injustices of evolution 
and looked around for some other 
creature to try his luck with. 

A paved road went past the farmhouse, and while Tulus stood stajring intently into the hazy blue distances, a land vehicle zoomed past, 
and was quickly lost to view. Startled, Tulus leaped chattering back 
behind the protection of a post that 
helped support the porch roof and 
clung to it tenaciously. 

As he peered around the barrier 
another vehicle shot past, and after 
a moment three more in rapid sue


CRAZY, MIXED-UP PLANET 



119 



cession. Tulus could sec several persons inside. It made sense, of 
course. Having no trees and vines 
for transportation, the creatures had 
built vehicles which traveled along 
the ground. His admiration grew, 
as did a plan for flagging down one 
of the strange land craft, 

"I'll just step out in front of the 
next one," he told the porch, "and 
when the pilot sees me he'll stop. 
Then I'll ask him to take me to a 
scientist." 

The whispered and highly confidential remark reminded him that 
he wanted the scientist to help him 
with the valve coating, and that in 
turn reminded him that he wanted 
the valve coating so he could blastoff 
into subspace. It also reminded him 
that no matter how fast he went he 
would probably be late anyway, and 
old Grimus and Bcrba would have a 
regular picnic in dissecting him, 
and— 

He moaned and decided he was 
wasting time feeling sorry for himself when he should be doing something about it. He scampered down 
the porch steps, and across the interval of lawn, and stood in the 
middle of the road. By shading his 
eyes with one hand, he could see a 
black dot on the road moving swiftly towards him. Eagerly, Tulus hopped up and down, chattering and 
waving his arms. The dot grew 
larger. 

He leaped away just in time. 
There was a deafening roar and a 
wheel nearly caught the end of his 
tail. Bewildered, he stared after the 



speeding vehicle and saw it swerve 
crazily, the occupants gawking back 
to look at him. 

Tulus drew his gun and fired at 
the car. He missed, and disintegrated instead the bottom of a pole 
strung with wires. By the time he 
had calmed down sufficiently to take 
careful aim, the car was out of 
sight and he had lost interest in destroying it. 

Replacing his weapon, he ambled 
on down the road. He thought 
briefly about returning to the space-, 
ship and forgetting the incomprehensible pink creatures who seemed 
determined to misunderstand his 
logically motivated behavior. But 
the prospect of leaving with his mission unaccomplished pained him. 
He'd try once more, this time staying beside the road. If they wanted 
to stop, well and good. If not, at 
least it wouldn't be any hair off his 
tail. 

Several more cars passed him during the next half hour, their pink 
occupants all craning their necks to 
stare at him. Finally, one of the cars 
stopped, a grey one with black letters proclaiming "State Police," and 
two pink creatures in dark blue uniforms got out. "At last," Tulus 
thought, with some relief, "these 
must be the scientists come to greet 
me." 

"Take it easy, Fred," one of the 
pink creatures said to the other. "He 
might be dangerous." 

Both held weapons, Tulus noticed with sudden alarm. He held 
out his arms in a friendly gesture. 



120 FANTASTIC 

"I come on a peaceful mission," he 
told them in the Basic Language. 
"My name—" 

"It talks!" the one called Fred 
croaked, turning slightly green. 

"It can't be," the other said. 
"Monkeys don't talk." 

"Maybe it's a circus freak," Fred 
ventured. "With a split tongue or 
something. There are talking dogs." 

"Yeah," the other breathed hopefully. "I sure trust you're right. I 
wish we had brought a net along. I 
don't like to wrestle monkeys." 

"I am not a monkey," Tulus insisted firmly. "My name is Tulus, 
and — ■** 

"Get him, Fred!" 

Fred leapt forward and threw a 
half-Nelson around Tulus' furry 
waist. "Give me a hand! Quick!" 
he shouted. 

"Now, hold on," Tulus protested. 

"That's just what we intend doing," the other pink creature said, 
leaping forward too. "Look out! 
He's got a gun." 

"Not any more lie hasn't," Fred 
said triumphantly, holding the 
weapon aloft. 

Tulus struggled, but the two pink 
ipecimens were huskier than the one 
at the farmhouse. They held him in 
an iron grip. "This is an outrage," 
he stormed. "What are you" going to 
do with me?" 

Fred scratched his head inexpertly. "That's right, what are we going 
to do with him? There's no zoo 
around here." 

The other shrugged. "We'll just 
have to pul him in jail, I guess." 



UNIVERSE 

"In jail? On what charge?" Tulus 
demanded. 

"That's right," Fred admitted. 
"You can't put him in jail unless 
he's done something wrong." 

"Listen, brother," his companion 
said, jabbing an authoritative finger 
at Tulus, v when a monkey goes 
walking down a state highway, we 
don't need a charge to slap him in 
the clink. Monkeys don't have no. 
civil rights, see?" 

"I see," Tulus said, debating the 
advisability of biting the finger waggin:.', impolitely beneath his nose. 
"But I don't like it. Besides, I don't 
know what a monkey is. I'm certain 
I'm not one. My name is Tulus, 
and — ■" 

"Well, you look like a monkey," 
the officer pointed out, "so we act 
accordingly." 

They proceeded to act accordingly 
by herding him into the back scat 
of the vehicle, where the one called 
Fred immediately snapped handcuffs on bis wrists. Fred sat nervously on the edge of the seat, even 
when the car roared into motion. 
He tried to avoid looking at his 
prisoner. 

Tulus felt properly indignant, for 
he had anticipated a far different 
reception from primitives. Not a 
banquet or a parade perhaps, but a 
little respect would not have been 
out of order. He felt the old familiar urge pounding at him to toss 
all gyros to space and start tearing 
and smashing and breaking. There 
were probably a. lot of breakable 
things on this crazy planet. 



CRAZY, MIXED- UP PLANET 



But he managed to console himself with the reflection that now at 
least he would be meeting highplaced officials who would listen to 
his story, and among them he might 
find a sympathetic ear. 

"I don't get mad very often," he 
told himself silently, "but when I 
do there's a good reason." But the 
time for anger, he realized, was not 
now. For the greater good of repairing his reactor valve, he must suffer 
a temporary inconvenience, and bide 
his time. 

He didn't care, though, for the 
planet's primitive means of locomotion, which made him feel only 
slightly less ill than had the rocket 
deceleration. He tried to watch the 
pink creature in the driver's scat to 
see what crude manipulations were 
necessary to keep the vehicle in motion. But during much of the fifteen minute journey he kept his 
eyes shut, opening them at the sudden screeching of brakes and honkings of horns only to satisfy a natural curiosity as to what they had 
missed colliding with. 

They passed into a busy section 
that was encircled like a fortress 
with the granitclike facades of tall 
buildings and crowded with double 
lines of swiftly moving traffic. At 
their destination — a large officiallooking grey building — Tulus was 
rudely escorted from the vehicle and 
guided up the steps. Several passersby did double-takes at seeing him, 
and he refl ec ted that, whi I e on 
Dorca he was just an average citizen, here he would naturally be re


12! 

garded as an advanced evolutionary 

product. 

It was not at all surprising, therefore, that these creatures should relet in such a manner. He thought 
briefly about Berba and what she 
would think of his sudden importance — briefly because he resisted 
the thought as soon as it came. First 
problems first, he told himself — and 
was promptly presented with another immediate problem as he was 
ushered into a cell. 

"I'd like to see the leader of this 
planet," he said. 

"Sure," the officer replied. "Just 
cool off in here for awhile, and try 
to relax. We'll scud him in when he 
arrives." 

Though he was not overly warm 
and had no particular wish to cool 
off, Tulus accepted the statement 
with some degree of relief. He 
shrugged noncomm it tally and made 
a quick stabbing motion for a flea 
which was crawling towards the 
sanctuary of his right armpit. 

"I hope I don't have to go 
through any diplomatic channels," 
he said, upon a sudden thought. He 
bad originally assumed that no such 
problem would arise, and that he 
would be able to land, find the reactor valve coating, and take off. He 
had not considered that there might 
be complex laws concerning visitors 
from space which these primitives 
would feel obligated to carry out. 

He sat down on a hard cot a few 
feet from the cell door, curled his 
tail comfortably about himself, and 
worried about his latest troubling 



1 22 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



thought. Perhaps, he wondered, he 
should have called the Interstellar 
Service Unit, after all. Exorbitant 
rates or not, the time element was 
important, and was rapidly becoming critical. 

Tulus frowned, and his tail 
switched in a sadden frenzy. Old 
Grimus, the Clockwatcher, would 
be at his post bright and early, waiting to see whom he could catch 
coining in late. Until now, Tulus 
had never been late. But now he 
was probably going to break all 
tardiness records. lie felt trapped 
and completely helpless.. 

In sudden resignation, he took 
hold of the bars of his cell and 
called out, "I've changed my mind. 
Let me out, please." But no one 
came. In a gruffer tone he repeated 
the request, but still no one came. 
Angrily, he paced the cell, his tail 
swishing. Then he grabbed the bars 
and shook them until they rattled. 

Finally, the uniformed creature 
known as Fred appeared, nervously 
ushering in another creature who 
had transparent discs suspended by 
a wire frame before his eyes. They 
stopped before Tulus, and the newcomer stared dirough the transparent discs with interest. 

"Er — this is my brother Arnold," 
Fred said, and added quickly, "Arnold's a biologist. I knew he'd be 
interested in you, so I decided to 
call him." 

Tulus listened patiently to Fred's 
explanation. On Dacca, introductions were generally accompanied 'by 



an En tert wining of tails, but Tulus 
had noticed early upon bis arrival 
that the pink creatures had the misfortune to lack that useful anatomical feature. Besides, under the circumstances he felt no obligation to 
be polite. 

"See here," he said, with all of 
the forccfulness the Basic Language 
could muster, "I've changed my 
mind. I want to go back to my spaceship." 

"Imagine diat," Arnold said, 
peering interestedly through his 
transparent discs. "A talking monkey." 

'T thought he might be the missing link, 1 ' F r ed vol un teered . To 
Tulus he said; "Arnold's not really 
a biologist. He's a plumber. But he's 
always wanted to be a biologist . , . 
Go ahead, Arnold, say something 
biological." 

Arnold blushed modestly. 

"This is all very interesting," 
Tulus lied, "but I'd like to get back 
to my spaceship." 

"Imagine that," Arnold said, still 
properly amazed. "A talking monkey." 

"Can you tell if he's a missing 
link," Fred said hopefully. "I could 
use a little extra cash right now, and 
I thought — " 

"Not without looking at him a 
little closer," Arnold said. "From 
here he looks like just an ordinary 
monkey that can talk. Could you 
open the cell?" 

Fred hesitated. "Well," he said, 
"well, I — I don't know." He wet 
his lips and looked around guiltily. 



CRAZY, MIXED-UP PLANET 



123 



"We don't want him to escape, you 
know." 

It was the word "escape" that arrested Talus' attention, for he realized with a sudden startling clarity 
tliat that was precisely what he 
would have !o do if lie ever wanted 
to leave this crazy mixed tip phinet. 
Willi renewed Enfceiest be watched 
.Fred's lips quivering wiih hesitation. 

"Well, okay," Fred said, finally, 
"but only for a minute." 

Tulus waited, poised, hardly daring to breathe, his legs toiled under 
him. When at last the door swung 
carefully open, he gave a great leap 
and bounded over the two suddenly 
startled pink creatures, knocking 
them with shattering violence to 
the floor. He paid no attention to 
their frantic exclamations of surprise, fear and anger, but sped on 
down the hall, trying to remember 
where the exit was. 

By the sheerest stroke of good 
luck he found it quickly, jerked it 
open, and scampered down the 
stone steps into the street. One of 
tlie land vehicles honked wildly, 
and just missed him. His blood 
boiled. He flung an obscene Dorcan 
phrase after the vehicle, and reached for his disintegrator — then remembered that the uniformed creatures had taken it from him. Well, 
he'd have to do without it. 

He jerked open the door of a 
passing vehicle, and leaped in. The 
driver stared at him in tenor, let out 
a shriek and tried to trawl through 
the rear window. 



"Stay in here," Tulus commanded in his most terrifying tones, "and 
you won't get hurt. Drive down 
this street." 

The driver gulped, turned a sickly shade of green and obeyed. The 
vehicle shot forward like a jet of 
liquid argon. 

'"Turn left here," Tulus said suddenly, remembering. "Go faster." 

The driver went faster. They 
sped down a widely curving road, 
tires humming against the pavement. Behind them a siren sounded. 

"Faster," Tulus urged, "or I'll 
eat you alive." 

The thought was nauseating to 
Tulus, but the thrc.it accomplished 
its purpose. The driver turned a 
deeper shade of green, shivered, 
and pushed his foot down hard on 
the accelerator pedal. 

The countryside streamed past. 
Tulus smiled. If only Bcrba could 
see him now. Another wish leapt 
unbidden into his mind. If only he 
could have gotten the valve coating! 
Or even have called the Interstcllar 
Service Unit, and smothered h is 
pride. 

The spaceship came into sight. 

''Stop," Tulus ordered. 

The driver was so anxious to 
please that Tulus was thrown violently forward against the front 
glass. But in his eagerness to get 
back to his own ship lie paid no attention to the grievously swelling 
bump on his forehead or the sudden 
turning over of his stomach. He 
leaped out, with the shrill whine of 
the sirens loud in his ears, and raced 



124 FANTASTIC 

across the field. Behind him, the vehicle made strange clashing noises 
and vanished down the road in a 
cloud of dust. 

"There he is, George," a familiar 
voice cried out. "That's the one that 
blew up the barn and attacked me. 
Shoot him !" 

Tulus glanced back over his 
shoulder. The pink creature he had 
encountered earlier in the farmhouse was standing on the porch 
pointing at him, and beside her was 
another pink creature with an 
abundance of hair on his chest. The 
other creature held a long metal 
tube in his hands. 

Tulus didn't stop to ask questions. He simply increased speed 
until he heard an explosive roar and 
felt a thousand angry bees sting 
him on his backside. He cried out 
then in furious resentment, and ran 
faster, his tail twitching painfully. 
As he reached the ladder and started to ascend, another roar came. 

But he stubbornly closed his eyes 
and kept climbing, as fast as he 
could pull himself up. The hull of 
the ship quickly became splattered 
with tiny chunks of metal. Still refusing to pause, he thanked the 
great god Greema for sparing his 
tail a further, and more grievous onslaught, and leaped the last few feet 
into the airlock. 

The clang of the closing portal 
rang musically in his ears, but even 
then he didn't pause to sigh in relief. He reeled across the pilot 
chamber, and forgetting his wounds, 
flung himself into the control chair. 



UNIVERSE 

Instantly, he cried out again and 
leaped up cursing, jabbing at the 
switches and buttons from a standing position. Beneath him, the rocket 
tubes shuddered, and he felt his 
stomach grow hollow and begin to 
contract. 

Not until the planet was a small 
round ball receding into the spatial 
void did Tulus stop, and stare back 
at it. He felt a justified surge of resentment, and he winced again as a 
spasm twitched his injured tail. He 
thought about the Interstellar Service Unit and the prices he'd now be 
compelled to pay. He thought about 
Berba and how she'd nag him for 
this, with an intolerable "I told yon 
so" look on her face. 

He thought about old Grimus at 
the nuclear fission factory and how 
the old buzzard would take such delight in the misadventure that he 
would never let him forget it. He 
thought about the disintegrator he'd 
left behind, the deluxe model which 
had cost him 4.99 credits but was 
guaranteed to shoot under water, 
He thought about his backside peppered with chunks of metal, his 
neatly combed tail ventilated by the 
small round pellets shot at him, 

Tulus got mad. In the space below him the planet spun unsuspecting through its orbit. It was skygreen, a color that had started everything, that had set the stage for his 
undoing. Tulus didn't like its color. 

With a smile of satisfaction curling his hairy upper lip, Tulus reached out to press a button. He knew 
what would happen if he did — a 



CRAZY, MIX] 

beam of light would dart out from 
the '819 Probos toward the skygrccn planet. And llic instant the 
light touched the planet the spinning globe would change color. 
First it would turn red. Then it 
would shrivel and turn black. And 
if would remain a black, smoking 
cinder spinning on into space, spinning on for all eternity. 

He took one more look at the 
planet — his finger on the button — 
And suddenly lie felt a sorrowful, 



hVf PLANET 125 

overwhelming pity for the rabbit and 

the pig. Tulus decided not to press 
the button, and so deciding, fch 
better almost immediately. Ever 
when he put a call through to the 
Interstellar Service Unit, his »ngei 
was minor. He did not even mind 
the spasm of pain that went through 
him when his tail gave an automatic 
swipe. 

"Imagine them trying to make a 
monkey out of me," he whispered 
and smiled comfortably to himself. 




HANS Stefan santesson, the only Honorary Monster we've ever met (yes, 
Honorary Member, tlma), will discuss current Science Fiction and Fantasy 
titles beginning with the nest itsue. A pioneer in the Book Club use of 
SF while Editor of the Unicorn Mystery Book Club during 1945-'}2, Saniesson spoke at the 9th and 10th World Science Fiction Contentions in 
New Orleans and Chicago. Active with the Mystery Writers of America 
(and former Chairman of their Student Awards Committee), Santtsson, a 
Science Fiction reader since the late twenties, has lectured on SF and 
Fantasy witting, led a Wiiter's Workshop and done considerable editorial 
work in the field, and was one of the organizers of the professional 
Fantasy Writer's Guild. He also — but enough for now. Watch for him! 



homecoming 

by J. . J. Harvey Haggard 



Leek's favorite songs were "Keep 
the Home Fires Burning" and "The 
Old Familiar Faces." But Loda City 
threw the joyful melody off-key! 



The spaceship landed, and 
ceased to throb and pulse, its stern 
lights blinking off. After a moment, 
a man emerged and walked to the 
pier edge of the landing island. 
Martin Leek was small, slender, and 
shyly wistful of aspect. Yel his 
retiring look concealed a grim 
fortitude that refused to compromise with the more outrageous 
aspects of life. 

"Welcome, traveler. Lots of profit this trip?" called Eugene, extending his saurian head aloft. He 
lolled on a mudbank, but he had 
plainly been watching the passengers debark. "Welcome home." 

"Hello," said Martin. He squinted against the wind— chill, malodorous it was. He pulled his thin 
cloak away from him as he clutched 
his flat traveling bag. He answered 
the other's greeting, one thought 
at a time. "Not too much. Thanks. 
Glad to be back." 

Behind him, aerocabs came and 
went like insects, taking passengers 
across the swampglades to Loda 
City. A monotube shot its glassy, 
bulletlike cab shoreward with a 
swoosh. Those inside, he observed 



}. Harvey Haggard's recent stories have been largely concerned with the 
mystery surrounding the origin and nature of human beings — a mystery 
which modern anthropology has failed to resolve. Are there intangibles 
in human evolution which point to same factor at work in the universe 
of stars which proceeds from the general to the particular in an often 
quite horrifying way? You'll see what we mean when you read this tiny yarn. 



126 



HOMECOMING 



127 



with a shiver, looked warm and 
cozy. Buttoning the top button of 
his wind-lifted coat, Martin turned his back on the tube and twisted 
his thin lips into a smile directed 
at Eugene. 

"Would you like a ri de to 
town ?" asked Eugene. Martin 
grinned and nodded. 

"Grab a hump," said Eugene. 
He reared from the mud-bank, 
obligingly. Martin straddled the 
upper ridge of armor plates, holding his bag close. Several newarrivals from other worlds squinted 
against the savage wind, gaping 
with disbelief. "All comfy?" 
Eugene asked. "All set to take the 
jolts?" 

Seeing his Dassenger was, Eugene 
took off. His departure became 
spectacular but not ungainly. Relaxing his height, he submerged 
halfway and began paddling swiftly 
across the thick fluid. His fhippers 
made sucking noises, and left on 
the smooth waters of the swampglade a wake of widening ripples. 
Vegetable growths made islets here 
and there, and now some moved of 
I heir own accord, d rawing away 
from the swimming behemoth. The 
keen wind, fruity with unpleasant 
aromas, blew spray patterns of scud. 
The sky above had been poisoned 
a slight orchid. 

Martin's cigarette made a hissing 
sound as he flung it into the roiling 
muck. He braced his legs, and 
squeezed his knobby knees together. 
He could hardly keep from shivering with cold, or prevent his teeth 



from chattering but he could at 
least protect the traveling Lit. 

Martin hadn't fathomed all of 
the strangeness of Yulil when he'd 
brought his new wife, Rugie, to 
the planet twenty years before. 
They'd been sustained by dreams, 
gossamer break-easy dreams, bubbles that held a teeming universe. 
He had promised to lay a cosmos 
at her feet, a planet at a time — 
and Yulil had been first on his list. 

Yulil. Geneless world. Amidst 
pleasures and palaces ... be it ever 
so humble . . . there's no place 
like . . . 

A world of polymorphs, say. 
Poly, for many. Morphs, for shape. 
Many shapes. No two alike. An 
interesting planet, when first you 
heard of it. No one had clearly 
understood at first. Then the scientists had detected that an inner 
radiation bombarded the living 
tissues of all life on Yulil. 

Everything on Yulil was different. Each living creature from the 
other, all different in turn. Tentacular .. . insectivorian . . . these were 
but words to denote biological kinship or dissimilarity, but here there 
could be no such thing as similarity. 
No such thing even as a separate 
species. Just substance knowing but 
one natural law, to evolve into 
something unlike anything that had 
ever existed before. Unlike produced the unthinkable. However, 
for all of that, there was a lot of 
gneissilite on Yulil. You could 
make rocket fuel out of that. 

"How's everything on the other 



tag 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSB 



planets ?" asked Eugene, forevet 
inquisitive. He'd never been off of 
Yulil. 

"Humdrum." 

"The War in Vegas?" 

"Invaders from the Seven Sisters 
have the edge, but it's touch and 
fio." 

"Wup! Hold it!" Movement 
surged, and an amorphous mass 
arose in front of Eugene. It had 
none of his saurian sleekness. It 
wis as primal as something swimming in stagnant water under a 
microscope. Everything hinted at a 
weak mental structure, largely intuitive. It threatened attack. 

"Scrambola!" yelled Eugene. He 
slashed out viciously, exposing a 
terrific mouthful of teeth. 

The primordial thing squirmed 
rapidly away. 

"Of life," quipped Eugene, 
"that's a most terrible parable." 
Then he brayed at his own humor. 

Martin joined in, chuckling as 
mui.li from relief as anything else. 
His thoughts slipped back to those 
of a moment before. 

Home and Rugie! She wasn't a 
princess by earthly standards, of 
CQtltse. But then, Martin Leek always enjoyed the traditional thrill 
of homecoming. He experienced a 
quickening of his pulses, a heightening of his perceptive faculties 
is the shore nearcd. 



Eugene swam against a heavy 
out-going tide, then found solid 
footing and waded ashore. Martin 
Leek slid off. He balanced for a 
moment on a walkway, then turned 
to Eugene. 

Compromise ... he thought. 
Adaption to circumstance. Who 
could have foreseen the problem 
that would confront all Earth dwellers who came to Yulil? Even from 
the moment of conception, from 
the foetus onward, the genes and 
chromosomes that determine heredity characteristics were destroyed or 
distorted by a radiation from the 
world's core. 

"Thanks for the lift," said Martin Leek gratefully. 

"Any time," said Eugene. 

"You'll be up at the house later, 
won't you?" 

"Sure. Tell mother I want to 
watch the Arcturian Express make 
a landing. Then I'll be up in plenty 
time for dinner." 

Martin Leek turned toward the 
city. His bent shoulders drew more 
erect, and he walked quickly as he 
stepped forward, humming a tune. 
He was home. 

Eugene taxied around toward the 
landing island, churning the water 
to a foaming wake. He turned once, 
still in hailing distance. 

"So long, dad,'* he called. 



/ This $ 2 9J Science-Fiction Best-Seller 

r 0' fafi WIO* " h 




Continued from Back Cover 

SIMI'l.Y mail the COMPOfi Woi 
thrilling brand-new, full !*• 



WITHOUT MONETf and : 
i Kill, permanent! y- booiH] • 



KlV " fu.»i M.it. Sel.riio., -wlii.'-li >,.,, may ,1,0,, from the 

two pulse- poundii>i BdeneA-Bletioi best seller*) described on 

tills page. 



Why the Book Club of TOMORROW 
Makes This Sensational Offer 



u introduce AHVAN 

the Science- to Com 
" jk Club, really v 



mil ii|> in publishers' eill
Bslei i ion in described IN 

I.'h rr bulletin. "Things 

itNLV those books you 
n four :i year, if you wish. 



recognition of (lie flirt Mini Seienev-P lction 
has won a place afl an Importanl ««w fcmd of 
literatim'. Hut how are tans t<> read tht- KKST 
new Science- Fiction Books— without wasting 

time iniil none? v. ...1 111 l'. through good and 
bad alike? 

NOW — The Creom of the New Science-Fiction 
Books — At Remarkable Savings 

To enable you to KNJOY Hie ftncct without copy 
worryliiK about the coal, the t'liili has arranged to bring von Ibe BEST brand-new 
full-length books I'lMf ONLY *1 EACH (plus 
S few tents shipping charge)— even though 



SEND NO MONEY — JUST MAIL COUPON 

We know .vol win enjoy < berstUp in tbia 

new and unusual book dub. TO PROVE it we 
are making Ibis uuuming offer lu new in. m 
hers. But the supply "I I he exciting new $2.»5 
beat -seller offered to you for only ilk 1 is very 
limited. That'i wliv H's Iniporiiuif tn vuii to 

mall Hie COtt] U 0I WITHOUT MONEY, 

nil TWO books immediately : your 



Ml III Tu 



You ALSO Get One of t 

Masterpieces of SCIENCE-FICTION 
at Remarkably LOW Cost: 

0MNIBUS0F SCIENCE - FICTION — 




I'rl re JAM — »ou 
SAYB K.flul 
ASTOUNDING SCIENCE-FICMON ANTHOLOGY — A so.rj ami Il.c llM A lleii.b 
itniL.ii liKliuu; n w..- iiiit'iilcdl A slury 
u( ill.' linn 1 1> iii.ii Ulr.e IIm\ !.li.)ws "nrwirveli" 

isihi-u IlKl'iHO: tin' liii "f ill* itnetll 

Pliu mum- i>ilii-r l"ii lain Initn a •Xacea 
j*ari oC A*li.i!tiillfi! S.lPii..'-Kl.iloti U«., 
ty IP rdliur. J. W, f um|.l»:i, Jr. '.si vw. 
ta matin OristaaJ puMi.i.cm' Piles ia.»5 
— you SAVE ftMt 



lirst t'lnii SviretiiiM Indicated below. nox'T 
UHI.AY. MAIL lb-. pon NOW to! SCIENCEFICTION BOOK CLUB. Dept. FU-8, Garden City, 
a New York. 

"This Coupon Saves You $2.85!"" 



Please rush DM my full-length, pil l« Mil III I J t mlHli eimy 
of "Assignment in Tomorrow," nnil my first. Club S. In-, 
tion indicated below. I!ill me only 10* for "AsBiaTtunsnt" 
and only (1 for my first .lelei'l.l.in (pin* few eent.ii shipping: chui-ji si . :ind enroll me ua a mealier of the SeienceFieli.in lioi.k Club. V.v-iy month i.-inl me the Club's free 

bulletin, 'Thin i.'h Inl' '," :;e I h:i|. I inny deeide whether 

or not I wish Lo receive the ccimiinr monihly seleeliun described therein. For each hoolc I accept, 1 will pay only $1 
plus shipping. I ilo nut lu. v ■ (<> lulu- a hook every in. mill 

(only four (hiring ewh year I urn a. member) — and I 
may resign at any time lifter accepting foor selections. 
SPECIAL NO-RISK GUARANTEE: If nut ddlulikU, I ■■»» return ull liuuks in 7 iJuy.H, put' dim innl In- iiii-uiI.ii r.-;lilu will be 

ciaeeUed! 

□ Astoumlini AnlholiHjy O Omnltiui 

(njULia rmrr) 



City Zonr> Stat* 

Selection prica in Canada SLID plus ihlp*ing. Addreti 
Stienca-Ficlinn Club iCanada). I OS Bond St.. To run to 2. 
(Gotd inly In U. &. and Canada) 



WOULD YOU PAY 10« TO 

See the First Space Monster 

—held Top Secret by the Army until . . . 



T^OR ONE THIN DIME you can be 
an eyewitness as Army Generals and 
top scientists interview the first space 
monster captured. You walk past armed 
guards through thick lead doors. You 
.stand bug-eyed at the sight of a giant 
toad-headed creature. You're dumbfounded as you hear how it learned 
human speech. You're even more terrified by its words, "I warn you — you 
have NO means of kilting rue!" 

Suddenly a fear-crazed officer starts 
pumping bullets into the creature. The 
monster slumps. Then you're startled 
by a woman's scream. You turn and see 
a WAG Captain ripping off her clothes. 




The monster's voice shouts from her 
body, "Any attempt to kill one of us 
will always mean the end of one of 
you!" You're horrified. These creatures 
can transmit themselves. There are 
millions of them who might prefer 
bodies like— YOURS! 

WHAT A STORY! And it is only 
one of TWELVE short stories,THREE 
novelettes, and a COMPLETE NOVEL 
— all in ONE brand-new volume called 
"Assignment in Tomorrow." Written 
by the top science-fiction writers of today. Crammed with suspense, udve:\ture, fantastic science-facts of tomorrow. A best-seller at $2.1)5 — but yours 
on thin umaziny offer for only 10$. 

JhiS Brand-New Complete 

SCIENCE-FICTION 

BEST-SELLER 

wilfi membership 

The regular price of tins spine-tingling ScienceFiction anthology is $2.'JS. But it is yours for 
only in* 1 — as □ demonstration of how much you 
will enjby membership in the exciting new ScienceFiction Hook Club. Take advantage of this offer. 
Read the remarkable benefits th:it can be your* as 
a member and mail the coupon — on the ether side 
of this page— TODAY! 



See other side for Full Details ! 



