SPECIMEN 



Lecturer after lecturer, back at Inter-Galactic's Space Academy, had 
warned them that they shouldn't take for granted that any Intelligences 
they'd meet on the Outer Planets would necessarily be humanoid. 

But this was such nonsense. Look at Venus, for instance! Everybody 
knew how there'd been all that rubbish talked about the strange fishlike beings that would be found on Venus, and then, when we'd gotten 
there, we'd found a tall and golden-haired people, just like us. Well, 
like some of i ... And look at all the nonsense that'd been written 
about the Martians, ever since the days of old H. G. Wells and the socalled science-fiction writers of the last century, who'd all insisted the 
Martians would be spider-like things. Somebody had even written a 
story about the spider-men of Mars, living deep down in the caves of 
the dead planets, coming out only on the Holy Days to sing together, 
by the canals, about the old days when Mars had been great 

Chuck Reynolds knew it was stuff and nonsense. So did Dave Leigh, 
Norman Kent, and the others who'd be going out on field trips once 
they landed. Beta VII was, according to earlier surveys, one of the 
dead planets. Back in the beginning of Time, man had perhaps walked 
on Beta VII. But then something had happened, perhaps the same 
something that had 'almost destroyed life on Mars and driven the tall 
and graceful Martians into the Inner Cities. 

They had an easy landing. This was Dombrowski's ninth flight with 
the Queen Maude. Both ship and flight engineer understood each other 
thoroughly by now. 

Captain Horton called them together in the briefing room the next 
morning. Dunninger, who had a degree from Oaxa School of Mines, told 
them again what they were to look for. Anything Inter-Galactic Development might be interested in. And then they were on their own. 

Somebody had said the soil of Beta VII was rocky. That was the 
understatement of the ages. It was all stones, millions of them, as far 
as you could see. Millions and millions of stones, small stones and 
slightly larger stones, all of them looking as if the winds had been 
polishing them and as if the sun above had been bleaching them for 
thousands and thousands of years. 

It was rough going those first hours until they were out of sight 
of the ship. Extremely .rough going 

Suddenly Reynolds thought he saw a shadow, a huge shadow, in 
front of him. He knew this was impossible. But then he heard the 
others shout. And he looked up. 

It was standing there, almost on top of the two men in the rear— 
an incredible giant Thing out of a Horror Tri-Di. A claw, as large as I 
any of them, was reaching out for Kent. 

Reynolds thought he could see an eye looking down on him, a quizzical, gently curious eye. 

And then the claw was nearer. . . . 



WHAT SECRET POWER 
DID THIS MAN POSSESS? 




BENJAMIN FRANKLIN ( A Rosicrudan) 



Why was this man great? How does 
anyone — man or woman — achieve greatness? Is it not by mastery of the powers 
within ourselves ? 

Cnow the mysterious world within you! 
Attune yourself to the wisdom of the ages ! 
Grasp the inner power of your mind ! Learn 
the secrets of a full and peaceful life! Benjamin Franklin — like many other learned 
and great men and women — was a Rosicrucian. The Rosicrucians (NOT a" religious 
organization) first came to America in 1694. 
Today, headquarters of the Rosicrucians send 
over seven million pieces of mail annually 
to all parts of the world. 

Wfe Rosicrucians 

SAN JOSE (AMORC) CALIFORNIA 



THIS BOOK FREE! 

Write for YOUR FREE 
COPY of "The Mastery of 
Life" — TODAY. No obligation. No salesmen. A nonprofit organization. Address: 
Scribe D.Q.W. 

SEND THIS COUPON 
1 

Scribe D.Q.W. 
The ROSICRLTCIANS 
(AMORC) 
San Jose, California 
Please send me the free book. The Mastery 
of Life, whkh explains how I may learn 
to use my faculties and powers of mind. 

NAME , 

ADDRESS 

CITY 

ZONE



_STATE_ 



FANTASTIC 

UNIVERSE 



MAY 1959 
Vol. 1 1, No. 3 



The Army Comes to Venus 4 

by Erie Frank Russell 

The Wistful Witch 32 

by Robert F. Young 

Parlor Game 44 

by Ron Goulart 

H. L. Herbert 
Publisher 

Citizen Meekle 53 

__ by Sam Rosenfeld 

Hans Stefan „ . „ ., . . _ 
Santesson Basic Criteri a for a Moon Building . . 63 
Editorial Director by Dr. John S. Rinehart 

Traveling Salesman 70 

by Lloyd Biggie 

Miss Millie's Rose 83 

by Joy Leache 

Universe in Books 96 

by Hans Stefan Santesson 

Norman Siegel The Amnesic Men 101 

CoverDesign by John Victor Peterson 

Letter from Tomorrow 121 

by Lee Correy 

iNr N ^« s ? I L u r vE M S 5' y^ 1 ^: » ; -™»tWy ^ king-size r UB ucAT,o N3 . 

INC 820 Fifth Ave N Y. 1, N. Y. Subscription 12 issues $8.75. single eopien 8 5(i. Foreign 
postage extra Reentered as second-class matter at the post office. New York N Y The 
f r ^'L m ^??S in f a £ enti, ' ely fi<,titif »™ an <> have no relation to any persons livinz 
or dead. Copyright, 19»9, by Kinu-Size Pubucations, Inc. AU rights reserved. M^y, T»S». 

PRINTED IN . 3. A. 



HAVE YOU BEEN ABLE 
TO GET YOUR COPY OF 

FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 

EACH MONTH? 

FANTASTIC UNIVERSE gives you the most thrilling collection of 

fantasy and science fiction ever made available in a SINGLE 
MAGAZINE. 

In each issue of FANTASTIC UNIVERSE, you meet internationally famous writers whose published novels would cost you from 
$2.75 to $3.95. 

You can look forward to stirring complete novels of intrigue 
or action on far-off planets, PLUS exciting stories, by outstanding 
authors such as Erie Frank Russell, Isaac Asimov, L. Sprague de 
Camp, Kenneth Bulmer, Lee Chaytor, Judith Merril, H. Beam 
Piper, Harry Harrison, Nelson Bond, Robert Silverberg, and many 
others. 

We should like very much to add your name to the list of the 
many thousands of subscribers from New York to Sydney, from 
Paris to the ports of Mars who in recent years have become 
FANTASTIC UNIVERSE avowed partisans. 

If you are having trouble finding FANTASTIC UNIVERSE on 

your newsstand, and you want to be sure of getting us regularly 
. just clip the coupon below and mail it to us — with your check 
or money order — and FANTASTIC UNIVERSE will arrive on time 
each month. 

{"KING-SIZE PUBLICATIONS, Inc. 
| 320 Fifth Avenue, New York 1, New York 

Kindly enter my subscription to FANTASTIC UNIVERSE for 
j One year (6 issues) at $2.00 Two years (12 issues) at $3.75 

' Additional postage: Canada 50?, Foreign $1.00. ! 

: Please remit by check or money order. f 

| NAME — — 

5 ADDRESS — 

; CITY, ZONE, STATE — 

■ PLEASE PRINT 




FU93 



the 
army 
comes 
to 

venus 

by . . . Eric Frank Russell 



He was secretly surprised 
to find himself enjoying 
this spell of gallantry. 
But worse was to happen. 



In thick, cloying mist the ship 
moaned like a tormented ghost of 
monstrous size. It descended slowly, warily, feeling with invisible 
electronic fingers for a place in 
which to sit. 

Those below stood gazing up 
into the fog, not sensing the probing ray, seeing nothing. A bunch of 
hard-bitten, bearded men in oiled 
slickers down which moisture 
trickled in thin streams. 

After a little while the fog appeared to solidify into an enormous 
wet cylinder with a steaming end. 
The ship came down, touched, settled. A sluggish wave of damp 
earth hunched itself on either side 
of the curved hull. 

Airlocks opened, duralumin 
gangways slid forth. The bearded 
ones clustered closer, avid for new 
faces. A shock-haired, red-whiskered man was the first to emerge, 
staggering under the weight of numerous bags and packs, carefully 
feeling his way down the metal 
steps. 

Somebody at the back of the 
waiting audience let go a yell of 
welcome. "Old Firelip, as I live 
and breathe!" 



Two-three days after we had commented on Eric Frank Russell's fast moving 
recent novel, the space willies (Ace Double Novels, }5 cents) this lovely 
novelet was submitted by his agents. This story, we hasten to add, is not 
space opera (like TSW). It is simply a credible story of life in a mining 
town on Venus, and u-hat eventually happens to some of those who live there. 



4 



THE ARMY COMES TO VENUS 



5 



Pausing halfway down the gangway, the newcomer screwed up 
rheumy eyes as he sought to identify the shouter. "Duckass, no less! 
What made the parole board let 
you out?" 

Listeners grinned, immediately 
accepting the new arrival as one of 
themselves. He had the two best 
qualifications, namely, a ready 
tongue and a friend in the attending mob. 

A fat man came next, waddling 
down and letting his bags go 
bump-bump-bump from step to 
step as he dragged them behind. 
He wore three chins and an expression of moony amiability. 

"Lookie, lookie, lookie, here 
comes Cookie," invited a brawny 
roughneck. 

The others chuckled. The fat 
man stopped, studied the other, 
spoke in high-pitched but undisturbed tones. "You must have second sight, chum. A cook is just 
what I am." 

"Then my belly says you're two 
years overdue. The few gals we've 
got here can do everything but 
cook." 

"Everything ?" asked the fat man 
with pointed interest. 

"You try 'em sometime." 

"Maybe I will." He lumbered 
the rest of the way down, his kit 
still bumping. Anything breakable 
in his bags was having a run of 
hard luck, 

A dozen nondescripts followed, 
til heavily burdened with everything, but the farmhouse roof. Pio


neers bearing their tiny personal 
worlds on their backs. 

Several ship's officers and a few 
of the crew came out for a gossip, 
a sniff of moist air, a stamp around 
on real, solid ground. After them 
followed a string of people who 
looked like nobody in particular 
and wanted to stay that way. A few 
had the air of still trying to thwart 
the systematic circulation of police 
photographs. 

"Where's the molar mauler?" 
bawled an onlooker with a lopsided 
face. 

"Me," responded a white-haired 
ancient, trying to lug four boxes at 
once. 

Gumboil grabbed two of them. 
"Good thing you've come, Pop. 
You've got a customer right now. 
One more day and I'd be off my 
nut." 

They moved toward the nearby 
shanty town. The rest of the crowd 
remained to watch the ship; they 
were bored by frontier solitude and 
thankful for a petty event. 

A person who oozed officialdom 
showed himself at the airlock, 
stared out with cold authority. 
Characteristically, they bristled at 
the sight of him. He went inside 
and did not reappear. It wasn't six 
months since they had pulled a 
would-be tax collector to pieces. 

Several sluggards emerged, one 
dragging a pack resembling a 
tightly wrapped haystack. Half a 
dozen witnesses helped get it down 
amid a shower of wisecracks concerning weak bladders and portable 



6 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



comfort stations. The owner registered acute embarrassment. 

Two girls came from the airlock, 
suddenly silencing the wits. They 
were full-lipped, full-busted, had 
brilliant eyes and emphatic hips. 
Both were bottle-blondes. A distinct sigh of gratification ran 
through the audience. The girls put 
op knowing smirks, revealed white 
teeth. They tripped down the gangway with dainty steps and beckoning backsides. Four of the crew 
toted their bags, surrendered them 
to eager helpers. 

"Annie's place?" 

The girls nodded, giggled, 
weighed up the hungry clientele. 
Two barrel-chested men indulged in 
an acrimonious shoving match for 
the right to carry a bag on which 
both had laid hands simultaneously. 
They solved the problem by bearing it between them, giving alternate tugs to tear it from each other 
at every tenth step. 

Came a pause while the cargo hatch opened, a long-armed crane 
swung out, began to lower boxes 
and crates. A few of the crowd 
shifted position to get a better view 
of the unloading. 

Another girl appeared, accompanied by a ship's officer. She was 
vastly different from her bosomy 
predecessors: small, slender, ovalfaced and cool. Her black hair was 
natural, her equally black eyes not 
glassy, her expression slightly wistful instead of hard and brassy. 
Carefully the officer helped her 



down the steps, shook hands with 
her at the bottom. 

"G'wan, kiss her, you dummy,'' 
advised a hoarse voice. 

"Sailors don't care," commented 
another. 

"Love 'em and leave 'em," added 
a third. 

For a moment the officer looked 
as if he would like to make something of it. He hesitated, glowered 
at the ribald crowd to their immense satisfaction. Then he whispered anxiously to the girl, 
apparently questioning the wisdom 
of her remaining alone on this 
world. She smiled at him, shook 
her head. 

"Not tonight, Cuthbert," jeered 
an onlooking tough. 

"You've had your share," urged 
another. "Don't be greedy." 

"Give real men a chance," suggested somebody else. 

Several chortled at that sally, 
their tones loud and coarse. One 
smacked his lips in exaggerated anticipation. The officer lingered 
awhile, reluctant to go, but finally 
mounted the gangway and went 
into the ship. His expression was 
worried. 

Left to herself, the girl surveyed 
the hairy mob with calm self-possession. They returned the compliment, taking in her slender legs, 
narrow hips, dark hair. They undressed her with their eyes and 
liked what they saw. 

"You doing anything tonight, 
Honey-babe?" inquired a bear disguised as a man. 



THE ARMY COMES TO VENUS 



7 



"You wait your turn, Bulstrode," 
ordered a scar-faced neighbor. He 
spat on thick, calloused fingers, 
combed his hair and straightened 
an invisible tie. "This one is for 
gentlemen only." He leered with 
undisguised appetite at the subject 
of his remarks. "Isn't that so, 
Luscious?" 

"All men are gentlemen." She 
looked at Bulstrode with a kind of 
dark-eyed innocence. "When they 
wish to be." 

Bulstrode's optics dulled and his 
huge fingers twitched while he digested this. It took him quite a 
time. When he spoke again it was 
with an apologetic rumble. 

"I was only kidding, Ma'am. I 
sort of thought — " 

"She isn't interested, you hairy 
ape," interjected Scarface. "So 
don't waste breath advertising your 
ignorance." He rubbed his bristly 
chin and gave another pull to the 
non-existent tie. "Can I carry your 
stuff to Annie's place, Lovebird?" 

Shuffling slowly around on big, 
Liimbersome feet, Bulstrode faced 
him and growled, "What makes 
you think she's heading for 
Annie's? Why, you slit-cheeked, 
ragged-eared louse!" Extending a 
spade-sized hand he spread it 
across the other's unhandsome features, curled his fingers and 
squeezed. 

The victim gurgled convulsively 
behind the horny palm, made frantic pulls at the thick wrist, finally 
kicked him good and hard on the 
shin. It sounded like kicking a tree. 



Taking no notice, Bulstrode began 
to twist the face leftward, bending 
him sidewise. 

"Stop that," ordered the girl. 

Still holding on, Bulstrode turned a surprised face over a massive 
shoulder. "Hey?" 

"Stop it," s^e repeated. "You 
wouldn't behave that way in your 
own home." 

Bulstrode removed his grip and 
started examining his hand as if 
he had never seen it before. His 
opponent made snuffling noises, 
voiced a lurid oath and let go a 
haymaker. The angry fist caught the 
big man smack on the chin, rattling his teeth but not knocking 
him down. 

Sweeping a columnar arm 
around in the manner of one 
brushing away a persistent fly, Bulstrode pleaded, "Look, lady, just 
you go take a nice, quiet walk while 
I slaughter this jerk." 

"Don't be silly." Her dark eyes 
reproved the pair of them. "You're 
like a couple of overgrown children. You don't even know what 
you're squabbling about — do you?" 

They stared at her dully, not answering. 

"Do you?" she insisted. 

A tall, gray-haired individual 
spoke from the front rank of the 
vastly entertained audience. "You're 
not on the home planet now. This 
is Venus and don't you forget it. 
Terra never comes nearer than 
thirty million miles." 

"Home is as near as your memory says it is," she contradicted. 



8 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"You may be right. But some of 
us haven't got so darned much 
worth; remembering." He paused, 
finished without bitterness, "That's 
why we're here." 

"Speak for yourself, Marsden," 
chipped in a squat, swarthy man 
standing behind Km. "I'm here to 
make money and make it fast." 

"I'm here because I love the 
sunshine," yelled a satirical voice 
from the rear. 

Some laughed, some didn't. All 
glanced upward at the fog which 
permitted visibility to no more than 
two hundred feet. Once in a while 
it lifted to two thousand. Often it 
descended in a thick, cloying mass 
to ground level. Moisture condensed on their slickers and ran 
down in tiny rivulets. The girl's 
black hair sparkled with diamonds 
of wetness. 

"If you're not going to Annie's," 
continued Marsden, "you'll have to 
find someplace else." A contemptuous sweep of his hand indicated 
her choice of six or seven hundred 
wooden shacks. "Take a look at 
what's on offer." 

"No place for a girl like you," 
informed Bulstrode, trying to ingratiate himself and eyeing her like 
an elephant hoping for a cracker. 

"Thank you, but I knew what to 
expect. I was well-primed in advance." She smiled at them. "So I 
brought my own home with me." 

Turning away, she tripped lightfooted toward the ship's tail-end 
where cargo was piling up as the 
j long-armed crane swung to and fro. 



Presently those on the ship dropped a ramp and rolled, down it a 
small aluminum trailer with two 
wheels amidships. 

"Oh, ye gods!" griped a snaggletoothed onlooker, openly disappointed. "I'm the only guy on the 
planet with a pneumatic mattress. 
And what's it to her?" 

"If they're going to start transporting them homes and all," complained another, "it'll be the beginning of the end. Before you 
know it, this town will become too 
big for its boots." 

"Which town?" asked a third, 
gazing around and pretending to 
see nothing. 

Marsden saw her at her door 
three days later. Leaning on one of 
the hardwood posts that somebody 
had driven in to mark the limits 
of her property, he let his calculating gaze rest on the trailer, decided 
that what hung behind the facing 
window were the first lace curtains 
he'd seen in many years. 

"Getting settled down?" 

"Yes, thank you. I've been very 
busy. Unpacking and sorting things 
out takes quite a time." 

"I suppose so. Has nobody helped you?" 

"I didn't need any help." 

"You may want plenty before 
you're through." He tilted his hat 
backward, went on, "Anyone bothered you yet?" 

"Dear me, no. Why should 
they?" 

"This is a man's town." 



THE ARMY COMES TO VENUS 



9 



Looking as if she hadn't the 
vaguest notion of what he meant, 
she said, "Then why don't they give 
it a name?" 

"A name? What's the use of a 
name? It isn't enough of a dump 
to deserve one. Besides, it's the 
only settlement on Venus. There 
isn't any other— yet Anyway, 
names cause arguments and arguments start fights." 

"If they'll quarrel over the mere 
question of what to call this town 
it's evident that they haven't enough 
to do." 

"When they're in the mood to 
let off steam they'll fight over anything. What else do you expect on 
the frontier?" 

She did not answer. 

"And they've plenty to keep 
them busy," he continued with a 
touch of harshness. "They're gnawing into a mountain of white granite that contains thirty pounds of 
niobium to the ton. It's mighty useful for high tensile and stainless 
steels. Also they're building a narrow-gauge railroad eastward to a 
deposit of pitchblende that makes 
a Geiger-counter chatter like a machine gun." He rubbed his lips 
with a thick and slightly dirty forefinger. "Yes, they work hard, swear 
hard, drink hard and fight hard." 

"There are other things as much 
worth fighting for." 

"Such as what?" 

"This town, for instance." 

"A cluster of tumbledown shanties. A haphazard array of smelly 
cabins. You call it a town?" 



"It will be a real one some day." 

"I can imagine." Marsden displayed a knowing grin. "Exactly as 
the boys would like it. Complete 
with city hall, police stations and 
a high-walled jail." He spat in the 
dirt to show what he thought of 
this prospect " \ good many of 
them came here to get away from 
all that Do you know that at least 
forty per cent of them have served 
prison sentences?" 

"I don't see that it matters 
much." 

"Don't you?" He was slightly 
surprised. "Why not?" 

"Men who are really evil prefer 
to take things easy." 

"Meaning — ?" 

"Those who've seen fit to come 
this far must have done so to make 
a fresh start with a clean sheet. 
They'd be stupid to make a mess 
of their lives a second time." 

"Some people are made that 
way," he informed. 

"And some make them that 
way," she retorted. 

"Oh, God, a reformer." He 
showed disgust. "What's your 
name?" 

"Miranda Dean." 

"Well, it could be worse." 

"What d'you mean?" 

"It could be Dolly Doberhorst." 

"Who on earth is she?" 

"An obese charmer round at 
Annie's." He studied her figure. 
"Some fellows like 'em fat And 
some don't" 

"Really?" She seemed quite unconscious of his meaning or of the 



10 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



trace of appetite in his eyes. "I'd 
better carry on with more chores 
else they'll never be done. Pardon 
me, won't you?" 
"Sure." 

He watched her enter the trailer 
but did not continue on his way. 
He remained Ier ing on the post, 
picking his teeth with a thin stalk 
of grass and thinking that she'd be 
very much to his taste without her 
clothes. Yes, she'd be clean and 
wholesome, not painted and gross 
like the others. For a short time he 
continued to exercise his masculine 
privilege of pondering- delightful 
possibilities until suddenly he became aware of a huge bulk looming 
at his side. 

Bulstrode followed his gaze and 
challenged, "What's the idea, staring at her place like that? You 
thinking of busting in?" 

"You wouldn't dream of it, of 
course?" 

"No, I wouldn't." 

"Don't give me that. Females are 
females. She's merely playing hard 
to get. And you're a liar, anyway." 

"That's enough for me," said 
Bulstrode, speaking low in his 
chest. "Take off that coat so I can 
start mauling your meat." 

"You'd better not get tough with 
me, Muscle-bound." Marsden protruded a pocket significantly. "Because." 

"There now, you've got a gun. 
Isn't that nice?" Bulstrode shuffled 
around to face him. "Like to know 
something ?" 

"What?" 



"I just don't give a damn." 

With that he thrust out a hairy 
paw, arrested it halfway as Miranda 
Dean reappeared and came toward 
them. Lowering the paw, he tried 
to hide it in the manner of a kid 
caught fooling with a prohibited 
slingshot. Marsden relaxed, took 
his hand from his pocket. 

Reaching them, she said brightly, 
"I thought you boys might appreciate these." Smiling at each in 
turn, she bestowed a couple of little 
black books and returned to her 
trailer. 

Taking one look at what he'd 
got, Marsden groaned, "Holy 
Moses, a prayer-book." 

"With hymns," confirmed Bulstrode on a note of complete incredulity. 

"A religious nut," said Marsden. 
"I knew she'd have a flaw somewhere. Nobody's perfect." 

"Hymns," repeated Bulstrode 
with the air of one whose idol has 
revealed feet of clay. His beefy features registered confusion. 

"What a laugh," Marsden went 
on. "When Annie hears about this 
she'll roll all over the floor." 

"It's no business of Annie's," 
asserted Bulstrode, feeling belligerent for no reason that he could understand. 

Jerking an indicative thumb toward the trailer, Marsden opined, 
"It's going to be. Sooner or later 
she will make it Annie's business. 
I know that kind of crackpot. I've 
met 'em before. They can't leave 
well enough alone. Stick their noses 



THE ARMY COMES TO VENUS 



I J 



into everyone's affairs. They think 
it's their ordained mission in life to 
improve everything and everybody." 

"Maybe some of us could do 
with it," Bulstrode suggested. 

"Speak for yourself," advised 
Marsden scornfully. "A shave, a 
haircut and a bath and you'd rise 
almost to subhuman level." His 
tones hardened. "But this is a free 
world. Why should you wash or 
shave if you don't want to?" 

"It's honest dirt," said Bulstrode, 
giving him a retaliatory stare. "Soap 
and water can take it off — which is 
more than it could do for your 
mind." 

"Suffering saints, that holy tome 
must be working on you already. 
Throw it away before it takes 
hold." 

He set the example by tossing 
his own book into a bank of tall 
weeds. Bulstrode promptly retrieved 
it. 

"If we don't want them we 
ought to give them back to her. She 
may have paid good money for 
them." 

"All right," said Marsden with 
malicious anticipation. "You go 
tell her to put them where the monkey put the nuts. I'll stay here and 
watch the fun." 

"I'll keep them." Bulstrode 
crammed them into a hind pocket. 
"I'll hand them back to her some 
time when I'm passing." 

Marsden smiled to himself as he 
let the other amble away. Then he 
favored the trailer with another 



speculative stare before he departed 
in the opposite direction. 

The ship lifted in the late afternoon of the third day, groaned 
high in the dank, everlasting fog 
and was gone toward the mother 
planet that no ma" on Venus could 
see. A sister ship was due in about 
six weeks' time and another two 
months afterward. In the intervals 
between such visits those who remained were a primitive community 
vastly marooned beneath perpetual 
cloud. 

Miranda went out for her first 
sight-seeing stroll that same evening. It was pleasant enough because the vaporous blanket came no 
lower with the night, the air was 
rich with oxygen which clung to 
the lower levels although absent 
from the upper strata. All around 
were strong plant-odors and the 
area held comforting warmth. 

Here and there amid the sprawl 
of shacks gleamed many lights 
served by a small generating-station 
astride a rushing stream three miles 
away. Quite a blaze of illumination 
came from one building midway 
along the straggling and badly rutted main street. 

She walked slowly into this slovenly town whose citizens thought it 
unworthy even of naming. She 
noted the rickety fence around 
somebody's clapboard, one-room 
hovel and, nearby, the pathetic 
remnants of a tiny garden soon 
started and as soon abandoned. One 
Earth-rose still battled for life amid 



12 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



an unruly mob of Venusian growths 
intent upon strangling the stranger 
from afar. 

To her right a larger, threeroomed erection had a dilapidated 
shop-front with a wire screen in 
lieu of precious glass, a few rusting 
hammers, saws, chisels, pliers and 
other oddments exhibited behind. 
In the middle of this display stood 
a crudely lettered sign reading: 
Haircut $1.00. Beard Trim 40 1. 
What she had seen of the inhabitants made her wonder whether this 
sign had ever attracted a customer. 

Farther along she came to the 
extraordinarily well-lit building 
from which came the noise of fifty 
or more raucous voices and occasional bursts of song. By local 
standards it was a large edifice, 
built mainly of peeled logs and 
noteworthy for having windows of 
real glass. Somebody must have 
paid a fancy price to import those 
transparent sheets. 

Over the door hung a big board 
bearing neat, precise letters from 
which condensation dripped steadily


ANNIE'S PLACE 
Anna M. Jones, Prop. 



A burly, rubber-booted man 
trudged along the street, paused 
outside the door, examined Miranda curiously. He was a complete 
stranger to her and she to him. 

"What's wrong, Sweetie? Annie 
gone bad on you?" 



She eyed him in calm silence. 
"Not deaf, are you?" 
"No," she said. 

"Then why don't you answer a 
civil question?" 

"I didn't consider it civil." 

"So that's the way it is, eh?" He 
gave a thin scowl. "One of those 
finicky tarts. Like to pick and 
choose." He shrugged broad, damp 
shoulders. "You'll come to your 
senses eventually." 

"So will you." 

"You'll change before you're 
through with this life." 

"Don't we all?" she offered 
sweetly. 

"Not the way we want," he 
countered. 

"The way God wants," she said. 

"Jumping Joseph, don't give me 
that stuff!" 

With a loud sniff of contempt he 
went inside. The noise from the 
place boosted and sank as the door 
opened and shut. A waft of air 
puffed forth loaded with strong 
tobacco, strong booze and sweat. 

Under one of the windows lay 
an empty crate. Mounting it, Miranda raised herself on tiptoe and 
glanced inside. Not for long. Just 
for a brief moment but somewhat 
in the manner of a general studying 
the field of battle. It sufficed to 
show the expected scene of tables, 
chairs, bottles and eight or nine 
blowsy women. And even a piano. 

Thirty million miles. Every 
pound, every ounce had to be hauled a minimum of thirty million 
miles and often much more. So 



THE ARMY COA 

they didn't have this and they 
didn't have that— but they did have 
1 brewing facilities and a piano. 
Well, she couldn't blame them 
for it All work and no play adds 
up to a miserable existence. This 
was a man's world and men needed 
an outlet. Annie was supplying the 
demand. Annie was giving them 
light and laughter plus girls to 
whom nothing was too hot or too 
heavy. 

But sooner or later men would 
discover that they had other needs, 
if not today then tomorrow or the 
day after, or next month, or next 
! year. It would be for Miranda 
rather than for Annie to supply 
those. 

This was a world in the earliest 
pangs of birth. Astrophysics was 
the skilled midwife but the fidgeting father was Ordinary Humanity. 
The world was destined to grow up 
no matter how reluctant to escape 
its easy-going, irresponsible childhood. 

And it would grow up, become 
big and civilized, truly a world in 
its own right. The test of civilization is its capacity for satisfying individual needs, all needs, sober or 
sodden, sensible or crazy, the need 
for darkness or light, noise or silence, joy or tears, heaven or hell, 
salvation or damnation. The adult 
world would have room for opposites of everything — including 
Annie and her ilk. 

Hurriedly returning to her trailer, Miranda extracted something 
from its small case, returned to 



ES TO VENUS 13 

Annie's place nursing the object in 
her hands. Except for the tinkling 
of its piano, the building was silent as she neared. Then suddenly 
a chorus of hoarse, powerful voices 
roared into catchy song that shook 
the door and rattled the windows. 

Anna Maria, Anna Maria, Anna 

Maria Jones, 
She's the queen of the tamborinc, 

the banjo and the bones; 
Rootitoot she plays the flute in a 

fascinating manner, 
Pinkety-pong she runs along the 

keys of the grand planner, 
Rumpety-tum she bangs the drum 

with very superior tones, 
Anna Maria, Anna Maria, Anna 

Maria Jones.' 

They howled the last three words 
at the very tops of their voices and 
followed with much hammering 
upon tables and stamping of feet. 
Then came an anticipatory quietness as they awaited a response 
from the subject of their song. 

Outside the door Miranda 
promptly snatched this noiseless 
pause, stretched her little concertina, made it emit a drone of opening chords, and commenced to sing 
in a high, sweet voice. The tune 
was fully as catchy, in fact it had a 
definite boogey beat, but the words 
were different — something about 
Hallelujah, Christ the King. 

Within the building a chair got 
knocked over, a glass was smashed. 
There sounded a mutter of many 
voices and several coarse oaths. A 



14 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



crimson- faced, tousel-haired man 
jerked open the door and stared at 
Miranda. 

"Jeez!" he said, blinking. 
"Jeez!" 

Several more joined this dumbfounded onlooker, pressing around 
him or peering over his shoulders. 
They were too petrified with 
amazement to think up suitable remarks. Eventually they parted to 
make way for one of Annie's girls, 
a startlingly overdeveloped female 
with hennaed hair and a revealing 
frock. 

Crinkling heavily pencilled eyebrows at the singer, the newcomer 
said in hard, brittle tones, "Beat it, 
you fool !" 

"Haw-haw!" chortled the touselhaired man, willing to extract the 
most from this diversion. "What's 
the matter, Ivy? You afraid of competition?" 

"From that?" Ivy let go a snort 
of disgust. "Don't talk crazy." 

"Oh, I don't know," he said, 
slyly baiting her. "Annie could use 
a young and slender one, just for a 
pleasant change." 

"Not a blasted hymn-howler, 
she couldn't," contradicted Ivy with 
much positiveness. "And neither 
could you. Get wise to yourself. 
You're no scented Adonis." 

"Off your knees, Slade," advised 
one of the others, trying to add 
fuel to the flames. "Ivy's got you 
down and she's counting you out." 

"Wouldn't be the first time," 
grinned Slade, giving Ivy a youknow-what-I-mean look. 



"Shut up," snapped Ivy irritably 
She glared at Miranda. "Are yo 
going to quit yawping or not? 

Miranda sang on, apparent! 
oblivious to everything. 

Exhibiting a fat fist ornamented 
with six rings in which zircons did 
duty as diamonds, Ivy rasped, 
"Shuffle off before I hammer you 
in the teeth. I'm not telling you 
again." 

Adding a couple more decibels 
to the volume, Miranda poured her 
hymn through the open door. 

Ivy's ample bosom heaved, her 
face flushed, her eyes glinted. "All 
right, Misery, you've asked for it 
It the fellows won't close you 
sanctimonious trap, I will!" 

So saying she stepped forward, 
intent on mayhem. Slade grabbed 
at her and got her big arm, his badly gnawed fingers sinking into the 
puffy flesh. 

"Now, now, Ivy, take it easy." 

"Let go of me," ordered Ivy in 
dangerous tones. 

Miranda continued blithely to 
sing. For good measure she laid it 
in the groove with a couple of hot 
licks on the concertina. 

"Take your paw off my arm, you 
smelly tramp," bawled Ivy, crimson 
with fury. 

"Be a lady," suggested Slade, 
hanging on to her. "Just for once." 

That did it. Ivy's rage switched 
its aim forthwith. 

"What d'you mean, just for 
once?" Swinging her free arm she 
walloped him over the ear. The 
blow was intended to knock his 



: 



; 



I THE ARMY CO 

i head off but he had seen it coming 
and rocked with it. 

"Haw, haw, haw!" laughed a 
bearded onlooker, holding his 
belly. 

"Come take the keys to the Kingdom," trilled Miranda. "Hallelujah! Hallelujah!" 

Still employing her unhampered 
arm, Ivy now smacked the bearded 
laugher clean in the whiskers. He 
sat down suddenly and hard, still 
chortling fit to choke. Several more 
cackled with him. Ivy hauled furiously against Slade's grip and 
voiced vitriolic imprecations. 

"Ivy!" called a sharp, authoritative voice from somewhere inside. 

"Look, Annie," hollered Ivy, 
"there's a dizzy dame out here 
| and— " 

/ "What's it to me?" inquired the 
/ voice acidly. "For the love of Moses 
come in and shut that door — the 
fresh air is killing us." 

Loud guffaws greeted that sally. 
Ivy forced herself to simmer down 
sufficiently to obey, throwing Miranda a look of sudden death before she went inside. The others 
followed, openly regretting this 
swift end to the fun. The door 
closed with a contemptuous bang. 

Miranda finished her singing and 
commenced addressing a speech to 
thin air. After four minutes of this 
an old frontiersman came creakily 
along the street, paused to look her 
over, stopped to listen. A bit later 
he removed his hat and held it in 
one hand. He was a scrawny specimen with clear blue eyes set in a 



ES TO VENUS 15 

face resembling an aged and badly 
wrinkled apple. For reasons best 
known to himself he did not consider it at all strange that a young 
woman should take time off to 
preach to a non-existent congregation. 

In fact when she reached the end 
he wheezed an underbreath, 
"Amen!" watched her tuck the concertina under one arm and head 
homeward. After she had gone he 
remained hat in hand for quite a 
time before he planted it on his 
head and mooched ruminatively on 
his way. 

From that time onward Miranda's singing became a regular 
evening performance. Sometimes 
she took her stand at one end of die 
potholed main street, sometimes at 
the other, and every now and again 
it was squarely in front of Annie's 
place. 

Gradually the oldster made it a 
habit to provide her with a one-man 
audience, standing not too near, not 
too far off, watching her with 
bright blue eyes and never uttering 
a word other than the final, 
"Amen!" It wasn't inborn piety 
coming out in later years, it wasn't 
sympathy with the spirit of rebellion, it wasn't his way of protesting 
against things that are as distinct 
from things that ought to be. It was 
nothing more than the urge to 
cheer on a little dog fighting a big 
one. 

Passers-by treated Miranda in 
three different ways. Some stared 



1 6 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



blankly ahead and refused to acknowledge her existence. Some 
threw her the brief, pitying glance 
one bestows on a village imbecile. 
The majority grinned and made her 
the target of coarse witticisms, always malicious and often cruel, 
opining loudly that religious mania 
is the natural result of chronic virginity. She never changed color, 
never winced, never permitted a 
barb to sink in. 

Once in a while the latter type 
had a go at heckling her speeches, 
taunting her with unseemly parodies, filling in her pauses with 
bawdy wisecracks or giving her the 
mock-support of mock-piety. Her 
one loyal listener resented these 
tactics but held his peace and remained content to pose nearby, hat 
in hand. 

There came a night when a burly, 
blue-jowled drunk dreamed up the 
ultimate insult. He stood on the 
boardwalk swaying and blearing all 
through the sermon, wiping glazed, 
out-of -focus eyes with the back of a 
hairy hand and belching loudly 
whenever she ended a sentence. 
Then when she had finished he 
turned to the oldster and ostentatiously tossed a coin into his hat. 
With a violent burp and an airy 
wave of his hand he staggered into 
Annie's place followed by three or 
four appreciative witnesses. 

Gazing angrily into his hat, his 
blue eyes burning, the old frontiersman said, "See that? The boozey 
bum flung us a nickel. What'll I do 
with it?" 



"Give it to me." Miranda extended an eager palm. 

He passed it over like one in a 
dream. "Mean to say you'll actually take money from a no-good 
sot?" 

"I would accept it from the 
Devil himself." She stuck the coin 
in a pocket. "We can use it for 
God's work." 

"We?" He misunderstood her 
use of the plural, thought it over, 
eventually mumbled, "Maybe you're 
right. Money is money no matter 
how you get it." Then he had another long think, screwing up his 
wizened features while he wrestled 
with a personal problem. Reaching 
a decision, he moved across, stood 
beside her shoulder to shoulder and 
held out his hat invitingly. 

"Would you care to sing with 
me?" she asked, squeezing an opening chord. 

"No, Ma'am. I've got a hell of a 
voice. Just let me be as I am." 

"All right." She closed her eyes, 
opened her mouth and jazzed up a 
fast one about marching, marching 
until we come to the Golden Gates. 

Ten minutes later a hurrying, 
self-conscious man reacted to the 
offer of the extended hat, threw a 
dime into it, cast a sacred glance 
around and beat it from the scene 
of the crime. 

She had been on Venus exactly 
eight weeks. Another ship had 
come and gone. By now the community glumly accepted that it had 
a harmless lunatic in its midst. 



THE ARMY COMES TO VENUS 



17 



Digging the little plot outside 
her trailer early one day, she paused 
to rest, rubbed the blistered palm 
of her right hand, glanced up and 
found a plump, frowsy-looking girl 
surveying her speculatively. 

"Good morning," greeted Miranda, smiling. 

"Morning," responded the other 
shortly and after some hesitation. 

"It's nice to meet another woman," Miranda went on. "There are 
so few of us and so many men 
around." 

"Don't I know it!" gave back the 
plump girl with subtle meaning. 
She looked warily up and down the 
street, eyed the trailer, seemed undecided whether or not to linger. 

"Would you care to come inside" Miranda invited. "There's 
coffee and cakes and I'm starving 
for a gossip and — " 

"I'm Dolly," chipped in the 
other, saying it with the air of begging pardon for a skunk in her 
purse. 

"How nice. My name is Miranda." Dumping the spade, she 
went to the trailer, opened its door. 

"I work at Annie's," announced 
Dolly, making no move. 

"That must be very interesting. 
I'd love you to tell me all about it." 

Registering a fat scowl, Dolly 
demanded, "Are you making fun 
of me?" 

"Good gracious, no." 

"They make plenty of you." 

"I'm used to it." 

"I'm not," said Dolly. She had 
another uneasy look up and down 



the street, added, "Hell of a place." 

"If you'd care to come in, please 
do." 

"I guess I will." She advanced 
as if breasting an invisible tide. 
"I've gone past caring, see?" Entering, she flopped onto a pneumatic 
seat, studied her surroundings with 
frank curiosity. "Nice little joint 
you've got here." 

"Thank you. I'm so glad you like 
it." Pumping her kerosene stove, 
Miranda lit it and adjusted the 
flame. 

"Damnsight better than my fleatrap. Everyone says you're cracked. 
H'm ! It sure looks like it. This holy 
biz must pay off." 

"It does." 

"So I see," said Dolly with a 
touch of malice. Her eyes narrowed. 
"Where's the catch?" 

Miranda turned to look at her, 
coffee percolator in hand. "I'm 
afraid I don't understand." 

"Nobody makes a bad cent without surrendering their heart's blood 
for it one way or another," informed Dolly. "You have got to give 
in order to receive. What's your 
sacrifice?" 

"Nothing much. Only my life, 
such as it is." Capping the percolator, Miranda placed it on the 
stove, asked with deceptively casual 
interest, "What do you give?" 

"Shut up!" snapped Dolly savagely. She rocked to and fro, nursing a cheap and clumsy purse on 
her lap and staring down at her 
big knees. She did this for quite a 
time. Then without warning she 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



18 

harshed, "I'm damn sick of it!" 
and burst into tears. 

Taking no notice, Miranda continued to busy herself with various 
tasks in the tiny kitchen and left 
her visitor to howl it out. Dolly 
shook and sobbed, blindly feeling 
for a handkerchiet. Finally she 
stood up, tear-stained and full of 
embarrassment. 

"I'd better be going." 

"Oh, not now, surely. The coffee 
is just about ready." 

"I've made a prize fool of myself." 

"Nonsense. A woman is entitled 
to a good cry once in a while." 
Taking little cakes from a cupboard, Miranda arranged them on 
a flowered plate. "Makes one feel 
lots better sometimes." 

"How the blazes do you know?" 
Dolly sat down again, dabbed the 
corners of her eyes, stared at the 
cakes. "Bet you've never bawled 
bloody murder." 

"I did the day my father died." 

"Oh." She swallowed hard, examined thick, unmanicured fingers, 
said after a long pause, "I don't 
remember my old man." 

"How sad." Miranda poured the 
coffee. 

"And not so much of my mother 
either," continued Dolly morbidly 
reminiscent. "I ran away from her 
when I was fifteen. She didn't think 
I was cut out to be a great actress. 
But I knew better, see?" 

"Yes, I see." 

"So I pranced around in the 
chorus line of a crummy road-show 



and that's as far as I got. The years 
rolled on, I couldn't keep my hips 
down and slowly but surely I was 
shoved toward the breadline by 
younger kids as daft as I had been. 
So ... so ... a girl has to do 
something, hasn't she?" 

"Most certainly," agreed Miranda. "Will you try one of these 
cakes. I made them myself lastnight." 

"Thanks." Dolly took a large 
bite, choked with emotion, blew 
her nose and said, "I went the way 
of all flesh, if you know what I 
mean. I got pawed around and 
kicked about something awful. But 
at least I ate. Thank God my 
mother never knew about it — she'd 
have died of shame." 

Miranda, wisely, offered no comment. 

"I finished up here with Annie. 
Sort of wanted to get away from 
everything over there." Dolly used 
her piece of cake to point more or 
less Earthward. "Now I'd go back 
on the next ship if there was anything for me to make it worth the 
going. But there isn't. Not for me. 
I picked this lousy, godforsaken 
dump and I'm stuck with it for 
keeps." 

"Well, there is plenty for a 
woman to do here," opined Miranda, sipping her coffee. 

"You're dead right there is — and 
I'm fed up doing it. What else is 
there?" 

"This town will want hundreds 
of things as time rolls on. It can't 
grow without them." 



THE ARMY COMES TO VENUS 



19 



"Such as what?" Doliy persisted 
sceptically. 

"Just for a start, a little laundry 
might be a good idea." 

"A laundry?" Doily was reluctant to believe her ears. "The few 
girls do their own washing. The 

•n don't wash at ail. Who the 
jj'azes wants a laundry?" 

"The men," said Miranda. "Obviously." 

"Who'd operate it?" challenged 
Dolly, changing her angle of attack. 

"We two." 

She dropped her piece of cake, 
fumbled around for it, retrieved it 
and stared wide-eyed at Miranda. 
' Mean to say you really think I'd 
get busy scrubbing clothes for a 
living?" She gave an unconvincing 
sniff. "I wouldn't sink so low." 

"I would." 

"Then why don't you?" 

"I intend to." Miranda indicated 
a couple of large packing cases 
looming outside the window. "One 
plastic tent and one fully automatic 
washing-machine. All I need is 
power. They're fixing me up with 
an electricity supply tomorrow." 

"You've got a nerve," said 
Dolly. "Christ, you've got a nerve!" 

"Haven't you?" 

Standing up, Dolly prowled restlessly around the small space, gazed 
a couple of times at the packing 
cases, scowled and muttered to herself, mooched to and fro. After a 
while she said, "Don't tempt me." 

"Why not?" 

"Annie would sling me out on 



my neck. Either I work for her or 
I don't. Besides, I'd have no place 
to sleep." 

"This is a two-berth trailer." 

"So what?" Dolly let her hands 
flap around as if she didn't know 
what to do with them. "You don't 
need a haybag like me." 

"Ever/body is needed by someone," said Miranda gently. "Everybody." 

"You're only saying that." 

"It's the truth, all the same. 
Don't you believe me?" 

"I'd like to. It isn't easy." 

"It should be," Miranda mused. 
"I've never found any difficulty in 
believing the things I want to believe." 

Ignoring that remark, Dolly 
again ambled round and round the 
tiny floor-space. "By God!" she 
said. "By God !" 

"Besides," added Miranda for 
good measure, "we'd be helped 
quite a piece." 

"Oh, yes? By whom?" 

"By God." 

Dolly flinched and snapped back, 
"We'll be on the skids with anyone 
less than God Almighty." 

"All that's required of us is courage. One can still have that when 
one has nothing else." 

"You're the kind of loony yap 
who can talk your way into anything and talk your way eut of it 
again," observed Dolly. She reached a reluctant decision, shrugged 
plump shoulders. "Looks like you 
are touched in the head and you've 
made me that way too. Anyway. 



20 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



you've got company. If you can get 
away with it why shouldn't I?" 

"Like another coffee?" Miranda 
reached for the cup. 

They were having a hopeless 
struggle with the tent next morning 
when Bulstrode came along, joined 
the fray, pitted his brute strength 
against unruly folds of plastic Between the three of them they erected it, pegged its stays, fixed it good 
and tight. 

"Anything more?" inquired Bulstrode, brushing his hands. 

"I hardly like to trouble yea," 
said Miranda, her gaze straying toward the other crate. 

"Think nothing of it," he assured, secretly surprised to find 
himself enjoying this spell of gallantry. It lent him a special air of 
proprietorship. Breaking the crate 
open, he dragged the machine into 
the tent, looked It over, asked, 
"What's the use of this gadget with 
nothing to drive it?" 

"We're having power laid on 
this afternoon and water tonight," 
Miranda explained. "Tomorrow, 
you'll see, this will be the M and 
D Laundry." 

"The whatta?" 

"The Miranda and Dolly Laundry." 

"I've been wondering what you 
were doing here," said Bulstrode, 
giving Dolly an incredulous onceover. "Don't tell me you're in 
this?" 

"Any objections, Hamface?" demanded Dolly aggressively. 



"No business of mine," he said, 
backing away fast 

"Thank you so much," put in 
Miranda. "We could never hav 
coped without your help." 

"It was a pleasure." He glowered 
around in search of witnesses, truculently ready to prove his hardness 
to any who might accuse him of becoming soft. There were none in 
sight He lumbered away and they 
heard him growl underbreath as he 
went, "A laundry — holy mackerel!" 

Staring after the burly figure, 
Dolly said wonderingly, "What 
made that muscle-bound bum pitch 
in?" 

"We needed him," said Miranda. 

Dolly stewed it over, responded 
quietly, "I'm beginning to think 
you've got something." 

"Do you feel it strongly enough 
to come out with me this evening?" 

"Out with you?" She showed 
puzzlement swiftly followed by uneasiness. "Singing in the street?" 

"Yes." 

"Nothing doing." Dolly waved 
agitated hands. "Don't ask me 
that! I've given Annie the brushoff and come in with you on this 
crazy stunt but don't ask me that J" 

"What's wrong with it?" 

"There's nothing wrong, I suppose," admitted Dolly, her alarm 
increasing by leaps and bounds. 
"It's not the sort of thing I care to 
do." 

"Afraid they'll laugh at you?" 
"And how! They'll bellow until 
their buttons fly off." 



THE ARMY COMES TO VENUS 



21 



"They don't do that to me," Miranda mentioned. 

"That's because . . . because — " 
"Because what?" 

"You've been around quite a 
time. They know you're of? your 
head and they're tired of making 
the most of it. A joke wears thin 
when it's used again and again and 
1 again. They've come to the point of 
accepting you as you are." 

"That's true, Dolly. It always 
happens if you are sufficiently determined, if you stick it out long 
enough. And it can happen to you 
too." 

"I'm in no mood to try." Her 
voice went up a couple of notes. 
"I've been the plaything of boozey 
apes too long to make myself the 
target of their cheap sneers now. 
Don't shove me further than I want 
to go. Enough is enough." 

"All right. You don't mind me 
leaving you by yourself for a cou, pie of hours?" 

"Mind? Why should I? Nothing 
can happen to me that hasn't happened fifty times. Besides, I'm not 
a kid. You go do your holy serenad; ing. I'll tidy the place and have 
' supper ready for when you come 
back." 

"Thank you. It will be nice to 
return to someone." Miranda 
smiled at her, added, "I'm glad to 
have you with me. I'm really glad." 

"Oh, ait it out," said Dolly, 
deeply embarrassed. 

And so that evening one remained in the trailer and absorbed the 
long-forgotten atmosphere of a 



home while the other took the concertina into town. 

The wrinkled oldster was waiting as now he invariably did. By 
this time Miranda had learned his 
name: James Hanford. But that was 
all she knew of him. 

"Good evening, Jimmy," she 
greeted. 

"Good evening, Miss Dean," he 
responded solemnly. 

Then he stood beside her at the 
kerb and held out his tattered hat 
while she began to sing. The collection amounted to one quarter, 
one nickel and one worthless brass 
slug. 

There sounded an imperative 
knock at the trailer door in the 
midafternoon of next day. Answering, Miranda found a tall, stately 
woman waiting outside. The visitor 
appeared to be in her late fifties, 
with white, regal-looking hair and 
intelligent but arrogant features. 

"Good afternoon," said Miranda, 
a trifle primly. 

"That depends on what one 
makes of it," answered the other in 
sharp, cynical tones. She subjected 
Miranda to a careful examination 
with dark gray eyes that had seen 
more than enough. "May I come 
in?" 

"Please do." 

"Thank you." Entering, the visitor glanced around with begrudging approval, announced, "Doubtless you have heard of me. I am 
Annie." Her cultured voice held 
sour humor as she added, "Once 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



22 

known as Anytime Annie. But that 
was long ago." 

"How interesting," said Miranda. "Do sit down." 

"I prefer to stand." Again she 
had a look over the trailer. "H'm! 
Quite domesticated. Where is 
Dolly?" 

"Outside. Working in the tent." 

"So she really is here?" said 
Annie, in the manner of one confirming a ridiculous rumor. "Why 
has she left me?" 

"She's ambitious." 

"A clever answer," Annie conceded. "I admire you for it. You 
must be smarter than they say." 

"Thank you so much." 

"In which direction do her ambitions lie?" 

"We've started a laundry." 

"A laundry?" Annie's wellplucked eyebrows lifted a fraction. 
"Do you think you're a couple of 
Chinks?" 

"I presume you mean Chinese?" 

"That's right." 

"Do we look like Chinese?" 

"Dolly is and always has been 
far too stupid to know what's good 
for her," went on Annie, evading 
the point 

"But you are so much wiser?" 

"I ought to be, my dear. Much as 
I hate to admit it, I am old enough 
to be her mother. I have been 
around for quite a spell. One learns 
a lot of things through the passing 
years." 

"I should hope so," Miranda 
gave back fervently. "It must be 
terrible to learn them all too late." 



Annie winced, recovered. "You 
have a quick tongue." She waved 
a hand to indicate the surroundings. 
"I think you could do better for 
yourself than this." 

"I'm quite happy." 

"Of course you are. You have 
youth on your side. The days of 
disillusionment have yet to come. 
But they will, they will!" 

"I doubt it," observed Miranda. 
"My line of business is vastly different from yours. I find it rather 
satisfying." 

"Clothes scrubbing and hymn 
howling," scoffed Annie, displaying a wealth of contempt. "Any incurable cretin could do either." She 
brushed the subject aside. "But I 
have not come here to waste time 
on profitless argument. All I want 
is a word with Dolly." 

"Very well." Sliding the window 
to one side, Miranda called toward 
the tent. "Dolly! Dolly!" 

In short time Dolly arrived, 
scowled at the sight of who was 
waiting for her, demanded, "What 
do you want?" 

"You!" informed Annie succinctly. "It's plenty hard enough to drag 
girls all the way here without them 
going temperamental on me afterwards. So collect your clothes and 
your scattered wits and come back 
where you belong." 

"You can go to hell," said Dolly. 

"Someday I shall — according to 
those peculiarly well-informed." 
Annie threw a brief, sardonic smile 
toward Miranda. "But that time is 



THE ARMY COMES TO VENUS 



23 



not yet. Meanwhile, you will continue to work for me." 

"I'm not your slave. Why should 

; I?" 

1 "Because I picked you out of the 
j "litter and that's where you're heading right now." 

"That is a statement of opinion 
rather than of fact," Miranda put 
in. 

"I'll thank you to keep out of 
this," Annie retorted. "You have 
meddled enough." She returned attention to Dolly. "Well, are you 
going to see reason or not?" 

"I don't want to go back." 

"You will, in your own good 
time. And then I won't take you. 
Not at any price. You could starve 
to death on my doorstep and I 
wouldn't bother to toss you a 
crumb. So it's now or never." She 
studied the other calculatingly. 
"Opportunity is knocking for the 
last time. You can return to me or 
stay here and rot." 

"I'm staying." 

"Very well. Someday you'll regret it. When that time comes you 
need not bring your troubles to 
me." Turning to the door, she 
spoke to Miranda with exaggerated 
courtesy. "Thank you for having 
me." 

"You're most welcome," said Miranda. "Anytime." 

"So kind of you," responded 
Annie, refusing to twitch. Outside, 
she added, "I know your kind. I've 
met them before. You'll keep on 
and keep on squalling until you've 
got all the dopes solidly behind 



you." Her smile was a warning. 
"But you'll never get me." 

With that she departed. Miranda 
went indoors, sat down, stared at 
the subdued Dolly. 

"What a strange person. I didn't 
expect her to be like that." 

"Like what?" asked Dolly, little 
interested. 

"She seems slightly aristocratic." 

"Pah!" said Dolly. "A vaudeville artist busted on the boards. A 
theatrical floppo. She rose higher 
than I did, fell farther and landed 
harder. Still flaunts the grand manner. Still thinks she's really somebody. It's one of the things I hate 
about her — always acting so clever, 
so superior." 

"One must learn not to hate." 

"Why?" 

"Because people are as life has 
made them." 

"You can't alter people," declared Dolly flatly. 

"But you can change life," said 
Miranda. "Why, you have just 
changed yours." 

At the end of another six months 
the laundry Was functioning regularly, at a modest profit, and had a 
small but steadily growing list of 
customers who were discovering 
that a clean shirt goes well with a 
shave and haircut. 

The tent had been replaced by a 
peeled log cabin built by Bulstrode 
and a dozen cronies who'd concealed their inward pleasure beneath a 
stream of blasphemy. The aged 
Jimmy had appointed himself gen


24 FANTASTIC 

eral handyman and Bulstrode had 
developed the habit of keeping an 
eye on things by calling in from 
time to time. 

Most importantly of all, the community had now accepted the situation as one unalterable either by 
opposition or by pointed criticism. 
Indeed, it was impossible to think 
up an adequate reason for opposing. In everyone's eyes Dolly had 
become established as a genuine 
laundress while it was understood 
by one and all that Jimmy had some 
sort of stake in the business and 
that the bearlike Bulstrode was its 
unofficial protector. 

The days of ridicule and venom 
had drifted by like fragments of an 
evil dream. The subject was exhausted of cruel humor and there 
was nothing derogatory left to be 
said. Sheer persistence had converted the formerly odd into a presentday convention; all that once had 
been resented was now taken for 
granted and recognized as an integral part of the Venusian scene. 

Sheer persistence. 

Subconsciously sensing this 
change in social atmosphere, Dolly 
found that it required no redoubtable effort of will to go out with 
Miranda one evening. Taking a 
tambourine from its box in the trailer, she was satisfied at first merely 
to beat time with the singing but 
after four nights her courage suddenly welled up. She joined in with 
a bellowing but not unpleasant contralto and the town accepted without comment that now two voices 



UNIVERSE 




were crying in the Venusian wilderness. Jimmy still remained silent, 
content to hold the hat and lend the 
moral support of his presence. 

But they were three. A daft virgin, an aged washout and an erstwhile whore. 

More ships had solidified out of 
the everlasting mist and dissolved 
back into it, the last bringing a 
couple of families complete with 
children. Swiftly erected shacks 
lengthened the main street by half 
a mile and there was half-hearted, 
perfunctory talk of throwing up a 
ramshackle school for the moppets. 
The nameless town was growing 
slowly but surely — creeping toward 
its destiny of a someday city. 

One morning Miranda left the 
laundry in the others' care, picked 
her way across four miles of rubblestrewn ground and reached the niobium extraction plant It was a big, 
dirty place where hammer-mills set 
up a deafening clatter and grinders 
roared without cease; a place full of 
big-chested men smeared with mud 
formed of granite-dust and moisture. Finding the office, she handed 
in her card. 

Somebody conducted her to an 
inner room where a wide-shouldered man with dark hair and fuzzy 
mustache stood behind his desk, the 
card in hand. A second man, redhaired and lean-faced, posed nearby 
and studied the visitor with frank 
curiosity. 1 

"Please be seated," said the mustached one, indicating a chair. "My 



THE ARMY COMES TO VENUS 



2--, 



name is Langtree" He motioned 
toward his companion. "And this 
is Mr. McLeish." 

"So glad to know you," responded Miranda. 

Waiting for her to sit, Langtree 
/ resumed his own chair, had another look at the card. "Now what 
can we do for you . . . ex . . . 
Lieutenant?** 
; McLeish gave a slight start of 
I surprise, bent over to examine the 
card for himself. 

"I understand that this company 
registers title to land," said Miranda. 

"In that respect we are functioning on behalf of the Terran Government," Langtree told her. "It is 
a temporary expedient Copies of 
! claims are shipped to Earth and 
are not effective until approved and 
recorded there. We have no real 
legislative status of our own. We 
are merely deputed to act until such 
time as this planet can support a 
I few bureaucrats." 

"All the same, you can assign unI claimed land?" 

"Providing that it has no known 
mineral deposits," he conceded. "Do 
you have something in mind ?" 

"Yes, Mr. Langtree. There's a 
nice, large vacant lot right in the 
middle of the main street I can't 
imagine why nobody has taken it. 
But if it hasn't been claimed, I want 
it." 

He gave a rueful smile. That 
particular piece of estate has been 
reserved for this company's headquarters whenever we can get 



around to some real, solid building." 

"I'm sorry. I didn't know." 

"Don't let it worry you. Recently 
we have changed our minds and 
it's most unlikely that we'll use that 
plot" 

"Why not?" Her oval face became hopeful, 

"Originally we supposed that the 
town would remain centered exactly where it is right now and that 
we had grabbed ourselves a good, 
dominating position. But now it is 
obvious that things aren't going to 
work out that way. Geologists have 
discovered rich supplies of pitchblende in the east, a railroad will be 
constructed in that direction and the 
town's natural tendency will be to 
spread along the tracks." He pondered a moment, said, "You realize 
what that means?"' 

"No — what does it mean?" 

"If this place ever becomes big — 
which I think it will— and if it has 
a slummy area — which unfortunately 
is very probable — the plot you want 
will be smack among the shacks and 
garbage dumps. It will be in a 
district anything but salubrious." 

"So much the better. " 

He frowned at that, went on, 
"Moreover it is directly opposite 
Annie's dump where all the rowdies 
tend to congregate" 

"So much the better," she repeated." 

"Have you ever lived in a big 
city?" pat in McLeish. 
"Yes." 

"In parts that are . . . well . . . 
not nice?** 



26 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"Nowhere else." 

"And did you like it?" he persisted. 

"Of course. It was very convenient for me because my work lay 
right outside my door." 

"Oh!" He subsided in defeat. 

Langtree hannphed, pulled at 
his mustache, asked, "For what 
purpose do you require this land, 
Lieutenant?" 

"For a place of worship — eventually." 

"That is what I thought." He 
played the mustache again. "You 
put me in a poor position to refuse." 

"Do you want to refuse?" she 
inquired, open-eyed. 

"Not exactly." He sought around 
for means of expressing himself, 
continued, "Naturally we approve 
your plan. In fact we support it most 
heartily. But we deplore the timing." 

"Why?" 

"You've managed to establish 
yourself in a small and tough community. So far you've got by. But 
don't let that fool you. It's going to 
be lots tougher before it becomes 
easier." 

"You really think so?" 

"I'm certain of it. Since the first 
ship made its landfall we've had 
eighteen murders and forty or more 
attempted ones. Not to mention 
plenty of lesser crimes. That's nothing, nothing at all. The real labor 
pains are yet to come." 

He paused for comment from her 
but got none. 

"Immediately the railroad is completed we'll have four shiploads of 



roughnecks here to operate the 
mines. Only yesterday we received 
prospectors' reports of large de 
posits of silver and osmiridium i 
the north and those will entic 
plenty more hard character's." Studying her thoughtfully, he assured, 
"You haven't seen anything yet." 

"Neither has this town," she gave 
back, smiling. 

"I don't doubt that. And I don't 
doubt that you intend to show it 
plenty. But I'd feel a lot happier i 
you'd put the brake on your ambi 
tions until at least we've reachei 
the dignity of having a small polio 
force." 

"Wouldn't it be much more satisfactory never to need one?" sh 
asked. 

Throwing up both hands in mo< 
despair, Langtree said, "I shoul 
know better than to argue with the 
opposite sex." 

"Then may I have this piece o 
land ?" She leaned forward, her expression eager. 

"You're hamstrung, manacled, 
pinned down and counted out," 
opined McLeish, grinning at Langtree. "You might as well quit." 

"I surrender." Langtree heaved a 
sigh of resignation. "Go fetch th 
papers." 

When they had been brought he 
read carefully through them, filled 
them in triplicate, showed he 
where to sign, gave her one copy. 
She departed, grateful and brighteyed. Langtree flopped back in his 
seat and gazed absently at die wall. 



THE ARMY COMES TO VENUS 



-27 



After a while, he said, "I guess 
t was inevitable. It had to come 
..sooner or later." 
j "Think so?" 

j "Yes. Ever noticed how big cities 
are boosted out of the dirt?" 

"Sure," said McLeish. "They're 
raised by a horde of steel-erectors, 
bricklayers, masons and hod-carriers 
bossed by fellows who wander 
around consulting blueprints." 

"And by the long sustained pressure of a thousand and one determined groups," declared Langtree with emphasis. "The Quakers 
forced Philadelphia out of the earth. 
The Mormons raised Salt Lake City 
from the desert. Earth is spattered 
with New Jerusalems built by 
pernickety dissenters and various 
gangs of one-track-minders. Stands 
ito sense the same things will happen wherever humanity is located." 

"Maybe you're right," McLeish 
admitted. 

"I remember that when they concocted that new rocket-fuel they said 
that space was ours. It wasn't. They 
had to spend years designing com, bustion-chambers able to contain the 
pressures. So now we're squirted 
across the heavens by a blast that is 
1 somewhat terrific. And still it isn't 
enough. Now we must settle, exploit 
and build under psychological 
thaists that can't and won't be contained." 

"So it seems." 

"It's only a matter of time before 
some fellow with a bee in his bonnet 
will try to prevent all building within a particular square mile of land 



because he thinks it ought to be 
reserved for a city park. He'll get 
like-minders behind him. They'll 
bellow and bawl and agitate until 
the area is officially protected and 
finally becomes a park. Another mob 
will compel all booze saloons to behave in a civilized manner. Another gang will push and shove and 
play merry hell until we've a hospital and a maternity home long before we can really afford either. Sustained pressure — it gets there in the 
end." 

"It isn't easy to brush it aside," 
remarked McLeish. 

"It's well - nigh impossible," 
Langtree asserted. "The pushful 
groups provide a developmentfactor that objective scientists rarely 
take into account. They can bring 
about the cumulative effect of a very 
large bomb, but slowly." He thought 
some more, added reminiscently, 
"When I was a kid a creeper thrust 
a thin tendril through a minute 
crack in the garden wall. My old 
man wanted to cut it but Mom 
wouldn't let him. Sixteen years later 
that wall was busted. You'd have 
thought a heavy howitzer had scored 
a direct hit on ,it. My old man had 
to pay fifty dollars for new brickwork." 

"That girl is different," said 
McLeish. "She's a human being. 
She'd have to push until she'd 
grown old." 

"Man, I've seen them do that 
too." Langtree threw an inquiring 
glance at the other. "Would you!" 

"Not on your life!" 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"She would. And it won't surprise me if she does." 

"It's a shame," decided McLeish 
for no logical reason. "But perhaps 
it's a good thing for this or any 
other world." 

"This or any other world needs 
a few good things," said Langtree. 

The vacant lot still remained a 
vacant lot at the end of another 
year. Some fine day when enough 
money, hands and material were 
available it would hold a stonebuilt, glass-windowed flophouse that 
would also be a house of God. \t 
times it seemed as if such a culmination was an impossibly long way 
off, that the temporarily homeless 
would have no place to sleep, the 
spiritually hungry no place to pray. 
But the lot was held in stubborn 
possession because everything comes 
to those who wait. 

At the laundry there were now 
three washing-machines and Jimmy 
had become an energetic, full-time 
worker therein. Bulstrode was a frequent visitor with the frequency increasing as the weeks went by. Onee 
or twice the big man had been 
frightened and horrified by a secret 
desire to turn the street parading 
trio into a quartet. He had stepped 
upon it firmly, crushing it down. 

His strength was also his weakness in that he doubted his ability to 
counter a crude insult with anything 
less than a broken nose. And from 
occasional remarks let slip by 
Miranda he'd gathered that nosebusting was out, most definitely out. 



That made it awfully hard on a powerful man with furry arms. It meant 
that he would have to answer blood heating jibes with a forgiving smile 
when it would be less trouble and 
infinitely more satisfying to break 
a neck. 

Such was the situation when the 
sixteenth ship came out of the 
eternal mist beyond which gleamed 
a host of stars including a great 
green one called Terra. The ship 
unloaded a little aluminum trailer 
the exact copy of Miranda's. An 
elderly couple, gray-haired and wiseeyed, arrived with it, positioned it 
next door, had a few small crates 
dumped alongside. 

A sedate celebration was held in 
the log laundry that afternoon. The 
newcomers greeted Miranda in the 
manner of oldtime friends, were introduced as Major and Captain Bennett. Miranda handed around pie, 
coffee and cakes, her face flushed 
and eyes alight with the pleasure of 
meeting. 

In due time Bulstrode wandere 
outside, stood gazing at the crates 
and whistling idly to himself. Soon 
Major Bennett joined him. 

"More washing contraptions ?" 
Bulstrode asked. 

"Dear me, no. Three should b< 
sufficient for a while." He examined 
the nearest boxes. "These are musi 
cal instruments." 

"Huh?" Bulstrode's heavy face 
livened with sudden interest. "Want 
them emptied out ?" 

"There's no hurry. I'm sure we 
can manage." 



I 

THE ARMY CC 

"I'm doing nothing. And I like 
usting crates open." 

"Then we may as well deal with 
lem," said Major Bennett. "The 
has to be done sometime." Finding a case-lever, he started prying 
up slats with the slow carefulness of 
the aged. 

j Scorning this method, Bulstrode 
hooked big, hard fingertips under 
ithe lid of another, bulged his arms 
;and drew it up with nails squeaking, 
i He peeped inside, 
j "Suffering cats !" he whispered. 
I "What's the matter?" 

"A drum." He voiced it in low, 

j reverent tones like one uttering a 
■ holy name. Sliding trembling hands 

\ into the crate, he fondled the con
I tents. "As I live and breathe, a big 

:' bass drum!" 

"Surely there is nothing remarkable about that?" said Bennett, mys
('tified. 

With a faraway look in his eyes, 
! Bulstrode told him, "For more than 
[ten years I carried the big bass drum 
in the hometown band." 
( "You did?" 

"Yes, tiger-skin and all. It was a 
darned fine band." 

Lowering his arms into the crate, 
.Bulstrode gently drew forth the 
drum. He made another dip, 
brought out a pair of fat-knobbed 
sticks also a broad leather sling 
complete widi chest and belly hooks. 
He tightened the drum's vellum. 
Then slowly, like one in a dream, he 
donned the sling, fastened the drum 
upon his huge chest, looped the 
sticks on his wrists. 



ES TO VENUS 29 

For about half a minute he posed 
like a statue dreaming wistfully of 
days long gone by. Something took 
possession of him. Fire leaped into 
his eyes. He twirled the drumsticks 
into twin discs of light, spun them 
sidewise, above, inward, outward 
and across, flashing them hither and 
thither while flicking the taut vellum with expert beat 

Boom. Doom. Bop • bop • boom 
went the big bass drum. 

Drawn by the sound the others 
came out of the laundry and watched 
fascinated while the drumsticks 
whirled and the great drum sounded. Finally, he stopped. 

"Jeez!" he said, flush-faced. 

Without comment Major Bennett 
extracted a silver comet from its 
case and handed it to his wife. Next 
he produced a trombone, fitted it together, checked its slide action with 
a tentative toot. He eyed Bulstrode 
shrewdly. 

"By hokey!" said that individual. 
"It takes me back years." He looked 
around in a semi-daze, noticed 
Miranda socketing together a pole 
bearing a large flag. "Years!" he 
said. 

Still watching him, Bennett offered no remark. He had the manner of an experienced cook who 
knows exactly when the joint will 
be done to perfection. 

"This town could use a good 
band," asserted Bulstrode, eyeing 
the trombone and licking his lips. 

"We have nobody to play the 
flute, the oboe and the tuba," said 
Bennett quietly. "Nobody to beat 



30 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



the drum. Someday we'll find them 
among those able to kneel and pray, 
able to fight for the things they believe to be right." 

Unhooking the drum and discarding the sling, Bulstrode carefully 
placed them on the ground. Then 
he stared at his feet, fidgeted about, 
transferred the stare to the sky. 

"Reckon I'd better be going," he 
announced. Starting to back away, 
he met Miranda's eyes and found his 
feet strangely frozen to the earth. 

"Goodbye!" encouraged Dolly in 
a tone he did not like. 

A slight perspiration broke out 
on his forehead. His thick lips 
worked around but no words came 
forth. He was in psychic agony, like 
a man paralyzed by sheer need to 
flee. 

Putting down the trombone, 
Major Bennett took him by the arm, 
led him into the trailer and out of 
the others' sight. 

"Let us speak to God," he said 
and sank upon his knees. 

After considerable hesitation, 
Bulstrode made sure the door was 
shut and windows obscured before 
kneeling -beside him. Putting an arm 
across his shoulders, Bennett held 
him while they spoke to God because that is the fashion of their 
kind. Other pressure-groups, other 
rigmaroles. This was theirs: to say 
what they wished to say side by side, 
shoulder to shoulder, before their 
Supreme Commander. 

When they came out, soldiers 
both, Miranda had opened another 
box containing hats but no uni


forms. Peaked caps and poke bonnets ornamented with red-lettered 
ribbons. Self-consciously fitting oh a 
cap, Bulstrode strove to divert ; attention from himself by loudly admiring Dolly in her new bonnet. 

"My, you look good in that," J 
enthused. 

"Don't you pick on me," s 
snapped. 

"But I mean it. You look kin 
of . . . uh . . . nice." 

"I'm as fat as a hog and I knoit." 

"Plumpish," he corrected. "Ju: 
the way you ought to be." 

"Nuts," she said. "A hat's a ha 
and makes no difference to what', 
under it." 

"There is a difference. You're no 
the same person." 

"Oh, go take a walk you bi" 
clumsy lug!" With that, Dolly pa 
duced a handkerchief and started tt 
snivel. 

"Jeepers," said Bulstrode, aghast 
"I didn't mean to — " 

Miranda pulled gently at h 
sleeve and explained. "A worn,' 
often weeps when she's happy." 

"That so?" He crinkled busl 
eyebrows at her, mildly dumbfoun 
ed. "Mean to say she's enjoying he. 
self?" 

Dolly sobbed louder to confirr 

it. 

"Good grief!" said Bulstrode 
quite unconscious of the pun. H 
studied Dolly in frank amazemen; 
until eventually she composed her 
self, wiped her eyes and gave hin. 
an embarrassed smile. 



THE ARMY COMES TO VENUS 



31 



Now he refitted the sling and 
took up the drum in the manner of 
one claiming his own after countless 
years. He hooked it onto his chest, 
"■ jod holding it in proud possession. 
,Ie twirled the sticks, again delightlag in the feel of them. 
1 "Christ Jesus," he said without 
iaspherny, "this town is going to 
ike an awful licking!" A thought 
truck him and he looked hopefully at Miranda. "How soon are 
f/e going to give it to them hot and 
strong?" 

j She didn't answer. She seemed 
^0 be waiting for something. All of 
them stood there in caps and poke 
ponnets watching him and waiting 
jor something. Momentarily it puz;led him, that and the electric suspense in the air. For whom or what 
i were they waiting? Was there any 
\good reason to wait at all? 
' It entered his mind that the big 
rum takes the lead and sets the 
ace. 
Always. 

Involuntarily his fingers tightened 
iround the sticks, his leg muscles 

; • 



stiffened in readiness, his chest 
swelled, his eyes flamed and what 
was within him burst forth as a 
triumphant shout. 
"Now!" 

It galvanized them into activity. 
Human pressure was on the boost. 
Old Jimmy donned the pole-sling, 
braced the flag in his grip. The 
others closed the trailers, collected 
their instruments, formed in two 
ranks of three each. 

For a few seconds they stood to 
attention like troops on parade. The 
pale, fog-ridden Venusian light 
sparkled on cornet and concertina, 
trombone and tambourine, while the 
big drum hung poised and the great 
flag flew above them fast and free. 

Then Bulstrode swung a stick and 
struck one loud, imperative note. 

Boom! 

In exact step both ranks started 
off upon the left foot and advanced 
with military precision upon the 
waiting town, 

Glory! Glory! 

The Salvation Army was marching into battle for the Lord. 



;HS5EE WHiTI MICE :., 

Three white mice traveled 1,400 miles into space this past 
pring and summer in the nose cones of Air Force Thor-Able 
ockets, according to a report read at the American Rocket Soiety's recent annual convention. This was the highest altitude 
my living thing has reached so far. Laika, the dog in Sputnik II 
(launched November 3, 1957) reached a highpoint of 1,020 miles. 

Nona of the mice were recovered, but heart beats of two of 
them were radioed back. It was known that at least one of them 
was "certainly alive" throughout the 15,000 mph six-thousandmile-long flight. 



the 
wistful 
witch 

by . . . Robert F. Young 



Anybody might think that 
she wanted to be a witch 
— and anybody thinking so 
would have been correct. 



Melanie was thinking abc at 
Fred when the knock sounded Set 
the door. 

Specifically, she was thinking 
about the quarrel they'd had 
the night before. It wasn't their 
first quarrel and it wasn't even their 
worst quarrel, but she couldn't get 
it out of her mind. 

It was all over the new hat she'd 
bought yesterday afternoon. Lately 
Fred had become quite critical 
about her taste in hats, and it had 
been her intention to hide this one. 
But she arrived home late and, in 
her haste to get supper ready, she 
forgot all about it. 

He must have seen it the minute 
he came in the front door. She flew 
into the living room when she heard 
the sound of paper tearing, but by 
the time she got there he already 
had the hat out of the hat box and 
was holding it up as though it wac 
some deplorable cast-off she'd picked up at a rummage sale, instead ot 
one of the local milliner's latest imports from Fifth Avenue. "Another 
witch hat!" he said, a defeated looL 
on his boyish face. 

"Witch hats are the rage now," 
Melanie said. "Everybody's wearing 
them." 



We are told that there are all sorts of people from different planes
and even from different planets — walking around these streets of ours 

and taking a hand occasionally in our affairs. And it's not impossible 

that Mr. Michelson might very well be. one of these people — or beings....' 



32 



THE WISTFUL WITCH 



33 



You're the only one I ever saw 
wearing one!" 

"Can I help it if Tompkinsville 
is way behind the times? Can I 
help it if all the women ever do 
around here is have babies and 
watch TV?" 

"And what's wrong with having 
babies and watching TV?" 

"Nothing's wrong — except that 
I can't see why people should let 
themselves become completely provincial just because they live in a 
small town. They should at least 
try to broaden their interests — " 

"By buying witch hats, I suppose!" 

Meianie stamped her foot. "All 
right then! By buying these witch 
hats!" 

"But darling, four witch hats in 
one rear! Anybody' d think you 
tcmted to be a witch!" 

"Well maybe I do!" Meianie 
said. Then she gave a little gasp 
and put her hand over her mouth. 

But she was too late . . . 

The knock had sounded on the 
kitchen door, and when Meianie 
. - •-. it she found a small 
humpbacked man standing meekly 
on the backporch. "Good morning," 
he said brightly. "My name is Mr. 
Mkhelson and I have a product 
here which I think might interest 

He had round pink cheeks, and 
the bluest pair of eyes she had ever 
seen. He had doffed his hat and was 
■>; it in one hand, exposing 
bis silvery hair to the October sun


light; in his other hand he carried 
a long black case. 

Meianie had the average housewife's distaste for door-to-door 
salesmen, but there was something 
about this one that made it impossible for her to turn him away. 
Perhaps it was because of the way 
he was regarding her (as though 
the tall, willowy girl with the 
black, bobbed hair, who had just 
answered the door, did not quite 
live up to his idea of what a prospective customer for his product 
should look like). "Come in," she 
said, and, after wiping his feet carefully on the backporch carpet, Mr. 
Michelson stepped into the kitchen. 

He upended his case and set it 
on the floor. Meianie watched 
curiously while he unsnapped the 
lid. At first she was disappointed 
when his product proved to be a 
broom. Then she saw what a remarkable broom it was. Her fingers 
actually tingled when she touched 
the polished ebony handle, and 
when she made a few tentative 
sweeping motions, the golden bristles left a path of gleaming linoleum behind them. 

"Why," she gasped, "I had no 
idea my floor was that dirty!" 

"It's a very special broom," Mr. 
Michelson said. 

She swept some more. The linoleum grew brighter and brighter, 
shone with a resplendence it had 
never known before. "How — how 
much is it?" she asked. 

"I'll tell you what," Mr. Michelson said. "Suppose I leave it with 



34 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



you for a day and give you a chance 
to try it out before telling you the 
price? I'll stop by tomorrow morning and, if you're still interested, 
you can settle with me then. I'll 
have the con — , I mean the bill of 
sale, drawn up in the meantime. 
How does that^uit you?" 

There was a disconcerting quality 
in his blue eyes that gave her pause. 
Was he trying to pull her leg ? Was 
a bill of sale really necessary in so 
simple a transaction? Then she returned hej^ attention to the broom, 
marveling again at the clean line of 
its handle, at the graceful swell of 
its golden bristles. "All right," she 
said presently. "I don't see what 
I've got to lose." 

"Fine!" Mr. Michelson closed 
the empty case, picked it up, and 
turned to go. Melanie noticed, then, 
how really humped his back was; 
there was something odd about the 
hump too, though she couldn't put 
her finger on what the oddness 
was. 

He paused on the backporch, 
snapped his fingers. "Oh, yes, I almost forgot to mention it," he said. 
"There'll be a book in the mail for 
you tomorrow — a sort of premium, 
you might say. If you decide to keep 
the broom, you can keep the book 
too . . . Till tomorrow morning 
•hen — " He made a small bow and 
replaced his hat. "Happy Landings!" 

Now that was a strange thing for 
him to say, Melanie thought, closing the door and going over to the 



picture window and watching him 
walk briskly down the drive and 
climb into his blue Ford. What did 
flying have to do with brooms? 

Abruptly she caught her breath. 
The broom slipped from her fingers, toppled to the floor. Then her 
common sense reasserted itself and 
she gave a tense little laugh. Such 
a ridiculous turn of thought! Resolutely she picked up the broom, 
carried it to the hall closet, shoved 
it into a dark corner and closed the 
door. 

She returned to her dusting, 
from which Mr. Michelson's knock 
had summoned her. Thanks to the 
interruption she was even further 
behind on her housework than 
usual. Not only that, the neighborhood coffee dub met at eleven 
o'clock, and here it was, a quarter 
to already! 

She sighed. Another morning 
wasted — and it was Gladys' turn to 
play hostess too. Melanie hoped she 
didn't overperk the coffee the way 
she had the last time it was her 
turn. Gladys was all right, but she 
was so absorbed in her baby that 
she sometimes neglected other 
things. Melanie didn't like to be 
hypercritical, but if it was your turn 
to make the coffee, you should make 
it right, baby or no baby. 

Slyly, her thoughts shifted to 
Fred. She had to admit that their ^ 
marriage, now in its sixth month, S 
hadn't turned out the way either of 
them had expected it to. Every day 
she could see Fred's increasing discontent in his eyes, hear ft in his 



THE WIST 

voice. And she didn't need to ask 
what was troubling him; she knew 
what it was. 

But it wasn't fair! They'd agreed 
about babies long ago. She'd remarked frequently and pointedly, 
when they were going together, 
that the sensible time to raise a 
family was when you were old 
enough to appreciate one. It was 
absurd, she'd said, for young people to tie themselves down right off 
the bat, and there was the very real 
danger that you might even resent 
your own babies for keeping you 
home all the time when you weren't 
psychologically ready to stay home 
all the time. And Fred had agreed 
with every word she'd said, kissing 
her after every sentence and nodding his head emphatically. 

She realized now that he hadn't 
taken her seriously at all, that he'd 
probably laughed at her behind her 
back, confident she'd change her 
mind. Well, she hadn't changed 
her mind and she didn't intend to, 
and he could make all the nasty remarks he wanted to about her taste 
in hats and about her wanting to be 
a witch and — 

She watched the small and lonely tear that had run down her 
cheek, fall forlornly to the living 
room rug . . . 

"Come in," Gladys called down 
from upstairs. "Oh, it's you, Mel~>» tnie. The rest of the girls aren't 
here yet.'' Then: "Come up and see 
my litde man this morning." 

Gladys was giving him his 



:l witch 35 

bottle. "Isn't he adorable?" she 
asked. 

Melanie lingered in the nursery 
doorway. She caught a glimpse of 
a small fist, a rotund face and two 
blue eyes brimming with wonderment. Despite her efforts to calm it, 
her heart began to pound. She raised one hand to herferoat. Presently 
she became aware that Gladys had 
asked a question, a purely rhetorical 
question to be sure, but convention 
demanded that it be answered. 
"Yes . . ." Melanie said, trying to 
keep the way she felt from showing 
in her voice. "He is . . ." 

"I don't know where he gets his 
good looks from," Gladys said. 
"Certainly not from me — " Suddenly she gave a start. "The coffee — I 
forgot to turn it off!" 

"I'll get it," Melanie said, thankful for an excuse to flee, and hurried down the stairs. 

But, at least from a connoisseur's 
point of view, the coffee was already a lost cause. Melanie was 
furious. But by the time Nina and 
Trudy and Ella arrived she'd calmed 
down enough to enter into the usual 
small talk that traditionally preceded the Principal Topic. In fact, she 
even contributed an item of her 
own. "What did you think of that 
charming little broom salesman?" 
she asked. 

Everybody looked at her blankly. 
"Broom salesman?'' Nina said presently. 

"Why yes. Didn't he come to 
your house?" 

It was quite obvious, from the 



36 FANTASTIC 

continuing blankness of their faces, 
that he hadn't. For a moment Melanie's stomach felt as though it was 
filled with ice cubes. But the feeling 
passed jjuickly. Suppose he had singled out her door in particular ? He 
could have had any number of 
logical reasons, ^or he could have 
acted on a mere whim. 

"I guess you must have missed 
him," she said. "Anyway, it's not 
important," she added, and changed 
the subject. 

Changing the subject was not a 
difficult thing to do, prior to the 
arrival of the Principal Topic, and 
shortly the conversation had shifted 
to this and that and the other thing. 
The Principal Topic, however, 
brooked no interference, and if you 
could not contribute to it constructively, you sat on the sidelines and 
listened. 

Melanie was quite familiar with 
the sidelines and quite sick of the 
Principal Topic. All someone had 
to do was to say one of the key 
words and it stepped into the room, 
shouldered aside whatever anyone 
else had been saying, and dominated the conversation from then on. 
The key word for today was "high 
chair," and before she knew what 
had happened, she found herself 
hopelessly involved in a verbal 
swirl of formulas, diapers and pablum. 

She sat through it miserably. She 
was relieved, as always, when the 
meeting broke up. She'd never 
wanted to join the coffee club in 
the first place, but Fred had kept 



UNIVERSE 

insisting and finally she'd given in. 
At the time she'd thought he was 
acting out ftf concern for her, but 
now she was beginning to suspect 
his real motive. Probably he had 
the silly notion diat, by subjecting 
her to an atmosphere that fairly 
reeked of babies, she might change 
her mind about having one. 

That showed you how much Fred 
knew about women and about his 
own wife in particular! 

Nevertheless, whether she liked 
it or not, the baby-club — to call a 
spade a spade — had become a part 
of her life and she was going to 
have to put up with it along with 
all the other trials and tribulations 
of modern housewifehood, such as 
Friday night shopping, the budget, 
TV commercials and door-to-door 
salesmen— ' 

Whereupon she again found herself face to face with the annoying 
fact that she was the only housewife 
in the neighborhood whom Mr. Michelson had approached. Why? 

Melanie went to the hall closet 
grimly. She brought the broom into 
the kitchen and examined it inch by 
inch. She didn't really think it was 
a witches' -besom, any more than she 
really thought she was on a certain 
party's list of prospective witches, 
but she knew she wouldn't have any 
peace of mind till she found out 
one way or the other. 

At first her examination netted 
her nothing out of the ordinary. 
Then, on the top of the handle, her 
fingers discovered a faint indenta


THE WISTFUL WITCH 



37 



tioQ no larger than a pinprick. 
When she accidentally covered it 
with her forefinger, a vertical bank 
of illuminated letters came to life 
on the upper section of the handle, 
almost as though she'd activated a 
secret switch: 

F 
R 
H 
I 

U 
D 

The company's name? Well 
hardly, Melanie thought. No company would employ that much subterfuge just to put its name on its 
product Well then, did each of the 
letters stand for a word? Did F, 
for instance, stand for Forward, and 
did R represent Reverse? 

Her heart was pounding now. 
She skipped the H and the I; she'd 
come back to them later. Right now 
she was concerned with the last two 
letters. The U and the D— 

Up and Down? 

She realized that her hands were 
trembling. She was breathing hard 
too, as though she'd just run up six 
flights of stairs. Could the broom 
really fly? Could she really go soaring over houses and towns and trees 
and fields? 

With an effort, she brought her 
imagination back to earth. The way 
she was acting, you'd think she 
wanted to be a witch. And she 
didn't want to be one at all The 
only reason she bought so many 



witch hats was because they became 
her, not because of a subconscious 
urge to fly over the countryside and 
put people under her spell. 

When you came to think of it, 
though, it would be something, 
wouldn't it, if she could take off, 
say, from her bfcdroom balcony, and 
go sailing away in the moonlight. 
Not for sorcerous purposes, of 
course. Just for fun — 

Tonight there'd be a full moon. 
And tonight was Fred's night to go 
to the lodge. And tonight she 
hadn't a single thing to do, except 
read, or watch TV — . 

Hmm . . . 

The moon was full. Meknie 
didn't think she'd ever seen it quite 
so full. It was rising behind the 
backyard apple tree, and from 
where she stood on the balcony, it 
looked like a ripe bright fruit that 
you could pluck if you climbed high 
enough in the branches. 

She'd donned her slinkiest black 
dress for the occasion and she was 
wearing her newest witch hat. She 
realized suddenly how scared she 
was. Her whole body was trembling. 

She canted the broom to what 
looked like a professional angle. 
Then a sudden thought occurred to 
her: did witches straddle a broomstick, or did they ride it side-saddle ? 

She decided, finally, on sidesaddle. For one thing, it was a more 
lady-like position, and for another, 
the tightness of her dress precluded 
the alternative position. She hunch


38 FANTASTIC 

cd down till the backs of her thighs 
touched the handle. Lord, she 
hoped no one was watching her! 

Timidly she touched the tiny indentation — the dashlight? — and 
waited breathlessly for the vertical 
bank of letters — the instrument 
panel ? — to light ' up. Presently 
FRHIUD stood out distinctly in the 
darkness. She moved her finger 
down the column of letters to the 
U. She hesitated a long time, then, 
resolutely, she lowered her finger. 

She hadn't really expected anything would happen. Just the same, 
she was disappointed when nothing 
did. She sighed, and raised her finger. The U, she noticed, had darkened to a dull red. Suddenly she 
felt light and giddy, and, looking 
down, she discovered that her feet 
had lost contact with the balcony 
fioor. 

She watched, terrified, while the 
house shrank to a moonlit matchbox beneath her. Then, frenziedly, 
she touched the D. When the broom 
began to drop, she gambled on the 
H. After she touched it, the broom 
came to a gentle stop, and there she 
was, a housewife on a broomstick, 
hovering high above Tompkinsville 
in the deliciously dark sky! 

Melanie took a deep breath. Tentatively she touched the F, and a 
wind seemed to spring up around 
her, and then she saw the slow 
drifting by of the lights far below 
and knew that the wind was the 
result of her own momentum. She 
took another deep breath. The air 
was cold and sweet, flavored with 



UNIVERSE 

the tang of cider apples and the 
scent of burning leaves and the 
winy smell of grapes. Moonlight 
was everywhere — on fields and forests, on hills and highways; in 
misted hollows. 

Her fright flew away and she began experimenting with the other 
control-letters. The H was for 
Hover, of course. But she couldn't 
figure out what the I stood for. 
Nothing seemed to happen when 
she touched it. She shrugged her 
shoulders. She'd find out later. 
Right now she had another, more 
pressing, problem: how did you 
turn a broomstick? 

The answer proved to be simple: 
you turned a broomstick merely by 
pointing it in the direction you 
wished to go. Melanie was enchanted. After considerable practice she 
was as much at home in the sky as 
she was in her own kitchen. 

On an impulse, she flew back to 
town and buzzed Fred's lodge. The 
deserted streets of the business section sobered her: everybody, as 
usual, was home watching TV, or 
playing with babies. Even from the 
perspective of a broomstick, Tompkinsville was a very lonely place at 
night. 

And the sky was lonely too — as 
lonely as her own living room. She 
hadn't noticed the loneliness at 
first, but she did now. There was 
the distant moon and the remote 
cold stars, but all the rest was 
emptiness. 

The emptiness seeped into her, 
the emptiness and the loneliness, 



THE WISTFUL WITCH 



3Q 



and suddenly she yearned to see the 
warm yellow light of a window, a 
window with people beyond it, even 
people playing with babies . . . 
especially people playing with 
babies. Well why not? A witch — 
even a make-believe one — could do 
a lot of things an ordinary housewife couldn't. 

She chose Gladys' living-room 
window. Putting the broom at 
Hover, she peered inside. Gladys' 
husband was sitting on the couch 
with the "little man" perched on 
his lap. Melanie caught her breath. 
She almost looked away and then 
she remembered that, since no one 
was watching her, she could look 
as long as she wanted to and not 
have to worry about someone coming up with the inevitable, "Well, 
what are you and Fred waiting 
for?" 

She had no idea how long she'd 
been looking when she heard the 
approaching footsteps. Turning, she 
saw Gladys cutting across the 
lawn from Ella's — on an angle that 
would bring her to within a few 
feet of Melanie's position in front 
of the window. 

Melanie froze to the broom, too 
startled to move. She was done for 
now. But Gladys walked right by 
her as though she didn't exist. Melanie was dumbfounded; then she 
remembered touching the I on the 
instrument panel. She'd wondered 
at the time why nothing had happened. Now she realized that something had happened. 

The I stood for Invisibility. 



Melanie lingered in front of the 
living room window till Gladys 
took the "little man" upstairs; then 
she raised the broom to the nursery 
window and watched Gladys tuck 
him in his crib. Finally, when 
Gladys turned out the light, Melanie 
headed for horne. 

She changed into housecoat and 
scuffs, descended the stairs and put 
the broom back in the hall closet. 
Then she went into the living room, 
turned on TV and sat down to wait 
for Fred. "Hi, darling," she said, 
several programs later when he 
came in the door, "you're out kind 
of late, aren't you?" 

He didn't even look at her. Instead, he went to the stairs and 
called up, "Melanie, you in bed already?" 

"I'm not in bed, silly, I'm right 
here," Melanie said. "If I was a 
mouse, I'd bite you." 

"Melanie!" Fred called again. 
Then, half under his breath: "She 
must be over to Ella's or Gladys' 
. . . Left die TV set on too." 

Melanie felt quite cold. She sat 
there disbelievingly while Fred 
came over and sat down exactly 
where she was supposed to be. She 
got up, then, and ran to the hall 
closet She found the broom in the 
darkness and activated the instrument panel. She forced herself to 
concentrate. Forward and Reverse, 
she knew, cancelled each other, and 
Hover cancelled both. The same 
held true for Up and Down, Conversely, Forward and Reverse or Up 
and Down cancelled Hover — 



40 FANTASTIC 

But how in the world did you 
cancel Invisibility? 

Melanie swallowed hard. Presently she deactivated the instrument panel and returned to the 
living room. She sat down on the 
studio couch and waited helplessly 
for Fred to worry, himself into 
enough of a dither to call the police. 

She didn't have to wait long. By 
half-past one he was pacing the 
floor and at two o'clock he called 
Gladys. Then he called Ella and 
Nina and Trudy. Finally he iaid, 
"Operator, give me the police!" By 
then his boyish face was pale and 
he was smoking one cigarette after 
another. Melanie yearned to go 
over and put her arms around his 
neck, and after a while she did; but 
he only lit another cigarette right 
where her head was supposed to be, 
and returned to his pacing. 

Well, an hour later, the police 
came, and Chief Desmond stomped 
all through the house and all over 
the yard, telling Fred not to worry, 
that they'd find her all right, and 
the neighbors stuck their heads out 
of their bedroom windows and 
Gladys came over, and then Ella, 
and Fred kept chain-smoking and 
Chief Desmond kept talking, and 
finally Melanie couldn't stand it 
.iny longer and went upstairs to 
bed, She lay there in the darkness, 
in the new loneliness of her twin 
bed, and tried to deep and couldn't. 
After a while she heard the police 
cir back OUt of the drive and pull 
away, and then she heard bred come 



UNIVERSE 

up and the sound of his shoes dropping on the floor, and presently the 
sound of his turning and tossing, 
and finally — sleepless hours later — 
the clatter of the alarm in the dawngray room . . . 

She waited till after Fred left for 
work before she got up. She had a 
faint hope that perhaps her invisibility had faded during the night, 
but one glance into her vanity mirror proved that it hadn't. Like 
Dracula, she had no reflection. But, 
unlike Dracula, she had no reality 
either. 

There was nothing she could do 
except wait till Mr. Michelson 
showed up. She shivered at the 
thought. She hadn't the faintest 
doubt but what he could dispell her 
invisibility with a flick of his finger, 
but she had a good idea of the price 
he'd probably ask for the service. 

The funny part of it was, she 
never once thought of the book he'd 
mentioned till she answered the 
mailman's ring and saw the oblong 
package lying on the doorstep. It 
was postmarked Tompkinsville and 
bore no return address. She opened 
it, her fingers trembling. When the 
last layer of wrapping finally fell 
away, she found herself holding a 
handsome, black leather volume entitled A Handbook for Modern 
Witches. 

Her instinctive repugnance was 
tempered by her dilemma. Surely 
such a book ought to contain some 
information on the subject of invisibility. She opened it to the table 



THE WIST 

of contents, scanned the chapter 
headings eagerly: "How to brew the 
Ten Basic Concoctions"; "How to 
cast Spells"; "How to develop an 
Evil Eye"; "How to dry up a Mother's Milk"; "How to build a Gingerbread House"; "How to turn 
Playboys into Frogs." 

Disappointed, she leafed through 
the pages, her eyes alert for the 
words she sought. She'd almost 
given up hope when at last she 
found them. They occurred in one 
of the subtitles of Chapter I: 

CONCOCTION NO. 3 
A Brew to make you visible after a 
Broomstick Binge 

At first Mclanic was afraid she 
wouldn't have the necessary ingrcdii Hi-., bill .ill ill llitin were avail 
|hj| tlghl in her own kitchen. 
Probably, the thought, getting them 
together, it was the magic words 
you repeated while the stuff was 
boiling that did the trick. 

Ptetty soon her big Revere-ware 
pol was full, and bubbling merrily 
on the Tappan range. The aroma 
1 1 i.i I filled the kitchen was strongly 
reminiscent of mushroom soup, but 
that wasn't particularly surprising, 
Considering that the recipe had called for half a can. 

Melanie waited till the brew had 
boiled the stipulated length of time, 
then she picked up the book and 
read the magic words: 

"Summer summer, swing and dream 
Till you hear a certain scream; 



JL WITCH 41 

Then through fields and forest 
flee 

Till you reach a certain tree — " 

They didn't make much sense, 
but the directions said to repeat 
them twenty times, so she did. As 
soon as she finished, she ladled out 
the prescribed dosage into a measuring cup, waited for it to cool, then 
quickly drank it down. 

It didn't taste bad at all. She set 
the empty cup on the stove and 
went into the living room and sat 
down. 

Maybe, she thought belatedly, 
the whole thing was a trick. After all, Mr. Michelson would hardly 
hand her back her reality free of 
charge after going to so much trouble to deprive her of it. Maybe, inslead of becoming visible, she'd 
turn into a white swan. Maybe, 
when Fred came home from work, 
he'd find a black cat meowing in 
the kitchen. 

But she didn't turn into anything. 
She just went on sitting there, staring abstractedly at the blank face 
of the TV screen. It was a 21" 
screen, rectangular, and utterly unremarkable. However, if you changed its position just a little so that 
the sun would hit it directly, itwould look like a window pane, a 
window pane, say, in a greenhouse, 
no different from the other panes 
except that this particular one was 
catching the rays of the afternoon 
sun, and every time your swing 
swung up, the reflection hit you 
squarely in the eyes — 



42 FANTASTIC 

Melanie writhed in her chair. No, 
her mind screamed. No! 

— and down and back, now down 
and up again, the light smiting 
your eyes and making you squint, 
and above you in the bedroom, the 
strange quiet, and beside you in the 
drive, beneath the same branch of 
the maple that held* your swing, the 
doctor's car — 

And then the scream shattering 
the serenity of the summer day and 
the serenity of your thoughts, and 
the swing, seemingly hy itself, losing its back and forth momentum 
and coming slowly to a standstill 
in the shade, and the greenhouse 
window forgotten, everything forgotten, except the scream still hovering in the summer air . , . 

When the doctor had driven in 
the drive, you'd wanted to look in 
his black bag, thinking that maybe 
it contained your new baby brother. 
But the doctor brushed you aside 
and hurried into the house where 
your father was walking back and 
forth, and then you heard the two 
of them mounting the stairs to your 
mother's bedroom, and, bewildered, 
you returned to your swing. 

Bad and forth . . . up and down 
. . . and then the scream — 

It was seven summers, sitting 
Iherc, waiting for the scream to go 
away. But it wouldn't go away and 
Inully you couldn't stand it any 
liMii.cr ..m.I you ran ran ran, down 
thr lane tu I he M/ukberry patch and 
through Hi.- | Midi, Ihc thorns scraping your little girl's legs, to the 
woods; and through the woods to 



UNIVERSE 

the special place beneath the big 
oak where you always took your 
frustrations and your fears. And 
you'd sat there all through the summer afternoon, whimpering and 
trembling, till finally your father 
had found you at sundown and had 
carried you back to the house. 

You'd just known your mother 
was dead— but she wasn't. And 
there in her arms was your longawaited baby brother. But at first 
you couldn't look at him, because 
looking at him brought the scream 
back. Looking at other babies 
brought it back, too. But gradually, 
through the years, the scream had 
become other things: it had become 
books your mother said you were 
too young to read; it had become 
dresses your mother said you looked mannish in; it had become dates 
you walked home from; it had become the subject of your senior 
theme, "Thomas Robert Malthus, 
The Forgotten Man"*; it had become a pre-marital discourse on the 
inadvisability of taking on the responsibilities of parenthood too 
early in life — 

Finally it had become a penchant 
for witch hats. 

The greenhouse window had resumed its role as a TV screen, and 
the long-ago summer day had absconded. The scream had died away 
forever, but another sound had 
come to take its place. Melanie sat 
up with a start. Someone was rapping, gently rapping, rapping at her 
kitchen door ... 



THE WIST 

"Well," Mr. Michelson said, 
sniffing the aromatic vapors of Concoction No. 3 through the screen. 
"I see the book I sent arrived all 
right." 

"Can — can you see me?" Melanie 
asked. 

"I certainly can . . . Aren't you 
going to ask me in?" 

"No." Melanie got the broom 
f rom the closet, picked up A Handbook for Modem Witches from die 
kitchen table, and opened the door 
just wide enough to hand them 
through. "I've changed my mind. I 
don't want to be a witch!" 

"Well, that is good news!" Mr. 
Michelson took out a snow-white 
handkerchief and wiped his pink 
forehead. "You had me worried for 
a while," he went on. "The way 
you were flying around last night, 
I thought you were a goner for 
sure. In fact, I was afraid that even 
the antidote wouldn't snap you out 
'of it, in which case, of course, I'd 
have had to insist on your signing 
the contract. My worthy opponent 
and I have a gentlemen's agreement 
on that point. When I use his tactics — and in your case, they were 
the only tactics that would have 
worked — I have to turn all the 
souls I'm unable to rehabilitate over 
to him. And vice versa." 



;l witch 43 

"Your — your worthy opponent?" 

"Why yes. You've heard of him, 
I'm sure. My father had a great deal 
of trouble with him way back when. 
Put him to rout, too . . . Well—" 
Mr. Michelson tucked the book under his arm and picked up the 
broom — "I g'jfss that just about 
wraps it up." 

He descended the steps and started down the drive to his car. Melanie slipped out on the backporch 
and watched him around the corner 
of the house. That was when she 
finally put her finger on what the 
oddness was about the hump on his 
back. It wasn't really one hump at 
all: it was two humps, one on each 
shoulder . . . 

"Wait!" she cried. 

Mr. Michelson turned. "Yes?" 

"Is — isn't there some way I can 
repay you?" 

Mr. Michelson's blue eyes seemed to twinkle. "As a matter of fact, 
there is," he said. "If the first one's 
a boy — " 

He walked the rest of the way 
down the drive and climbed into 
his blue Ford. Melanie stared after 
him, her face aflame. Just before he 
drove away he rolled down the 
window and leaned out. 

"You can call him 'Mike' for 
short," he said. 



parlor 
game 

by . . .Ron Gonlart 



Luanne made it almost a 
challenge. She really was 
pretty. And there were so 
few women on Prospero II. 



"Off to the jungle," Hawley 
scrawled across the memo pad, and 
gathering up his briefcase, he jumped 
out the rear window of the Earth Embassy. Orange dust splashed high as 
he ran down the narrow alley toward 
the outskirts of town. From behind 
he heard the mahogany door of his 
office, flown all the way from Earth, 
splinter. 

By the time the round pink natives of Prospero II came out the 
window after him Hawley was into 
the shoulder-high grass beyond the 
Embassy warehouse. Running with 
his head down slowed him and made 
breathing tougher. 

Across the warm afternoon came 
the cries of the angry natives. Hawley even thought he heard the raspy 
voice of their Prime Minister yelling, "Death and destruction!" Maybe not. When he'd spotted them 
coming across the courtyard toward 
the embassy none of them seemed 
to have neckties. 

"Good thing Collins is in the 
North Country," Hawley muttered. 
One deep breath and he dived into 
the shadows at the jungle's edge, 
bending even lower, with his briefcase up against his chest, schoolgirl 
fashion. 



Ron Goulart, now free-lancing, writes that he sold his first SF story in 
1952 and his second in 1957. Inbetween, he edited the humor magazine 
at the University of California and spent two and one-half years as a copywriter in a San Francisco agency — writing mostly about peanut butter. . . . 



44 



PARLOR 

The revolutionists didn't seem to 
be shouting as much anymore. Or as 
near. Still Hawley kept running. 

Twenty-four hours of ripe fruit 
and pond water slowed Hawley to a 
trot. For nearly twenty-three hours 
he'd heard no sound of pursuit. Quite 
deep in the jungle of Prospero II 
now, he wasn't completely sure 
where he was. By a bush covered 
with large yellow flowers he sat 
down, dropping his briefcase near 
his scuffed left shoe. 

This afternoon was cool and Hawley buttoned his coat again. Leaning 
back against a fallen dead tree he 
slowly drew his tie out of his collar 
and tossed it away into the brush. 

Gradually, with eyes half-closed, 
Hawley realized that the tie might be 
a clue to anyone who decided to trail 
him. He got up and went into the 
brush after it, squinting for a sign 
of red stripe. 

Only a few steps from the dead 
tree he dropped suddenly into the 
ground. He landed with his right 
ankle under him, and even in his 
surprise he knew he had a sprain. 

The grass was about five feet 
above him now, very yellow in the 
flashes of sunlight through the 
leaves. Hawley swore and decided to 
take off his shoe before too much 
swelling started in his ankle. 

He stood in the hole, one shoe 
dangling in his hand, for over an 
hour trying to determine the best 
way to get up and out with his 
sprained ankle. 

Hawley always carried a pack of 



game 45 

Earth cigarettes in his briefcase. He 
got it out and began smoking while 
he thought. 

Just as soft twilight showed above 
the hole, water splashed down on 
Hawley. "Damn it, anyway," he 
said, throwing away his soggy 
cigarette butt. 

Taking it easy on his bad foot he 
went up on tiptoe and watched the 
opening above. Maybe this was a 
native trap and they were planning 
to drown him, slowly, by stages. 

"You're not a ground sloth," said 
a girl's voice. 

Hawley frowned up. 

"And you're not on fire." A girl 
was on her knees at the hole edge, 
her long chestnut hair hanging almost into it. "You're not one of 
those natives from faraway, either." 

"I'm from the Earth Embassy and 
I think I've broken my leg." 

The girl bit her forefinger. "Oh, 
I'm sorry." She disappeared. 

"Hey, what the hell," shouted 
Hawley. 

"You should watch your language," the girl said, dropping a 
vine rope down to him. "Now you 
grab hold and I'll pull you up." 

Hawley took the rope carefully 
and then the girl, gritting her teeth, 
yanked him up onto the ground. 

Helping Hawley to sit on the dead 
tree she said, "Actually, that's a trap 
I made for a ground sloth. I try to 
fix sloth every couple of weeks. It's 
good for your eyesight." 

Hawley looked at the girl in the 
failing daylight. She was slender, 



46 FANTASTIC 

very tan, and tall. Almost as tall as 
Hawley, and he was over five feet 
eight. She was wearing some kind of 
short dress made of blue caribou 
skin and held in at the waist with a 
leather cord. Nice legs. Hawley picked up his briefcase, took his shoe 
out of his pocket and put it inside. 
"I'm Ralph Hawley. 'With the Earth 
Embassy." 

The girl smiled shyly. "My name 
is Luanne Horner." She coiled the 
vine rope and put it over her shoulder. "Well, I can't leave you out all 
night. You'll get all covered with 
dew." She rubbed her chin. "Your 

leg isn't broken, I'd say, probably 

just a sprain." 

"It hurts," Hawley said. "My foot 

at least." 

Luanne nodded. "I'll let you stay 

in my hut." Stepping toward him 

she added, "You're not afraid of 

high places?" 

"No. Just yesterday I jumped out 

of a second-floor window." 

"Oh, yes, buildings." Luanne took 

Hawley's arm and helped him up. 

"Easy now. We only have about two 

miles to go. Then I'll have you up 

into the hut." 

"You live in a tree or what?" 
"A tree." She guided him to a 

path through the brush. "Come on, 

through here. Everything'll be okay." 

Putting his briefcase in his outside 
hand, Hawley rested his other hand 
on Luanne's smooth shoulder. 
"Thanks," he said, squeezing her 
shoulder. 

The girl stopped angrily and 



UNIVERSE 

shrugged his hand off. "Don't do 
that again," she said. 
He didn't. 

Hawley looked from his bandaged 
ankle to Luanne across the room. 
The girl was sitting cross-legged on 
a grass mat, her eyes not quite meeting his. "Fire and Brimstone," she 
said. 

"Uh huh," Hawley said. "What 
else?" 

"He wrote a book about married 
life called The Straight and Narrow Way." 

Hawley shook his head. "Funny, 
I never heard of him. Sydney Smith 
Horner. No, can't place it." He 
touched at his bandage. "I'm supposed to know most Earth writers, 
you know. It's good for Public Relations. This is my first post." 

"I'm sorry the natives got angry 
with you, Mr. Hawley," Luanne 
said. 

"This is the second revolution in 
the year and a half I've been here. 
The first one they were for us and 
they chased after the Mars Embassy 
gang." He clenched his list. "You 
hate to have so many revolutions on 
your first assignment with the Foreign Service." 

"You can't help it. Natives here 
are vicious and nasty. I know." She 
looked down. 

"I'm sorry. I don't want to get 
you to thinking about your folks 
again. Sorry I asked at all." 

"Don't be." She stood, pulling her 
hair back and tying it with .1 strip of 
red leather. "That's why I've stayed 



PARLOR 

here in the jungle by myself all these 
years. The natives and all." 
"You like it?" 

"Certainly." She smiled directly at 
him. 

A night bird flew by the halfopened window. 

"Leg feels fine now," Hawley 
said. 

"I'm glad," Luanne answered, 
still smiling a little. "This is my 
parlor. You will sleep here, of 
course. I'll get you a quilt." 

Hawley watched her walk lightly 
into another room. 

When she came back with a blanket of vari-colored scraps of caribou 
skin Hawley said, "You're very 
pretty, Luanne." 

The quilt dropped heavily on his 
sprained ankle as Luanne stepped 
back, pale. She swallowed. "You 
should never talk about things like 
that, Mr. Hawley. Physical details." 

Hawley picked the blanket gingerly off his foot. "Sorry. Anyway, I do 
appreciate the aid you've given me," 
he said, falling back on his diplomatic stock. "I really am very grateful. If I've offended you, such was 
not my intent." 

Luanne murmured, "Very well." 
She crossed to a cane table. Took a 
long leather cord from a pile and a 
few short sticks from a hand-made 
box. "I hope you won't be offended 
if I take certain precautions, Mr. 
Hawley." 

Hawley watched for several minutes before he realized what Luanne 
was doing. In under a half-hour she 
made a sort of primitive lock, simi


GAME 47 

lar to the one on the front door of 
the tree hut. After attaching the lock 
to her bedroom door with the help 
of some home-made tools Luanne 
said, "You know where the primrose 
path leads, Mr. Hawley. Good 
night, sleep well." 

"Oh, yes, or$y too well, where it 
leads," Hawley said, careful to look 
grave until she was out of the parlor 
and locked away for the night. 

Grinning thoughtfully, Hawley 
pulled the quilt up nearly to his chin. 

It had only occurred to him vaguely before. But Luanne made it almost 
a challenge. She really was very 
pretty. Tan all over, nice legs. Hawley decided to try. There were very 
few Earth women on Prospero II. 

A night bird began singing as 
Hawley fell asleep, 

Hearing Luanne land lightly on 
the platform outside, Hawley sat up, 
awake. He blinked and brushed at 
his crewcut to smooth it out. 

The lock rattled and Luanne came 
in with a basket of assorted fruit. 
"Sleeping late is a sign of laxity, 
Mr. Hawley." 

"After a twenty-four-hour run I 
often take long naps," Hawley said, 
finding he had stubble all over his 
face. 

"You can use my father's razors, 
Mr. Hawley," said Luanne, watching 
his fingers. "They were given to him 
by the students of his first missionary 
school on Venus at the successful 
completion of their course of study." 

"I was thrown out of college once 
for attacking my forestry professor, 



48 FANTASTIC 

who happened to be a ravishing 
woman," Hawley said, trying to get 
up. 

"I'll help you rise, but no tricks, 
Mr. Hawley." 

Hawley was careful not to touch 
Luanne as he got to his feet. 

When he came back from washing 
up she said to him, "I know it's my 
fault about your foot, Mr. Hawley, 
but I wish you'd check your language." She washed the last of the 
fruit in a basin of water. 

"It's being with you, Luanne," 
Hawley said, running back through 
his memory of courses at Diplomacy 
School. "It makes me speak strangely. Why, just this morning I was 
saying to myself, 'Hawley,' I said, 
'Gather ye rosebuds while ye may, 
old time is still a-flying.' Then I said, 
'And this same flower that smiles today, tomorrow will be dying.' " 

Wiping an orange-colored fruit on 
a white cloth, Luanne said, "That's 
odd all right." 

"Fair daffodils, we weep to see 
you waste away so soon," Hawley 
said, watching the sunlight on the 
broad green leaves beyond the shuttered window. "About how old are 
you, Luanne?" 

"Just twenty-one," she said, cutting a round green fruit in half. 

"That old? And you've been here 
alone in the jungle since you were 
twelve. All these long years. Time is 
fleeting." 

"Twenty-one isn't old. Let's have 
some lunch. You slept through 
breakfast." 

Hawley went to the cane table. 



UNIVERSE 

"Myself, I'm twenty-eight and filled 
with regrets." He sat and turned to 
lace the plate Luanne was bringing. 
"Anyway, Luanne, I think we should 
be friends. Okay?" 

"Oh, certainly." She sat opposite 
him. "Try those little plums there." 

"Let's shake on it," Hawley said, 
extending his hand across the table. 

Luanne hesitated, then held out 
her hand. 

Hawley bowed and turned the 
girl's hand up to kiss it. "Mighty 
lak a rose," he said. 

Luanne's chair tumbled against 
the window shutters as she jumped 
away. She carried Hawley with her 
part way by the hand before she was 
all free. 

"I warned you about lust," 
Luanne cried. 

Hawley winced and rearranged 
the scattered fruit. "It's hot blood, I 
guess. Please forgive me." 

Luanne's nostrils flared. "Certain 
coarse acts are unforgivable." She 
opened the front door of the parlor 
and jumped for a vine without bothering to lock up. 

"Milton, thou shouldst be living 
at this hour," Hawley said, watching 
Luanne swing away through the 
trees. He wished he could stop thinking of this thing as a challenge, because he realized he might possibly 
not bring it off. 

"Pacing is bad for a bad foot," 
Luanne said, swinging in at the open 
window. 

"You've been gone almost a day," 
Hawley said, stopping. "You mad?" 



PARLOR 

"I was busy. How's your foot?" 
She sat on the window ledge, her 
long tan legs pointing straight out 
into the parlor. 

"Better." He moved in her direction. "Are you mad?" 

"No, Mr. Hawley. Disappointed. 
When I was a girl the men at the 
Earth Embassies were gentlemen." 
She dropped into the room, glancing 
at the empty fruit bowl. "I thought 
you'd have enough to eat." Luanne 
slowly slid out a chair and sat down 
in it. 

"Oh, yes." Hawley sat in the 
other chair, deciding to pick things 
up again. "Look, Luanne, I know we 
just met. But, really, ever since 1 
fell into your ground sloth pit, or at 
least from the time I looked up and 
saw you looking down, well, I've 
liked you." 

Luanne walked over to the door 
of her room. 

"I've been sitting' here thinking 
we should be friends," Hawley said. 

Luanne undid the band around her 
hair and let it fall. "Fine." 

"Good. I thought maybe tonight 
we could walk in the jungle, watch 
the moon." 

"Oh, no, Mr. Hawley." Her hair 
brushed the far edges of her shoulders when she shook her head. 

"Stop calling me, Mr. Hawley, 
damn it." 

Luanne's head shook more slowly. 
"Very well. I'll call you Ralph. And 
that will be the extent of our friendship." She went into her room and 
closed the door, but she didn't lock 
it. 



GAME 49 

The day he found he could walkpretty well Hawley remembered his 
necktie. If the natives were belligerent enough to follow him into the 
jungle the tie might help them out. 
He was walking in a small circle just 
below the dangling end of the vine 
ladder that led up into Luanne's tree 
hut when he diought of the tie. 
Luanne had swung off into the jungle again because of something he 
said at breakfast about a rose that 
once has bloomed. He'd gotten up in 
time for breakfast for two days running. He was thinking that he'd 
probably misquoted the line anyway 
and was still pretty far from breaking down Luanne and then the tie 
popped up. 

Deciding not to wait until Luanne 
came back, which might be another 
day if there was a pattern to her 
anger, Hawley went up the ladder 
and left her a note on a piece of 
Embassy bond from his briefcase. 

The beginning of the path that led 
back to the ground sloth trap wasn't 
hard to find. But later on in the 
jungle Hawley lost the trail. He was 
fairly certain of the direction, 
though, so he kept pushing ahead 
through the brush. 

Hawley was stopped behind a 
great orange fern taking a deep 
breath when he heard the angry 
voices. He stooped, trying not to 
make any of the dry things around 
him snap, and peeked cautiously 
through the fern. He saw, sure 
enough, a half-dozen round pink 
revolutionists standing in the clearing a few yards from his fern. The 



50 FANTASTIC 

one Hawley was pretty sure used to 
make speeches standing on an empty 
lard drum in the City Courtyard was 
holding up Hawley's maroon and 
gray tie. 

Another of the natives, a fellow 
with a rusty sword, laughed, which 
Hawley resented. 

The ringleader raised his voice 
and said, "Death to tyrants !" 

Hawley assumed they were still 
discussing him. Hoping he remembered enough details of a lecture on 
Jungle Warfare he'd heard two years 
before at the Mars Y Hawley dropped to his hands and knees and began crawling away, back toward 
Luanne's hut. 

He maintained utter silence, even 
while creeping across a thistle bed. 
Toward sundown he toppled quietly 
out of the jungle and crawled to the 
tree that held the hut. Hawley reali2ed lie had to stand to grab the 
ladder. Looking thoroughly over his 
shoulder he stretched up, grabbed the 
bottom rung, and shot up to the platform. 

Giving a little over a second to 
catch his breath he yanked the ladder 
up into a haphazard coil and tried to 
hide it under the grass welcome mat. 

Inside the hut, which he'd crawled 
into, there was no sign of Luanne. 

In the final moments of light, 
Hawley decided on one more try and 
he slipped our the back way to wash 
up. 

Luanne dropped the small green 
guanaco on a mat and frowned at 
Hawley. "Haven't had guanaco for 
a week. I thought maybe a pot roast 



UNIVERSE 

It'll take a couple hours, in case 
you're really hungry. Why are your 
clothes all shredded, Ralph?" 

Hawley hitched his chair forward 
so that his face was in the lamplight. 
Looking at Luanne intently, he said, 
"The grave's a fine and private 
place, but none, I think, do there 
embrace." His voice caught as he 
finished. 

"That's morbid," Luanne said and 
unsheathed her hunting knife, which 
said Property of Inter-Galactic Missionary Society on its dark handle. 
"What about your clothes?" 

With one hand gripping his chair 
Hawley stood up. "At my back I 
always hear time's winged chariot 
hurrying near." 

"You're just not used to the jungle at night. It's full of odd noises at 
first." She squatted and began to 
skin the guanaco. "No, really, don't 
you want to tell me?" 

"Well, I don't know how, Luanne." He stepped toward her. "You 
see, this may be our last night. I hate 
to mention it, but I've been followed 
into the jungle." 

"By natives," Luanne said, not 
looking up. 

"Today I went for a stroll in the 
jungle. Very pleasant. Flowers in 
bloom, unaware that soon they'd 
fade." 

Luanne turned and pointed her 
knife at him. "You did what? Why 
were you stumbling around out there 
by yourself?" 

"I wasn't stumbling, I was crawling. See, I'd lost my tie out there 
when I fell in your sloth pit. I didn't 



PARLOR 

want anybody to find it so I went 
back for it." 
"You idiot!" 

"And they are after me. I saw 
them. A horde of them, Luanne. 
They may be here at any moment." 
This was v/here he'd intended to 
take her in his arms. He hadn't figured on the knife. "In these last few 
minutes before we are destroyed I'd 
like to take you in my arms, Luanne. 
We'll face death together, two in 
love, unafraid." He was worried now 
himself, thinking back on the rusty 
sword. 

"Keep your distance, Ralph," 
Luanne said. She wiped the knife 
and then put it between her teeth. 
"Get me the roast pot while I wash 
some vegetables." She motioned him 
to the kitchen. 

"Luanne, darling, we face death. 
Couldn't you sort of let up a little. 
We could hold hands or something." 

The knife blade caught first the 
lamplight, then the moonlight from 
the window. "Get that pot, Ralph. 
Now, come on." 

Hawley went into the kitchen. 
"Doesn't imminent annihilation 
bother you? Make you a little tender?" he asked over his shoulder. 

Luanne was a few steps behind 
him. "It's a wonder you didn't fall 
into the traps, clumsy as you are." 
She took several blue carrots from a 
wooden bin. 

"What traps?" Hawlc j y found the 
roast pot. 

"You simpleton. I had this all 
planned. I thought they might follow you. Your native pursuers are 



game 5 1 

all in the bottom of a twelve-foot 
pit. That's what I've been doing this 
past week. Mining this area, so to 
speak." 

"Are thej' dead?" 

"No. But I think your tie is ruined." She smiled and sliced a carrot 
into circles. "A day or two in the pit 
and they'll cool oil. Then I'll send 
them back home. This happens now 
and then." 

Hawley looked down into the 
empty pot. "I guess you wouldn't 
care to embrace in celebration of our 
close escape?" 

"We won't talk silly anymore," 
Luanne said, her smile gone. 

Hawley was wiggling his toes in 
the sunshine by the parlor window 
and looking down through the various greens and oranges of the plant 
life outside. He decided he looked 
pretty good in the yellow caribou 
skin Luanne had fixed him up with. 
He popped suddenly half out the 
window. "My word!" he shouted. 
"Hey, Collins!" 

Collins pushed back his Embassycrested pith helmet and stared up. 
"Ralph, boy! Are you a captive?" 
He made his loyal native bearers 
halt. "We put down the revolt when 
I got back from the North, boy." 

Hawley was coming down the ladder agilely. "Good work, Robert." 

Puffing, Collins said, "I saw your 
memo and decided to track you." 

"You're tattered," Hawley said, 
noticing Collins' white shorts. 

"You know me. I kept falling in 
holes all the way out here." He 



52 FANTASTIC 

puffed again. "If you hadn't called I 
probably wouldn't have seen you at 
all. I'm awkward as hell in the wilderness." 

"The pits are because of Luanne," 
Hawley said. 

Collins squinted up at the tree hut 
and then at Hawley's yellow costume. "Who's Luanne?" 

When Hawley had briefed Gillins 
on the situation of the past two 
weeks he sent him a mile or so into 
the jungle to wait. Hawley was determined to make one last try with 
Luanne. 

"Don't you like your caribou outfit?" Luanne asked, sailing in 
through the window that afternoon. 

Hawley tightened the belt on his 
ragged Diplomatic uniform, wishing 
he had his lost tie. "Luanne, my dear, 
I'm afraid this must be good-bye." 

Luanne inhaled quickly. "You're 
angry?" 

Hawley wiped his eyes and gave a 
tight smile. "Oh, to be torn twixt 
love and duty." He held out his 
arms, open wide. "My people have 
come for me, Luanne. The revolt's 
over and I must return to my true 
calling. This is good-bye." 

Luanne touched her hair absently. 
"That's good I suppose. You never 
did get oriented to the jungle." 



UNIVERSE 

"Well, couldn't we kiss each odier 
good-bye?" Hawley was still holding 
his arms out. 

"Don't spoil things, Ralph. You 
know I'm fond of you. I want to remember you always as a friend. Despite your vulgarity, you're not a bad 
fellow." 

Gambling, Hawley said, "We'll 
probably never meet again." 

Luanne smiled vaguely. "Oh, if 
you're ever in the jungle you're welcome to drop in." 

Hawley moved up a pace. "Luanne, why don't you come back to 
the city with me?" 

"Ralph, don't ruin our last meeting with crude suggestions like that. 
I have no intention of living in sin 
with you or anyone else." 

Before he thought about it, Hawley said, "Sin, hell ! Why don't you 
marry me then ?" 

Luanne sniffed, her eyes sparkling. 
"That's very nice, Ralph. Are you 
serious?" 

"Well, sure." Hawley stopped 
talking. "Oh, yes, Luanne, sure." 

Inching ahead, he said, softly, 
"Now, can we relax restrictions a 
little?" 

Luanne laughed happily. "Of 
course, Ralph," she said. And with 
great abandon she stepped forward 
and kissed him on the cheek. 



citizen 
meekle 

by . . . Sam Rosenfeld 



What happens when a little 
man who isn't aggressive — 
but who does dream — finally 
makes a startling discovery? 



Jonah C. Meekle sat at his desk 
and stared blankly at the seven or 
eight men and women that worked 
with him. It was just before the fifteen-minute morning break, and 
Mr. Meekle was bemoaning his lot 
in life. 

He wasn't an aggressive man. As 
a matter of fact, he was the kind 
of man who always got the table 
in the far corner and then apologized to the waiter for his trouble. 
But there existed in this insignificant being the longing for achievement and grandeur that is a basic 
desire in all mankind. 

He was becoming angry at his 
minor existence, and was ready to 
get up and release his anger on the 
water fountain by his usual method 
of giving it an extra hard twist. At 
that moment, one of the men approached his desk and said, "It's 
my turn today — what'll it be?" 

Quickly snapping out of his day 
dreams, Mr. Meekle asked in his 
maddeningly indecisive manner, 
"What are the others having, Mr. 
Adams ?" 

"It's kinda hot — we're getting 
sodas." 

"All right then, please make 
mine cherry soda," said Mr. Mee


Sttrn Rosenfeld, who now teaches in a Long Island high school, was working 
as an explosives chemist in Indiana when the War broke out, and then at 
the Air Force Research Center at Wright Field, as a civilian. He returned 
there later as an Air Force Lieutenant, in charge of fuels and oils research. 



53 



54 FANTASTIC 

kle, carefully placing a dime on the 
desk. 

Mr. Adams took the coin, picked 
up some empty bottles, and went 
whistling down the stairs. 

Mr. Meekle drifted back to his 
day dreams. In these thoughts, he 
even talked back to his boss, Mr. 
Farnum, and to his big, over-bearing wife, who pulled him around 
like a dog on a leash. 

Just then, Mrs. Fenley, two 
desks in front of him, dropped her 
keys to the floor, bent over, and 
picked them up. 

Seeing this, Mr. Meekle, who 
was also in his dreams a great inventor, actually the greatest inventor 
that ever lived, called to her, "Why 
waste effort in bending down and 
picking up the keys? Why not just 
lower a magnet on a string? That'll 
do the job." 

Mrs. Fenley just laughed and 
continued her work. 

Mr. Meekle's hobby was science. 
He read science books and articles 
every chance he could. He had even 
put together a small laboratory in 
his basement. And, just as Sir Isaac 
Newton wondered about the apple 
that fell on his head, Jonah C. 
Meekle now started to wonder about 
the magnet picking up those keys. 

"The south pole of one magnet 
will attract the north pole of another magnet." He had performed this 
experiment many times, and he inwardly reveled at his scientific 
knowledge. 

"But the north pole of one magnet will repel the north pole of an


UNIVERSE 

other magnet and, likewise, the 
south poles will repel each other." 
This, too, was an established fact 
and, again, he was gloriously happy 
with his knowledge. 

"And," he thought while waiting 
for his soda, "in the field of electricity, unlike charges attract each 
other, whereas like charges repel 
each other." 

This now insignificant, but soon 
great, man was now arriving at the 
conclusion that was to change the 
entire course of his, and many other 
lives : 

"Sir Isaac Newton stated that 
whatever falls is attracted to the 
earth through a force called gravity. 
Therefore, since nature is orderly in 
its laws, objects that fall due to 
gravitational attraction must have a 
charge opposite to that of the 
earth." 

Now came the big question. 

"Why is there only gravitational 
attraction? Where is the repulsion 
of like gravitational charges-?" 

Mr. Meekle became excited. If he 
could only find the like pole of the 
earth, then, instead of being attracted, an object would be repelled. 
Just then, Mr. Adams arrived with 
the sodas, interrupting his thoughts. 

He placed the box of sodas on 
the unoccupied desk in front of Mr. 
Meekle, removed the bottle caps, 
and lined the sodas up on the desk. 

"Funny," said Mr. Meekle, "out 
of eight of us here, three ordered 
cokes, two ginger ales, two oranges, 
and one cherry soda." 

And then he froze in his seat! 



CITIZEN MEEKLE 



55 



He stared, with open mouth, at 
the bottles lined up on the desk. 
He got up and crept closer to the 
desk — still staring at the sodas. 

Breathing hard and fast, he mumbled, "That's it! I'm sure that's 
it!" 

Mrs. Fenley, alarmed at Mr. 
Meekle's excited appearance, shouted, "What's it? What's wrong? Are 
you feeling all right?" 

Trembling, Mr. Meekle sat down 
in his seat and weakly sputtered, 
"It's all right; everything's fine — 
fine — everything's fine — " 

What sharp Mr. Meekle had noticed, was that the bubbles in the 
cherry soda were rising faster than 
the bubbles in any of the other 
sodas ! 

Finally he regained some of his 
composure, and everybody continued their tasks, forgetting the 
disturbance, as is usual in offices 
where people let routine take over. 

However, Mr. Meekle fidgeted in 
his seat until five o'clock. At last it 
came. 

He hurried down the steps, into 
the street, and into the packed subway, never noticing the crowds — so 
anxious was he to get home. 

Arriving at his stop, he got off 
the train, raced up the steps, and 
over to a refreshment store. 

"Ten bottles of cherry soda, 
please, one bottle of ginger ale, one 
orange soda, one lime, one coke, 
and one grape — and hurry," blurted 
Mr. Meekle, startled at his own 
brashness. This was the first time 



he had ever asserted himself even 
in a minor way. 

The storekeeper placed the fifteen bottles inside a paper bag. 
"O.K., sir, here they are." 

Mr. Meekle paid cheerfully and 
took his bulky package. He half -ran 
the three blocks to his home. 

After grappling for his key, he 
hurriedly opened the door and, 
clutching his precious package before him, ran down the center hall 
toward the basement at the other 
end. 

At this moment, Mrs. Meekle, 
the great big Mrs. Meekle, stepped 
from the kitchen into the center 
hall. 

The laws of physics state that 
two objects cannot take up the same 
space at the same time. Unfortunately, this law was about to operate 
now. 

Mr. Meekle met Mrs. Meekle — 
suddenly — and with great momentum obtained by a running start of 
about fifteen feet. 

One hundred and thirty-eight 
pounds of Mr. Meekle (plus package) thus knocked one hundred and 
sixty-three pounds of Mrs. Meekle 
flat on her rug. 

"Excuse me, excuse me," he babbled, "I've got to get to that basement." 

For the first time, the considerate 
Mr. Meekle didn't bother to cringe, 
bluster, or do something to alleviate 
his wife's predicament. She struggled to her feet in a mad rage, fists 
shaking, and ran toward the base


56 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



ment screaming, "I'll show you, you 
weasel! I'll show you!" 

Just as she reached the top of 
the basement steps, Mr. Meekle 
slammed the door shut and locked 
it. Mrs. Meekle pounded her fists 
in vain upon the door, screaming 
wildly, "I'll show you — you — 
you — " Then, realizing the damage 
she was causing her hand, and also 
realizing something was amiss, 
since her husband had never acted 
this way before, she subsided and, 
muttering, went back to her chores 
to await a later revenge. 

Meanwhile, Mr. Meekle, completely oblivious to what he had 
done, put on the basement light, 
unwrapped his precious bundle, and 
gazed in anticipatory glee at his fifteen bottles of soda. He found a 
rusty bottle opener and quickly 
opened the bottles. 

He observed intently. 

"There it is again!" he shouted 
in a sort of hysterical glee, "The 
bubbles in the cherry soda rise faster than the bubbles in any of the 
other sodas!" 

The great mind now concluded, 
"The bubbles are rising faster in 
the cherry soda than in the other 
sodas because they're being repelled 
by the earth's force of gravity. 
There's something in the cherry 
soda bubbles that has the same 
gravitational charge as the earth, 
causing them to be repelled. I, Mr. 
Meekle, am going to isolate it and 
concentrate it," he said grandly and 
dramatically. 

Mr. Meekle now really set to 



work. Collecting gases, boiling, concentrating, extracting — he went 
through everything in the book. He 
tried method after method, becoming more and more excited. He 
changed methods, invented methods, combined methods, and kept on 
working feverishly. 

At intervals, Mrs. Meekle pounded on the door and shouted, "Supper is ready. Come out, you weasel ! 
Come out!" But Mr. Meekle didn't 
even hear, for when a great man 
concentrates, all else is forgotten 
except the task before him. 

Mr. Meekle worked and remained in that basement for two whole 
days and nights — never sleeping, 
never eating. At 10 A.M. of the 
third day, he let out a wild scream 
of triumph. He had it! He had isolated the ingredient in the cherry 
soda bubbles that had the same 
charge as the earth's gravity! 

By sheer ingenuity, Mr. Meekle 
had concentrated it and, using 
beeswax, had put it in ointment 
form inside of a wide-mouthed 
bottle. 

And did it repel! 

When he had first made the ointment, it almost flew out of his hand 
due to the strong repulsion from the 
earth. Now, with a full, tightlycapped bottle of the wonderful stuff 
in his hand he had a difficult time 
holding it down. In fact, the strain 
was starting to tell on him. He 
thought quickly. All magnets have 
two opposite poles, one on each 
end. Perhaps, this too — well, it was 
worth a try. 



CITIZEN MliEKLE 



57 



Slowly he turned the bottle upside-down, and sure enough, the 
opposite pole of the bubble ingredient was attracted to the earth in 
the normal action of gravity. On 
the other hand, by turning it right 
side up, there was once more a 
strong repulsion, and the bottle 
started to float upwards; but, Mr. 
Meekle, now on the alert, caught it 
in time and quickly turned it upside-down where, once again, it 
behaved with normal gravitational 
attraction. 

Ideas were coming quickly to 
Mr. Meekle: "If an entire steel bar 
can be magnetized from one point, 
if a copper wire can be electrified 
from one point, what will happen 
if I rub some bubble ingredient on 
myself?" 

Mr. Meekle nibbed some of the 
ointment on his face. 

Nothing happened. 

A terrible sweat broke out over 
poor Mr. Meekle's face. His shoulders started to droop again — but 
only for an instant. 

"Of course, of course," he cried 
to no one in particular, "I rubbed 
the ointment in a downward direction, thus lining up the poles opposite to the earth, causing normal 
gravitational attraction. I simply 
must rub the ointment upwards," 
he said almost desperately, feeling 
it was his last chance for success. 

Carefully holding the bottle upside-down, he took some of the 
ointment from the jar and rubbed 
it on his cheekbones — upwards. No 
sooner had he rubbed some on, 



than — wham!— he rose so swiftly, 
his head hit the ceiling with a thud 
that almost knocked him senseless. 
A small amount of the bubble ingredient had charged his whole 
body with exactly the same gravitational polarity as the earth. 

He carefully took a tiny bit more 
bubble ingredient and rubbed it 
downwards, hoping to neutralize 
some of the repulsion. It worked, 
he was floating in air! 

Mr. Meekle then experimented 
with ordinary objects. He rubbed a 
bit of the bubble ingredient on a 
chair. Up it went! Trying various 
other objects, the results were the 
same. 

Mr. Meekle sang out loud as he 
floated, for a happier man was nowhere to be found. At last the insignificant Mr. Meekle with pentup dreams of accomplishment had 
done something to be proud of. 
Now people would notice him. 
Now he'd show them who he was. 
It seemed that the moment success 
came to him, all the tortures of his 
insecurity and fear of people and 
life seemed to vanish. 

Nevertheless, he was still having 
his troubles. It's nice to float in air, 
but how do you float forwards? In 
fact, right now he'd settle for backwards. 

But nothing can stop success. Mr. 
Meekle rubbed a bit more of the 
ointment on his face. Floating to 
the ceiling, he pulled himself over 
to a shelf where he had once stored 
a pair of web-shaped rubber flippers — the kind used by skin divers 



5& 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



to propel themselves under water. 
He tried to take his shoes off, but 
it was tough balancing himself. It 
was like learning to tread water or 
to swim. 

After some minutes of practice, 
Mr. Meekle caught the knack of 
maneuvering himself, and kicked 
off his shoes, replacing them with 
the web-shaped flippers. He practiced floating back and forth, right 
and left, using the rubber flippers 
as a duck uses its webbed feet to 
move in water. 

After two hours, he was quite 
adept at moving about in his new 
medium. It was now three o'clock 
in the afternoon and Mr. Meekle. 
the excitement of success abating, 
began to feel the pangs of hunger. 
He placed the jar of bubble Ingredient into his jacket pocket and, 
with a joyous flip, sailed up the 
basement stairs as slick as a bird. 
He unlocked the door and floated 
into the center hall nipping his 
flippers. 

At this moment, Mrs. Meekle 
stepped into the center hall, took 
one look at Mr. Meekle floating in 
the air above her, and promptly 
passed out cold. 

She lay there in a heap. And what 
a heap, thought the new Mr. 
Meekle as he floated into the 
kitchen for some water. Filling a 
large pitcher with cold water, he 
floated over to Mrs. Meekle and 
poured it on her face to revive her. 

Revive her it did, but only for 
two and one-half seconds, for, no 



sooner did she see him floating in 
air than she passed out again. 

After reviving her for the fifth 
time, it seemed to take, although 
she was still dazed and spoke incoherently about "angels in the 
house." Mr. Meekle led her to a 
chair in the kitchen. 

He was still floating. 

Mrs. Meekle sat motionless, staring, while her husband heated up 
some of the strongly spiced meat 
loaf his wife always made, and 
which he never ate for fear of heartburn. He gulped it down with nary 
a burp. Success had even placated 
his stomach. 

It was 3:45 P.M. now, and Mr. 
Meekle decided it was time for action. 

Leaving his wife still motionless 
and staring in her chair, Mr. Meekle floated out of the house and into 
the street. He had found that by 
using his flippers properly he could 
go high or low and in any direction, just like he did in the ocean. 

Living in a residential section of 
town, nobody saw him at first. Most 
of it happened as he approached 
the business district. A few people 
hurrying somewhere happened to 
glance up as a shadow hit their 
eyes. 

The newspapers later estimated 
that in that first half -hour along 
the business district, 243 women 
and 172 men passed out cold, and 
347 women and men (they didn't 
know exactly how many of each) 
were injured rushing down subway 
steps and into hallways and stores 



CITIZEN 

to escape. It was announced that the 
traffic tie-up was the worst in the 
history of recorded mankind. 

Mr. Meekle enjoyed his newlyfound power but, not really being 
heartless, and not wishing to do 
any harm to people, he quickly 
scooted out of the district and down 
a deserted street, floating just below the roof lines. 

Mr. Meekle was not heartless — 
but he was human. Being human, 
he thought about his job and his 
boss, Mr. Farnum. 

How he boiled! For twenty-two 
years Mr. Meekle had been a clerk. 
Not once had Mr. Meekle dared ask 
for a raise. Not once had he ever 
dared disagree with the boss. Even 
the other employees didn't dare disagree with Mr. Farnum, but especially Mr. Meekle because of his 
fears of everybody and everything. 
A plan now materialized in his 
mind. 

He removed his jar of bubble 
ingredient and rubbed himself 
down to earth. Replacing the jar 
inside his jacket, he nonchalantly 
walked towards his office, up the 
flight of stairs, and into his place 
of employment, appearing as innocent as — Mr. Meekle. 

He courteously answered his colleagues' questions as to where he 
had been the past few days by saying truthfully, "I sort of felt my 
stomach was up in the air." He 
graciously received their clucks of 
sympathy, and turned the corridor 
toward the boss' office. At the far 
end was a frosted glass door with 



meekle 59 

large gold letters on it spelling out, 
"MR. FARNUM." 

Being around the corner, nobody 
ever knew when Mr. Farnum would 
.ippear. During the lunch hour session down at the corner cafeteria, 
this curse had often been bitterly 
discussed, and Mrs. Fenley fervently believed that this was the cause 
of her ulcers. 

But right at this moment, it was 
a blessing to Mr. Meekle for the 
plan he had in mind. Thus hidden 
from his colleagues, he donned his 
flippers and placed his shoes into a 
large pocket which he had sewn 
inside his jacket. He then applied 
the ointment and again floated in 
air. He adjusted himself to a point 
about six feet in the air, opened his 
employer's door without knocking, 
and floated in. 

Mr. Farnum, hearing the door 
open, half -rose, looked up and, seeing Mr. Meekle, shouted, "How 
dare you enter without — without — " 

He never finished the sentence. 
He merely sat down hard in his 
seat staring at Mr. Meekle. 

Mr. Farnum, however, had nerves 
of steel, and soon collected his wits. 

"Mr. Meekle, you're floating in 
air! That's impossible. It's ridiculous. Get down immediately." 

"I'm not floating in air," said 
Mr. Meekle, calmly. "That would 
be quite impossible." 

"But you are — you are!" said 
Mr. Farnum with an incredulous 
look on his face. "I know you are. 
I see you." 



6o 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"No you don't," insisted Mr. 
Meekle. 

"You can't do this to me," croaked Mr. Farnum. "I'll prove it. I'll 
call in the other employees." 

"That won't prove it. They won't 
dare disagree with anything you 
say," said the great psychologist, 
with hidden elation. This was the 
very moment he had been waiting 
for. "Call them in and satisfy yourself." 

Mr. Farnum mustered his 
strength and rose. He walked shakily past Mr. Meekle, and out die 
door. 

Mr. Meekle quickly neutralized 
the bubble ingredient, donned his 
shoes, and remained standing on 
the floor. 

The door burst open, and in came 
Mr. Farnum with seven bewildered 
employees following. Mr. Farnum 
was shouting, "He's floating. I saw 
it. I saw it" 

And then he stopped with mouth 
agape as he saw Mr. Meekle standing there. The employees were looking from one to the other. One of 
them said, "Yes, Mr. Farnum, he's 
floating — I guess — " 

"Yes! Yes!" they all chorused. 
"He's floating all right, all right." 

Mr. Farnum found his voice. 
"But he's not floating now. He's not 
floating, I said." 

At this, the employees chorused, 
"No! No! Of course not," and, 
alarmed, ran out of the office and 
back to their desks. 

Mrs. Fenley fell on the way, bat 
somebody picked her up. Mr. Far


num ran into his employees' office 
shouting wildly, "Come back! 
Please come back!" 

Everybody, frightened, sat quietly very hard at work. 

Mr. Meekle hastily took advantage of the time to get back in the 
air again. 

Mr. Farnum, coming back, saw 
him, screamed, "He's floating 
again!" and ran back to his employees' office where he collapsed 
beside poor Mrs. Fenley's desk, doing her ulcers very little good. 

Mr. Meekle floated out without 
being noticed, for everybody was 
bending over Mr. Farnum. 

Mr. Meekle decided to float home 
— but he never made it. 

As he reached the business section, a policeman noticed him and 
shouted up, "Hey — we've been 
looking for you. Come on down." 

"What for?" asked Mr. Meekle 
floating down a bit. 

"We've got orders to pick you 
up on sight," said the officer. 

"I didn't do anything. What's 
the charge?" said Mr. Meekle indignantly. 

"The charge—?" The officer 
drooped visibly— then he brightened up. "Let's get going. The 
charge is flying without a license." 

Mr. Meekle decided to be big 
about the whole thing. He turned 
away from the policeman and 
smeared himself down to earth. 
They both walked toward the police station. 

When they entered the station, 
the arresting officer said to the set


CITIZEN MEEKLE 



6 1 



geant, "Here he is— The Floater." 

The sergeant eyed Mr. Meekle. 
Without a word he lifted the 
phone. Mr. Meekle could hear him 
making numerous calls. After several of these calls, the sergeant 
turned to him and said simp!)-, 
"Wait." 

Mr. Meekle waited. 

After about one-half hour, the 
door of the station burst open and 
in walked a general, two colonels, 
and what appeared to be a division 
of the army. The confusion made 
it seem like a division; actually it 
was a general, two colonels, three 
corporals, and four privates. 

"We heard he's here," said the 
general looking around sternly. "I 
must see him at once!" 

"At once!" echoed the two colonels. The three corporals and four 
privates said nothing. 

"Here I am," said Mr. Meekle 
from one corner, "What is it?" 

"You must come with us at 
once," stated the general. 

"And if I don't?" said Mr. Meekle belligerently. 

"Please," begged the general, 
"please come. You simply must. I 
don't dare return without you. 
They'll investigate me." 

"Please," echoed the two colonels. The three corporals and four 
privates said nothing. 

"Of course I'll go," said Mr. 
Meekle, deeply touched. His heart 
went out to the poor general. 

Out they marched, and into an 
official car— Mr. Meekle, the general, and the two colonels. The 



three corporals and four privates 
followed in another car. 

Once inside the car, the general 
told Mr. Meekle that the military 
chiefs-of-staff had called an emergency meeting, and had flown down 
from Washington, D. C. They were 
waiting for him in a hotel room 
"somewhere downtown." He would 
say nothing more — it was "a top 
secret matter." 

The story broke in the newspapers the next day. The papers told 
how Mr. Meekle, a great and loyal 
citizen, had given his great discovery to his country. This discovery, 
it was predicted, would revolutionize construction of large aircraft, 
ships, and heavy weapons. It would 
even revolutionize military offense 
tactics and air travel. 

The story was also told how Mr. 
Meekle, the great citizen, offered it 
to his country for nothing; but the 
military chiefs-of-staff wouldn't 
hear of it, since their legal department advised them that this would 
bring up too many problems. It was 
legally easier to buy it outright. 

Mr. Meekle, though now wellto-do, went back to work for Mr. 
Farnum. He knew of no feeling as 
wonderful as working when he 
didn't have to. He leaned back in 
his new swivel chair at his large 
desk — a thoroughly happy man. Mr. 
Adams had gone down for refreshments, and he could hear him on 
his way back up the stairs. 

Mr. Adams entered the orifice and 
placed the box of sodas on an 
empty desk in front of Mr. Meekle. 



62 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Removing the bottle caps, Mr. 
Adams lined up the sodas on the 
desk and put the box on the floor. 

Mr. Meekle smiled contentedly 
and reached for his soda. 

Suddenly he froze and began to 
tremble — his lower jaw dropped. 

He stared and stared. 



Yes! He was sure of it — absolutely sure. 

The bubbles in the lime, orange, 
raspberry, and celery sodas were 
going straight up!! But the cream 
soda—!!! 

The cream soda bubbles seemed 
to be going slightly sideways. 



SPACE AGE ADDS TO MOTHER'S ROLE 

Dr. Weknher von Braun, speaking on "Woman's Role in a Changing World" at the recent Women's Forum on National Security, in 
Washington, said, bluntly, that science had "not discovered a substitute for a mother's inspiration." 

"My first telescope was a gift from my mother, whose encouragement had more to do with the shaping of my life than any other 
single factor," said the man .chiefly responsible for the successful 
launching of our satellite. At a time like this when "we hear, see 
and read of interplanetary voyages, when we look forward to excursions to lunar spas, it might seem a little strange to talk about 
women's role in the home," he continued. "Yet, if ever there was a 
period when the affection, inspiration and guidance of a mother 
could help her child's development, it is the troubled age in which 
we live." 

Parents must resume responsibilities which, in too many instances, has been delegated to the public school — or ignored. With 
the impact of science and technology requiring a fundamental understanding of mathematics and the physical sciences by all our citizens, the school should be relieved of additional burdens not related 
to academic preparation. It was to the home, too, "that we must look 
to instill in young minds a respect for the basic facts of existence — 
respect for truth, for initiative, for knowledge, for the satisfaction 
and reward which can only be obtained from the individual's effort," 
he continued. These were, admittedly, "homely ideals, but they are 
equally as valid today and tomorrow as they were before the first 
satellite appeared in our skies." 



basic 
criteria 
for 



moon 
building 

by . . . Dr. John S. Rinehan 



What problems must we anticipate as we design a building to be occupied by the 
first men to reach the Moon? 



MAN will, within the foreseeable 
future, construct permanent buildings on the moon to serve as living 
quarters for moon explorers, laboratories for astrophysicai and astrochemical research, maintenance shops 
for the vehicles of the space traveler, stations for communication networks and numerous other structures 
required for many of the common 
activities of man. How are these 
buildings to be built? What are the 
basic design criteria? How do they 
differ from those applicable to 
earth-situated buildings? What special facilities must be provided, not 
needed on earth ? What are the environmental differences and hazards ? What determines the material 
we use? What problems must the 
architect and the construction engineer face? How are the materials to 
be transported? 
Physical characteristics 

The moon is a large, essentially 
spherical body which moves in a 
slightly elliptical orbit around the 
earth in accordance with well established physical and astronomical 
laws: Newton's laws of motion; 
Newton's Universal Gravitation 
law; and Kepler's laws. Its mean 



Plans were made public recently for a permanent "moon building," to 
house living quarters, laboratories, etc. The building was designed and 
engineered by the Wonder Building Corporation of America, in Chicago, 
under the technical direction of Professor Rinehart, Director of the 
Mining Research Laboratory, Colorado School of Mines, and former Associate Director, Smithsonian Astrophysicai Laboratory, Cambridge, Mass. 



63 



64 FANTASTIC 

distance from the earth is 238,857 
miles and it takes 27.3 days to revolve once about the earth. During 
this revolution it turns exactly once 
on its own axis so that it always 
presents the same side to the earth 
(but the sun illuminates all points 
on the moon at some time during 
this revolution). The moon wobbles 
a bit so that actually we see about 
59 percent of its surface. 

Its diameter is 2160 miles, approximately 14 that of the earth, but 
its mass is only 1/81 that of the 
earth; thus its density (pounds per 
cubic feet) is only 0.61 times that 
of the earth or about 280 pounds 
per cubic foot. From this we derive, 
from Newton's Universal Law of 
Gravitation, a most significant and 
important result, namely, that, the 
gravitational attraction at the 
moon's surface is only 0.165 (approximately 1/6) that on the surface of the earth. Thus on the surface of the moon every object will 
weigh only 1/6 as much as on the 
surface of the earth. The mass or 
inertia of each object is, however, 
independent of its location. In design one must continually keep the 
distinction between mass and weight 
clearly in mind, 
Environmental conditions 

The environment of a building 
on the moon differs markedly from 
its environment on the earth. The 
moon has no observable atmosphere. 
There is no haze, no clouds, no 
winds, no rain or snowstorms. The 
building is either bathed in intense 
sunshine or looks upon stark, black, 



UNIVERSE 

and cold space. It will be continuously plagued by the great gnat-like 
rain of interplanetary dust. 

The moon has lost its atmosphere, 
if it ever had any, because of its 
small size and, hence, low gravitational pull. The velocity of escape 
from the moon is quite low, 1.5 
miles per second, as contrasted with 
6.9 miles per second for the earth. 
(The velocity, of escape is the velocity which a body must have in order 
to fly off into space under its own 
momentum, never to return.) The 
gravitational attraction of the earth 
is strong enough to grip and hold 
to it the nitrogen and oxygen molecules that form our atmosphere. Not 
so on the moon. The thermal velocities of the gas molecules are 
sufficiently high that if gas molecules 
were ever present, they would long 
since have wandered off into space. 
A few molecules of heavy gases such 
as carbon dioxide, krypton, and 
xeonon may have remained behind 
or may be seeping out from the 
moon's interior but these are not 
significant. Thus the atmospheric 
pressure is zero and any building 
constructed there must he internally 
pressurized with an atmosphere in 
which humans can survive. 

The moon's surface, unshielded 
by an absorbing atmosphere, can 
feel the full force of the sun's rays 
and become extremely hot on one 
side while the other side will quickly have radiated its heat into space 
and become exceedingly cold. Day 
and night on the moon are each 
about two weeks long. 



BASIC CRITERIA FOR A MOON BUILDING 



65 



The temperatures on the surface 
of the moon have been carefully 
measured using a telescope equipped 
with a vacuum thermocouple. On 
one occasion this was done during 
an eclipse and it was found that the 
surface of the moon cools very 
quickly, reaching a low temperature 
in 20 or 30 minutes after the sun 
stops shining. The temperature at 
lunar midday is 214° F; at sunset, 
32° F and at midnight —243° F. 
Any structure placed there must be 
able to withstand these extreme 
temperatures and especially the tremendous temperature gradients 
which will abound. 

The ultraviolet radiation, normally absorbed by the earth's atmosphere, will be sufficiently intense to 
render panes of glass or plastic useless as windows through discoloration. Thus, shutters for such windows must be provided. 

The moon is continually bombarded by particulate matter: cosmic 
rays, charged particles; and meteoric 
particles. Not much is known about 
the rate of influx of cosmic rays although recent records from the satellite, Explorer III, indicate that 
they are considerably more abundant 
than we have thought. They probably do not present a health hazard 
but they may be sufficiently abundant 
to discolor glass or plastic after long 
exposure. 

It is also not possible to define 
very accurately the nature and distribution of meteoric matter so as to 
estimate it as a potential hazard to 
structure. Extraterrestrial material 



exists in three forms: the most 
abundant by far is interplanetary 
dust, the dust which forms the 
zodiacal light, a faint band of light 
seen extending from the sun at the 
end of twilight; next is the debris 
from the comets, which, when it 
streaks through our atmosphere produces an intensely luminous trail, 
called a meteor; and, lastly, the 
meteorites, ponderable masses of 
stone and iron, fragments of planets 
which once resided between Mars 
and Jupiter in our solar system. The 
interplanetary dust ranges in size 
from 1 to 300 microns in diameter; 
meteors are fragile, porous bodies 
of low gross density; and meteorites are solid chunks of iron and 
stone. The velocity with which any 
of this material might strike the 
moon ranges from 1.5 miles per 
second to about 44 miles per second. 
There will be no atmosphere to 
check its velocity as is the case with 
the earth, where the interplanetary 
dust and the meteors are rendered 
impotent. Only the largest of the 
meteorites, greater than 100 tons, 
come through our atmosphere and 
land with velocities undiminished. 

How many meteoric bodies are 
there and how are they distributed 
in time and space? If one goes out 
on an average clear night and observes meteors he will see about 10 
per hour. This frequency corresponds to about 24 million over the 
entire sky for a 24-hour period. At 
certain times during the year (Perseids, 10-12 August; Orionids, 19 
October; Leonids, 14 November; 



66 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



and Gemids, 12 December) the 
count will be up by a factor of a 
hundred or more. These so-called 
showers are periodic but of short 
duration and contribute only about 
ten percent of the total number of 
meteors. Our best picture of a 
meteor producing particle is that it 
is a popcorn ball-like mass several 
centimeters in diameter, weighing a 
few grams. 

The fall of a meteorite is a relatively rare event: about 5 per day 
reach the earth. Interplanetary dust 
is by far more abundant in space 
with the abundance of this dust in 
the vicinity of the moon being about 
5 x 10" a grams per cubic centimeter. The moon sweeps up this material at the rate of 110 tons per day. 

Thus the chance of a large building being struck by a meteorite or a 
meteor is negligible, one hit in perhaps several thousand years. Interplanetary dust is the real hazard and 
we do not know how great it is. The 
particles are small, and even though 
of great velocity, could be easily 
warded off with an umbrella-like 
shield. Our best estimate is that 
about 3 or 4 particles with diameters 
ranging from 0.0002 to 0.0004 
inches would strike each square yard 
of exposed surface per day. A meteoric shield must be a part of any 
structure built on the moon. 

From a practical viewpoint, the 
exact nature of the surface of the 
moon is our greatest unknown. On 
a grand scale we know that the 
moon's surface is fraught with large 
and deep craters, mountain ranges, 



and great flat areas. But we cannot 
look at the moon in the intimate 
detail needed to provide us with 
realistic design data for construction. Resolution with our best telescopes is about 1 mile. 

Opinion is now divided as to the 
nature of the moon's landscape. At 
an Air Force symposium on this subject in April 1958 three eminent astronomers summarized their variant 
ideas: 

No. 1 "The maria (large dark flat 
areas) are almost certainly covered 
with lava and will make firm landing spots for earth's spaceships." 

No. 2 "The rock has turned 
slowly to dust by bombardment of 
rays and particles from the sun and 
space. The dust, kept stirred up by 
the same agents that formed it, has 
flowed like a slow liquid into the 
moon's low places so the maria are 
not filled with lava, but with dust 
perhaps several miles deep. Dust 
near the surface may be as fluffy as 
baby powder. Unwary ships might 
disappear in dry quicksand." 

No. 3 "Although the moon may 
have plenty of dust, its surface has 
been solidified. There may be a thin 
layer like dust on a grand piano but 
underlying material, cemented together (not stirred up) by bombardment from space, is probably 
'crunchy' and strong enough to support air alighting spaceships." 

With this lack of knowledge and 
great divergence of opinion we can 
only design for the worst condition: 
a sea of dust upon which we must 
float our structures. 



BASIC CRITERIA FOR 

Basic design criteria 

Without defining the specific 
function of the building we know 
that it must provide for the following: 

(1) Living quarters, including 
rooms for sleeping, cooking, 
eating and recreation. 

(2) Physics, chemistry, and biological laboratories. 

(3) A control tower for communication, meteorological 
studies, earth observations, 
astronomical observations, 
traffic control, etc. 

(4) Air conditioning, heating, 
power and refrigeration 
plants, oxygen production 
units, extreme-temperature 
regulating devices, water 
supply and sewage disposal 
plants. 

(5) A machine shop and equipment maintenance area. Further, we know that the structure must be built as an integral floatable unit. 

We assume the following: (1) 
that the location of the building on 
the moon will be fixed; (2) that the 
building will be constructed from 
materials brought from the earth. 
This restriction implies at once that 
no single piece can be heavier than 
the load carrying capacity of the 
cargo space of our future moon rockets; (3) that the building will provide the functions listed above; and 
(4) that it will be a permanent 
type building in the sense that it will 
be occupied on a continuing basis 
over several years' time. 



A MOON BUILDIVO 67 

A moon building presents its own 
peculiar problems and first is the 
matter of gravity. The force of gravity on the moon is approximately 
1/6 that on the earth. This means 
that the deflection of a cantilever 
beam or any other load supporting 
beam or column will be only 1/6 
as great as it would be on earth. 
Changes in gravity will not effect 
the strength properties of the materials. For design purposes we can, 
in all static situations, (N.B. only 
static, not dynamic) replace the "g" 
of 32 feet per second which repeatedly appears in our strength of materials formulas by one sixth its 
value, say 5 feet per second. 
A whole new field of design 
is opened up. It is as if we had 
an exceedingly high-strength, lightweight construction material. 

We must, however, be wary of 
any dynamic situation. We do not 
change the mass of our material by 
transporting it to the moon. It 
would be just as difficult to accelerate a car on the moon as it is on the 
earth. Thus, designs involving vibratory or rotary motion must conform to the normal earth pattern. 
An electric generator designed for 
moon use would not appear substantially different from an earthly one. 

Reduction in gravity will influence the convective flow of air and 
the rate of flow of liquids downhill. 
These changes are likely to become 
important in design of the heating, 
power, water, sewage, and ventilating system. 

Ramps and stairs can be much 



68 FANTASTIC 

steeper because man will be able to 
lift himself with 1 /6 the effort required on earth. A crane designed 
for a one ton load on the earth can 
lift at least six tons on the moon. 
We must, on the other hand, be 
careful with our elevators for here 
we are accelerating and decelerating 
masses. 

No consideration need be given 
wind or snow loads since they will 
not exist. Our major stresses now 
come from the artificial atmosphere 
contained within the hermetically 
sealed building. Normal atmospheric pressure, 14.7 pounds per 
square inch, is a realistic figure to 
use for design purposes; 10 pounds 
per square inch would be sufficient. 
The problem is not unlike that encountered by the designers of high 
flying aircraft except perhaps in one 
respect which could be significant. 
On the moon we can play the gravitational forces against the air pressure forces, achieving some kind of 
equilibrium which may gain us an 
advantage. This is a matter that 
needs looking into. Broad expanses 
of curved structures can be used but 
we must tie the whole together with 
rods or similar means so that it does 
not suffer an internal explosion. 

Rapid, intense heating and sudden, severe cooling present difficult, 
but certainly solvable, design problems. The parts of the structure becoming shaded will immediately become exceedingly cold, while those 
in the sun will remain heated to a 
high temperature. During the lunar 
day, when the sun is upon the struc


UNIVERSE 

tare, devices must be provided to 
regulate the influx and efHux of 
heat. These should be tied together 
to the heating and ventilating systems. But we must also be prepared 
to be without our principal energy 
source, the sun, for two weeks at a 
time. This means providing energy 
storage facilities of no mean proportion. 

The potential hazard from cosmic 
rays, while still one of the big unknowns, is probably not great 
enough to warrant modifying constructional practices. Eventually the 
living quarters may be lined with 
thin sheets of lead. 

The bombardment by meteoric 
matter is serious but can be dealt 
with. The best approach is to use 
the scheme long in use by tent 
dwellers to protect themselves from 
the fury of rainstorms; a canvas 
canopy covering, placed above and 
separated some distance from the 
roof of the tent, which dulls the 
force of the impact of the raindrops 
and diverts the material away from 
the roof of the tent. On the moon, 
the canopy must be of metal, not 
canvas, whose thickness will be sufficient to stop meteoritic dust. A 
1/32 inch thick aluminum shield 
should be sufficient. 

Finally, we ate concerned with 
foundations for the building and 
here is the greatest difficulty. There 
seems to be but little else to do but 
to design the building as a structure 
which floats in a stationary ocean of 
dust, anchored in place by large, 
heavy blocks suspended by long 



BASIC CRITERIA FOR 

cables from the body of the structure. In many ways its construction 
will resemble that of a ship at anchor, a freely-floating, self-contained unit The building need not be 
streamlined. Fortunately, also, it 
need not be built to withstand the 
tumultuous forces exerted by a 
watery ocean. The dust on the moon 
is as calm as a mill pond. 

According to Archimedes' principle a body immersed in a fluid is 
water buoyed up by a force equal 
to the weight of the fluid it displaces. A 10,000 ton ship, for example, has 320,000 cubic feet (1 
cubic foot weighs 62.4 pounds) 
immersed when it is floating. Now, 
how will our dust ocean act in this 
respect? We are safe in concluding 
that it will act as a fluid of low 
density: for design purposes, about 
0.5 times the density of water or 30 
pounds per cubic foot. Thus the 
lower part of our building will be 
covered with dust, the volume, V, 
so covered being given by 

V (ft') = Total weight of building (pounds) 
30 

The dust will tend to support 
the lower floor, or hull. At a 60 foot 
depth, the pressure acting on the 
floor will be just equal to atmospheric pressure. If the hull is embedded to depths greater than this 
it must be designed so as not to be 
crushed by the weight of the dust. 

Since the building is floating, 
weight must be fairly uniformly distributed if it is not to topple over 
or settle in unevenly. 



A MOON BUILDING 69 

If the moon's surface proves to be 
sufficiently solid it will provide normal support for the building and 
may be used as foundation blocks. 

The design 

There is no one building uniquely qualified for placement on the 
moon. Design requirements allow as 
well as demand a diversity of structural types, proportions, materials 
and forms. The Buck Rogers portable and inflatable plastic balloon 
house is a perfectly practical type 
of temporary housing. 

Permanent housing must be fabricated from more durable materials. 
Aluminum suggests itself immediately because of its high strength, 
low weight, and ease of fabrication. 
Aluminum also provides a good reflecting surface which aids in cooling problems. 

The basic elements of the Wonder Building Corporation of America's "Truss-Skin" roof system are 
well suited for construction of moon 
buildings because of its great flexibility and versatility. Some details 
have necessarily been modified, including the development of means 
for hermetically sealing the structures. 

The basic scientific information 
needed to complete first designs of 
functional and attractive buildings 
for use on the moon are at hand. 
Our task has been the very specific one of taking these scientific 
guide lines and producing a practical model. 



traveling 
salesman 

by . . . Lloyd Biggie 



The Feds were getting tough. 
It was costing too much to 
distribute the stuff. He'd 
probably have to go away... 



The day was Sunday, the time 
■was 5:19 P.M., Eastern Standa/d 
Time. Charles Armstrong threw a 
switch, and stepped through into 
Time Dimension 7. He experienced 
nothing but a momentary breathlessness and a slight jolt. The breathlessness he was accustomed to; the 
jolt irritated him. He moved to his 
Time Dimension 7 workbench and 
scribbled on a memo pad, "Raise 
machine 1/16 inch." Then he hurried up a stairway. 

With the aid of a complicated 
arrangement of peep holes he checked his surroundings carefully before 
he slid aside a panel and stepped 
through the wall into a spacious living room. He moved quickly from 
window to window, looking out at 
the calm country landscape. A flock 
of sheep were grazing contentedly 
just beyond his fence, confident that 
Armstrong's dogs couldn't get at 
them. A savage, half-breed dog lay 
near the fence, watching them hungrily. Far down the hill he could see 
lights in Farmer Winslow's barn. 
The farmer would be milking his 
goats. From the opposite window he 
looked down on a small, picturesque 
lake where ducks floated lazily. 

Armstrong took out four cartons 



We still know next to nothing about lloyd Biggie, except that he has a 
wry humor and an ability which makes him one of the mare interesting of 
the new writers. He will be remembered for his judgement day (FU, April 
1958) clout the man who'd never told anyone about the pictures he saw. 



70 



TRAVELING 

of dog meat, and went out to feed 
his dogs. There were four of them, 
and he had the enclosed space around 
the cottage fenced into four sections, 
so the dogs couldn't tear each other 
apart sometime when he was late in 
feeding them. 

While they gulped their food 
noisily, he took a rake and carefully 
circled the dirt path outside his tenfoot fence, smoothing it behind him. 
He found nothing but a few sheep 
tracks. Satisfied, he returned to the 
cottage and dressed himself meticulously. 

Impatient to get started, he paced 
back and forth briefly and finally sat 
down at his desk, took a copy of 
H. G. Wells' The Time Machine 
from a secret compartment and read 
a few pages into his voicewriter. The 
machine clicked busily, sliding the 
finished pages into a pile in front of 
him. He hesitated several times, 
looked critically at the voicewritten 
pages, and read on. When the pile 
seemed thick enough, he swept the 
pages into a drawer, concealed the 
book, and hurried out to his aircar. 

The farmer's wife was crossing 
the yard as he flew over. She waved 
at him, and he blinked his landing 
lights in reply. He flew cross-country for ten minutes, turned into the 
crowded New York air lane, and 
half an hour later set his aircar down 
on the Times Square landing platform. 

He went immediately to a public 
visiphone, and he self-consciously 
straightened his tie and tossed his 
cape back over one shoulder with 



SALESMAN 7 1 

studied carelessness before he dialed. 
The screen in front of him shimmered hazily, and abruptly focused. 

A girl, blonde, voluptuous and 
long-limbed, dressed in a semitransparent lounging robe and very 
little else, looked out at him expectantly, and squealed with delight. 

"Charles, darling, where have you 
been? I've been trying to find you, 
and nobody knows where that queer 
country place of yours is." 

"Been working," Armstrong said. 
"Got a couple more chapters done. 
See you tonight?" 

"Sorry, darling. Just impossible — 
I have too much to do. That's why 
I wanted to talk to you. I wanted to 
invite you to my wedding. I'm getting married tomorrow. Now don't 
carry on so, you darling brute. You 
look as if you're going to run out 
and take poison. My getting married doesn't have anything to do with 
us. I've told you over and over again 
that I couldn't marry you. The old 
man wouldn't stand for it." 

"I know," Armstrong said. "But 
I'd hoped . . ." 

"Just be reasonable, darling. The 
old man would disinherit me, and 
why should I throw away all that 
money? And Wilber — Wilber Forms, that's who I'm marrying — he's 
loaded, too, you know. A girl has 
to put up with a few inconveniences 
to be rich. You know yourself it 
takes years and years for a writer to 
make any money, and you'll never 
get rich as long as you write those 
queer stories. Now don't let it bother 
you — there's a good boy. Give me a 



72 FANTASTIC 

call in about a month, and we'll arrange a nice weekend together. I'll 
cheer you up!" 

"I don't know," Armstrong said 
slowly. "Anyway — I wish you all 
kinds of happiness." 

She stared at him. "Now that's a 
hell of a thing to say to someone 
who's getting married. What's the 
matter with you, anyway?" 

Armstrong half-promised to call 
her in a month, and cut off. He 
kicked the wall of the visiphone 
boodi savagely. "What a damnable 
beginning! This trip will probably 
be another flop." He studied his appearance in the mirror, straightened 
his tie again, and dialed another 
number. 

This girl was a brunette, demure 
and not especially attractive. She 
stared at him, clapped her hand to 
her mouth, and glanced behind her 
cautiously. "Charles! You weren't 
supposed to call me again!" 

Armstrong's pent-up irritation exploded. "I can't help it, damn it! 
Do you love me, or don't you?" 

She faltered. "Yes. I— I love you. 
But dad forbade me to see you 
again. He said you're just a fortune 
hunter. He says he'll change his will 
if I marry you. He'll even change it 
if I don't stop seeing you." 

Armstrong grinned, confident 
again. Fathers always came around, 
eventually. All it took was a grandchild. "Let him change it," he said. 
"We don't need his money. I don't 
even want it. We can get along if 
we love each other, can't we ?" 

"Oh, yes, I suppose we could. But 



UNIVERSE 

I'd hate to make Dad and Moms unhappy. It's not just your being a 
writer, but if only you'd write something respectable." 

"I will," Armstrong said fervently. 
"I'll forget all about the science fiction. What do you want me to 
write?" 

"No." She shook her head sadly. 
"No. You must be true to yourself. 
I know you'll be a great writer, some 
day, and I'll always be proud that 
I've known you. But please don't 
call me again." 

Abruptly, the screen went blank. 
Armstrong swore violently, and 
slammed the door after him as he 
left the booth. He'd botched things 
up nicely. 

He walked down West Fortysecond Street to a small, crumbly 
hotel, mounted to the second floor, 
and knocked on the door. Two 
knocks, a pause, then three knocks. 
The door opened a crack, Armstrong 
was cautiously scrutinized and admitted, and the door was quickly 
closed behind him. A wizened scarecrow of a man peered at Armstrong 
through thick glasses. "Got any?" 

Armstrong took a bottle of aspirin tablets from his pocket, and 
placed it on the table. Trembling 
fingers seized the bottle, dumped 
the contents onto a dirty piece of 
paper, and counted deftly. "Hundred — got any more ?" 

Armstrong produced another bottle. It was dumped, and the contents 
quickly counted. The man took one 
tablet from each bottle, and tasted 



TRAVELING 

carefully. "Good stuff. Got any 
more?" 
"Not this trip." 

He nodded, took a thick roll' of 
bills from his pocket, and reluctantly 
counted the money into Armstrong's 
hand. One thousand, two thousand 
credits. 

Armstrong scowled. "Price gone 
down?" 

"Has to. Feds are really getting 
tough. Costs a hell of a lot to distribute the stuff. Might lose money 
on this batch. I'm getting out of 
New York, in' a couple of days, 
until things quiet down." 

"I'm thinking of switching to 
Philadelphia," Armstrong said. 
"Got any connections there?" 

"Yeah — Philly. Might go to 
Philly myself. When'll you have 
some more stuff?" 

"Hard to say." 

"There's a little frozen foods 
store way out on Market Street. 
Marty's Frozen Foods. When you 
get some stuff, you ask Marty how 
to get hold of Chip. I'll leave word." 

"Will do," Armstrong said. 

He hurried out of the hotel and 
walked back towards Times Square, 
glancing furtively over his shoulder 
to see if he was being followed. He 
entered a restaurant, found an empty 
booth, and dialed his order. He 
leaned back thoughtfully while he 
waited. 

It was a hell of a mess, he thought. 
No matter how hard he worked, 
nothing seemed to work out. He 
hadn't had any success for a year and 
a half — anywhere — and now there 



SALESMAN 73 

wasn't one grade A businessman left 
in the entire New York area that he 
could consider a prospective fatherin-law. He'd either have to shift his 
base of operations, or pull out. 

But he didn't want to pull out. 
He liked Time Dimension 7. It 
was as good a place to live as any 
Time Dimension he'd found. He'd 
have to start over again in Philadelphia. He could still be a writer, but 
he wouldn't write science fiction. 
That had been a serious mistake, but 
of course, he hadn't known that 
when he started out. He'd thought 
a Time Dimension as scientifically 
advanced as No. 7 would be enthused about science fiction. But they 
seemed to like old-fashioned stuff. 
Dickens — he wondered if they 
would like Dickens. He'd have to 
edit the stuff, which would be a lot 
of work, but with a voicewriter it 
should be possible. He could do a 
little study, and make himself a 
writer of historical novels. Hell — 
Dickens was supposed to be a good 
writer. His stuff should be successful. 
The next time he got back to Time 
Dimension 1 he'd pick up the complete works of Dickens. 

He finished his meal and walked 
back to the parking platform, where 
he entered a visiphone booth and 
placed a mail subscription for three 
months of Philadelphia newspapers. 
The society pages would be a good 
place to start looking for eligible 
heiresses, and when he got a list 
made up he could start checking on 
their fathers. 

He flew back to his cottage with


74 FANTASTIC 

out incident. It was 22:30 Eastern 
.Standard Time in Time Dimension 
7, and the farmhouse was dark. 
Armstrong climbed into his Time 
Dimension 7 bed, and had himself 
gently rocked asleep. 

The bed awakened him at seven, 
by rocking gently, then firmly, and 
finally dumping him onto die floor 
when he failed to respond. He placed 
a frozen breakfast unit on die stove 
to heat while he was dressing. After 
eating, he stepped through the wall 
panel to die concealed stairway, and 
descended to his basement workroom. For the next hour he methodi: ally visited each of the eleven Time 
Dimensions in which he had a base 
established, fed his dogs, and carefully inspected the ground outside 
each fence for signs of intruders. 

His last stop was Time Dimension 3. There, in one end of his cottage living room, he had a machine 
shop, widi a stationary steam engine 
furnishing power from a shed outside. On his work bench was a small 
gasoline engine, die product of Time 
Dimension 1. Armstrong had disassembled it, made a scale drawing of 
each part, carefully removed all identifying marks of the manufacturer, 
and reassembled it. He could have 
built one simself, but it seemed a 
waste of time when he could acquire 
one ready made. 

He changed into a costume suitable for Time Dimension 3, and 
busied himself with building a crate 
for the gasoline engine. It was nearly 
ten o'clock when he finished. He 



UNIVERSE 

strolled down the hill to the farmhouse, and found Farmer Hilton 
waiting for him with a horse and 
buggy. 

The farmer grinned happily as his 
rough hand crushed Armstrong's. 

"Saw ya comin', so I hitched her 
up," he said. 

"Well, now, that was nice of you. 
Anything I can bring you from 
town?" 

"Oh, no — you been too good to 
us, Mr. Armstrong. Glad to help 
out." 

Armstrong nodded his thanks, and 
drove the buggy back up to the cottage. He loaded in the gasoline engine, and carefully padlocked the 
gate after him as he drove away. The 
padlock he had made himself — copying the best lock, he could buy in 
Time Dimension 1. 

Armstrong drove into Princeton 
on tortuously muddy roads, left his 
horse and buggy at a livery stable, 
and caught the train to Newark, taking the gasoline engine into the 
coach with him as hand baggage. At 
Newark, he hired a horse and buggy, 
loaded in his gasoline engine, and 
drove out into the country to the 
estate of his Time Dimension 3 
father-in-law. 

He drove up the broad, horseshoeshaped drive to the sprawling house, 
and his wife Victoria burst joyously 
from the veranda and direw herself 
into his arms. "Was the train late, 
darling? I'm so glad you didn't get 
lost in your work and forget to 
come. Daddy has some kind of important meeting for you tonight, and 



TRAVELING SALESMAN 



75 



it would have disappointed him terribly. Charlie, Charlie, see who's 
here!" 

Charles Armstrong, Jr., toddled 
down the steps, his two-year-old 
face puckered into an impish grin. 
He gave his father a rough but respectful hug, searching in his pockets for candy, found some, and 
munched cheerfully. Time Dimension 3 candy. In a moment of carelessness Armstrong had once brought 
home some delicacies from Time Dimension 1, and caused a sensation. 
For months afterwards the entire 
household had been after him to buy 
more. But it was, he explained, something that had to be imported, and 
he hadn't been able to find any. 

Armstrong arranged with a stable 
boy to return his rented horse and 
buggy, and tenderly carried the gasoline engine up onto the veranda. 
Victoria looked at it wide-eyed. 
"You've finished it? Oh, Charles!" 

His mother-in-law regarded it sedately. She was no more than fortyfive, but she was the sedate kind of 
woman, and Time Dimension 3 was 
a sedate civilization. "Roger will be 
pleased," she said. "It's hard to convince men they should invest money 
in something they haven't seen. But 
if it works — it does work, doesn't 
it?" 

"Mother!" Victoria exclaimed. 
"Of course, it works. Didn't my 
husband build it?" 

Mrs. Cahill smiled faintly, and 
returned to her knitting. 

"We'll have a demonstration 
when Dad gets home," .Armstrong 



said. "You'll find that it's an infernally noisy thing, but it works very 
well." 

"Do you have to go back tomorrow?" Victoria asked anxiously. 

"I'm afraid so. Still have lots of 
work to do on this." 

"I'd hoped we could take a lunch 
and have a picnic — just the three of 
us." 

"Too muddy," Mrs. Cahill said 
firmly. "Not good for Victoria, anyway." 

"Oh, Mother!" * 

"Don't tell rne you haven't told 
him." 

"But, Mother . . ." 

"A husband's got a right to know. 
A duty to know. After all . . ." 

Armstrong stared at Victoria's 
blushing face. "What's all this? You 
don't mean to say — that's wonderful!" 

"I'm so happy, Charles," she whispered. "And Charlie needs a little 
brother or sister. Are you happy? 
Oh, Charles!" 

She fiung herself into his arms, 
and Mrs. Cahill dryly collected her 
knitting and left. 

That evening the family and a 
half-dozen businessmen that Cahill 
had invited in sat in a circle watching 
Armstrong's gasoline engine pound 
away noisily. Mrs. Cahill and Victoria held their hands over their ears 
and- grimaced painfully. Charles, 
Junior, watched open-mouthed, and 
the eyes of the businessmen were 
glistening dollar signs. 

Later, they retired to the house, 
and die men gathered in Roger Ca


76 FANTASTIC 

hill's study for what Armstrong regarded as a painful two hours of 
business chatter. The men left, eventually, and Cahill pressed another 
cigar on Armstrong, had a new supply of drinks brought in, and leaned 
back contentedly. 

"I don't doubt," he said, "that 
this engine will be everything you 
say it will. And it will make a fortune for both of us. We'll own fiftytwo per cent of the stock between us, 
and you'll be getting a nice royalty 
on every engine the company makes. 
Then there'll be those other ideas 
of yours — that lock, for one thing. 
That should cause a sensation. I give 
you just five years to make your first 
million. The second million will 
come quicker, of course." 

'Tm afraid I'm not very practical 
in business matters," Armstrong 
said. "Without you to back me, I 
probably couldn't have brought this 
off." 

"Nonsense. You'd have made out 
all right." 

"Just the same, I'm glad to have 
someone I can trust to manage things 
for me. You look after the business 
end of it, and let me do the inventing. I'm sure it'll work out best that 
way." 

Cahill nodded. He did not look 
dissatisfied. "I'm rather happy the 
way things have worked out," he 
said. "I don't mind saying I had my 
doubts about you, at first. Thought 
you were one of these blasted fortune hunters, and I was certain your 
marriage to Vicky wouldn't last a 
year. But you've made her as happy 



UNIVERSE 

as any girl could be. She'd like to 
have you around more, of course, but 
/ know how much sweat goes into 
something like this, and I'm sure she 
understands." 

"I hope this goes all right," Armstrong said. "After all that work on 
the electric light . . ." 

"Don't let that worry you. They're 
interested, all right. I'll have the 
money in the morning. And when 
we're big enough, we can get to work 
on that electric light again. We've 
got the patents, so there's nothing to 
worry about. There wasn't anything 
wrong with the idea. It just took 
more capital than I could swing." 

Armstrong nodded. The electric 
light was his first Time Dimension 3 
invention, but he ran into stubborn 
resistance. After all, what was wrong 
with gas ? Why spend all that money 
for a powerplant and transmission 
lines when people were happy the 
way things were? And wasn't electricity dangerous? Even his fatherin-law had been skeptical. But the 
gasoline engine seemed to be going 
over. Now he was toying with the 
idea of inventing the telegraph. Perhaps he could get the government 
interested in financing a trial installation. 

Victoria was waiting for Armstrong in their bedroom. "You're 
getting too important," she said. 
"Now I can't even have you when 
you get home." 

It was early the next afternoon 
when Armstrong drove his buggy up 
to the Hilton Farm. The Hiltons' 



TRAVELING 

ten-year-old son took charge of the 
horse, and also the package of presents Armstrong had bought for the 
family in Newark. Armstrong felt a 
warm affection for the Hiltons. He 
wished he could do something for 
them. Something big. Whenever he 
saw sturdy, red-faced, kindly Mrs. 
Hilton laboring in the barn his conscience bothered him. He wanted to 
give them a milking machine, but 
there were just too many complications. He would have to go slow — 
he'd learned that much. It wouldn't 
do to spring something that involved 
half a dozen complicated inventions. 

But once he got the gasoline engine on the market, perhaps he could 
manage it. He could develop a milking machine powered by the gasoline 
engine. He could, that is, if some 
essential material wasn't lacking in 
the Time Dimension 3 economy. 
He'd have to check on that 

He looked his cottage over carefully, fed his dogs, and then visited 
the other ten Time Dimensions. He 
fed his dogs, inspected the automatic 
feeders he'd set up for the times 
when he might have to be absent a 
few days, checked for prowlers, and 
allowed himself to be seen by the 
farmer in each Time Dimension. In 
Time Dimension 7 he walked down 
to the farmhouse and picked up his 
mail — the accumulations of newspapers from Philadelphia. 

Satisfied that everything was in 
order, he stepped through into Time 
Dimension 19. His cottage was a 
glistening, pre-fabricated structure 
of an aluminum alloy, and there was 



SALESMAN 77 

a sleek, atomic-powered automobile 
in his garage. Armstrong drove to 
Princeton on a broad, smoothly surfaced highway. He stopped to make 
two phone calls, and drove on to 
New York. 

His first stop was the office of a 
stout industrialist. That worthy gentleman pawed eagerly at the small 
bag of cheap industrial diamonds 
that Armstrong gave him. He spread 
them out on his desk, beamed happily at them, weighed them carefully, 
and counted out an impressive pile 
of cash for Armstrong. 

Armstrong could buy industrial 
diamonds for next to nothing in 
Time Dimension 3, where industry 
was still in its infancy. And a few 
of these same diamonds brought a 
gratifying price in highly industrialized Time Dimension 19, where the 
demand was incessant — and where 
the diamonds of Central and South 
Africa had never been discovered. 

Amstrong's second stop was the 
home of a charming young debutante. Armstrong took her to dinner, 
made bright conversation with her, 
and very correctly and properly took 
her home. Society in Time Dimension 19 was organized along very 
correct and proper lines. Armstrong 
had been engaged to a lovely young 
heiress, and two weeks before their 
wedding date she had gotten herself 
tragically killed in an automobile accident. It was another in Armstrong's 
long series of frustrations. 

But he had to conduct himself correctly and properly about the whole 
thing. He had retired for a suitable 



78 FANTASTIC 

period of mourning, and now he 
was gradually easing himself back 
into circulation. There were enough 
heiresses among the friends of his 
former fiancee to provide a wide 
field of selection. The only question 
was, which father would make the 
most desirable father-in-law? Armstrong was uncertain, but he was 
studying the problem carefully. 
When he made up his mind, he 
would pick a suitable profession to 
match his father-in-law's talent. In 
the meantime, he was doing very 
well with the diamonds. 

Armstrong checked into a hotel 
for the night, and in the morning 
he drove back to his cottage, made 
his usual inspection tour, and stepped through into Time Dimension 5. 
He flew his helicopter in to Princeton, made a half-dozen telephone 
calls, found a half-dozen young 
ladies unavailable, unenthused, or 
under paternal edict, and flew angrily back to his cottage. He couldn't 
see any break at all in the bad luck 
that had plagued him for a year and 
a half. 

In Time Dimension 12 he sat 
down in front of a typewriter, and 
worked biisily at copying Hemingway's The Old Man and the Sea. He 
thought Hemingway would make a 
highly successful writer in Time Dimension 12. The problem was in 
editing the background of a story. 
He couldn't use For Whom the Bell 
Tolls, because a war about the Spanish Revolution wouldn't make much 
sense in a Time Dimension where 
there hadn't been any Spanish Revo


UNIVERSE 

lution. And A Farewell to Arms set 
in World War I Italy created some 
problems in a Time Dimension 
where Italy had not participated in 
World War L Both novels could be 
adapted to other settings, but that 
would take work, so he was starting 
out with The Old Man and the Sea. 

He worked industriously for three 
hours. Then he collected the pages 
he had typed, got out his automobile, 
and drove to New York. It was a 
normal automobile, much like those 
of Time Dimension 1, but less 
streamlined, and with less chrome, 
fewer gadgets, and much, much better performance. The engineers of 
Time Dimension 12 were more concerned about what a car did than 
how it looked. In most respects, 
though, Time Dimension 12 was 
startlingly similar to Time Dimension 1. It was the most normal world 
that Armstrong had discovered. 

It was evening when Armstrong 
reached the Long Island home of his 
wife's parents. His wife, a chubby 
but not unattractive blonde girl, 
greeted him affectionately, and hauled him off to the nursery to view the 
latest antics of Charles Armstrong, 
Jr. The plump six-month-old baby 
gurgled and cooed and displayed exhibitionistic tendencies to delight the 
proudest parents. 

It wasn't until later, when she 
had Armstrong settled comfortably 
on a sofa and herself settled comfortably on his lap, that she asked 
him how the book was coming. 

"Wonderful," Armstrong said. 
"I'm really breezing along. I should 



TRAVELING 

have it finished in a couple of 
weeks." 

"Dad will be happy to hear that." 
"He will?" Armstrong said doubtfully. 

"He will now. He took what you 
have finished over to a professor 
friend of his, and the professor says 
you're an out and out genius. Entirely new style, and all that. It'll revolutionize modem American letters. 
Dad is so pleased to have a genius in 
the family that he's going to publish 
it no matter what his editors say." 

"I really don't think he should," 
Armstrong said seriously. "I can always find my own publisher, and if 
his firm isn't sold on the book . . ." 

"Don't be silly. What's the point 
in having a publisher for a fatherin-law if you don't let him publish 
your book?" 

"I'll have to talk to him about 
it," Armstrong said. 

"He'll convince you. He's all enthused, now. And he's the boss, so 
it really doesn't matter what his 
editors say. He'd be tickled pink to 
have it become a best seller after 
they told him not to publish it." 

"I hardly think . . ." 

She interrupted him with a kiss. 
"Oh, don't be so modest. How about 
flying down to Florida for a couple 
of days?" 

Armstrong hesitated. He hated to 
waste time. But then — this trip was 
building up to another total loss, and 
some relaxation might be good for 
him. "Sure," he said. "A little time 
away from the book might be healthy 
for me. When do we leave?" 



SALESMAN 79 

Armstrong was back at his cottage Tuesday morning. He made his 
usual round of inspection, and stopped off for a brief check on Time 
Dimension 10. World War II 
wasn't over yet, in Time Dimension 
10, though the end was expected almost any day. Armstrong was keeping discreetly out of sight. He didn't 
want to get into difficulties as a draft 
dodger, and he felt that he'd done 
his share of fighting World War II 
in Time Dimension 1. 

During the afternoon he was in 
to Princeton four times and back 
again, in Time Dimensions 5, 9, 11 
and 16, and he scored no progress. 
Worse than no progress. He had the 
definite feeling that he was losing 
ground. Some of the damned fathers 
of girls on his lists infuriated him. 
They thought he was after their 
money, and a father-in-law's money 
was the last thing Armstrong yearned for. What he wanted, what he had 
to have, was a good business manager in every Time Dimension. A 
father-in-law made an ideal business 
manager, if he was a good business 
man. He could be trusted. He could 
do all right for himself, too. 

But diese thundering idiots called • 
him a fortune hunter, and accused 
him of wanting to marry their 
daughters for their money. 

By the time he reached Time Dimension 14, Armstrong was in a 
seething, sputtering rage. He stomped about die room, smashing test 
tubes on the floor. "Get it over 
with," he told himself. "Wind this 
up in a hurry, and go home. Next 



80 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



trip you can make a clean start. 
You've wasted enough time. No results for a year and a half . . ." 

He stalked down to the farmhouse, and got his horse and buggy. 

Time Dimension 14 was a horseand-buggy civilization, but the automobile was coming into use, electric 
lights, the telegraph and the telephone had already been invented, 
and with the most obvious inventions 
already spoken for, Armstrong had 
gone into another field. His decision 
had been influenced by the fact that 
he had a prosperous drug manufacturer as a prospective father-in-law 
—but that wasn't working out, 
either. When the situation had looked more hopeful, Armstrong had set 
himself up as a scientist, and given 
himself a thorough course in general 
research chemistry and bacteriology. 

Evening found Armstrong calling 
at a sprawling monstrosity of a 
house in Trenton. The girl was very 
glad to see him, and very frightened 
about his being there. Armstrong, in 
his eagerness to wind things up, used 
a brusque frontal attack that terrified 
her. 

"Do you love me, or don't you?" 
he snapped. 

"Charles! You know . . ." 

"I know nothing of the kind. I 
don't care what your father thinks of 
me. I'm not marrying him. You're of 
age, and you're old enough to make 
up your own mind. Either we get 
married tomorrow, or you'll never 
see me again. Which will it be?" 

She stood before him and sobbed 
convulsively. She was a small girl, 



plain-looking, with an overly-large 
nose that completely spoiled her face. 
But he suspected that underneath the 
layers of clothing that females wore 
in this Time Dimension she might 
have an enticingly arranged figure. 

He watched her coldly until she 
lifted her tear-stained face, and whispered, "I'll marry you." 

Electrified, he seized her in his 
arms and danced about the room. 

"Father," she whispered. "What 
will I tell Father?" 

"Let me talk to your father," 
Armstrong said confidently. 

Ebenezer White did not greet 
Armstrong joyfully. He was a robust, middle-aged man with prematurely white hair, and the sight 
of Armstrong fired his naturally 
pink complexion into a flaming red. 
"I've told you, sir," he thundered, 
"that you are not welcome in my 
house." 

"Your daughter and I are getting 
married tomorrow," Armstrong said 
coolly. "If possible, with your blessings. If necessary, without." 

White sputtered impotently, and 
his red face took on a definite tinge 
of purple. "I see. I suppose there's 
nothing I can do about that. But I'll 
have you know, you scamp, that 
you'll never lay a hand on my money 
or business." 

"If that's all 'that's bothering 
you," Armstrong said, "why don't 
you call in a lawyer now, and make 
the necessary arrangements? I have 
enough money for us to live on comfortably, and every expectation of 



TRAVELING SALESMAN 



future success. But frankly, I think 
it would be best for Janis to live here 
with you. I spend a lot of time at my 
laboratory, and she wouldn't like 
being alone. For her sake, I think we 
should be able to work out some 
reasonable arrangement." 

There was skepticism in White's 
wry smile. "Do you actually mean 
you have no objection to my putting 
my estate in trust for Janis? You 
wouldn't be able to touch it, you 
know, and the executor would keep 
a careful watch on what she did with 
her money." 

"Sounds like a sensible arrangement," Armstrong said. "I'm certainly no businessman — I'm a scientist. I couldn't blame you in the least 
for wanting your estate in capable 
hands." 

White stared at Armstrong. "I 
don't quite understand this. My 
daughter is no raving beauty. Frankly, I consider her homely. And you're 
a handsome man. Why would you 
want to marry my daughter, if not 
for her money ?" 

"Perhaps Janis told you, sir, that 
I've been married before. I married 
my first wife because she was beautiful. It's a rare woman who can be 
beautiful and stay that way. I vowed 
that if I ever married again, I'd look 
for other qualities than beauty." 

"I see," White said. He fumbled 
in a drawer, found a lavishly polished corncob pipe, and got it lit. 
"Your — ah — work. Have you found 
that cure for smallpox yet?" He 
chuckled. 



Si 

"Not a cure, sir. A prevention. 
Yes, I believe I've found it." 

White dropped his pipe, and stared. "You have?" 

"Yes, sir. All I need is the right 
firm to produce and sell it." 

White's face was almost back to 
its normal pink. His eyes narrowed. 
"Seems to me there'd be quite a 
market for something like that. 
Every man, woman and child in 
America would be a potential customer." 

"Every man, woman and child in 
the world, sir." 

"In the world," White repeated. 
"Every man, woman and child in the 
world." His eyes gleamed brightly. 
"I'd like to talk to you about that — 
after the honeymoon, of course." 

"After the honeymoon," Armstrong agreed. They shook hands. 

Nine days later Armstrong drove 
up in front of his Time Dimension 1 
apartment house, and began unloading packages from his car. From an 
upstairs window Mrs. Hallihaa looked down, nudged Mrs. Jones, who 
was a new tenant, and said, "There 
he is — that's Armstrong. He's late 
this trip. Handsome brute, isn't he? 
I always said a woman's a fool to 
marry a good-looking man like that, 
and let him be a traveling salesman. 
We used to say he dealt exclusively 
in lingerie, and we didn't mean selling it, either. Once when he was 
supposed to be out on the road I saw 
him myself, coming out of that big 
apartment building down the street, 
with a woman that lived there. 



82 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



There was a woman right here in 
this building, too — and him with six 
children, and his wife used to be 
such a pretty thing. Never could 
figure out why he wanted to be a 
salesman. Not the type, you know. 
We always said he couldn't sell hot 
soup to the Eskimos. What he really 
ought to be is a mechanic, or something like that. He can fix anything, 
TV sets, and radios, and cars — real 
handy with his hands. You should 
see some of the things he's built. But 
he had to be a traveling salesman — 
wanted to get out so he could chase 
women, I suppose. His family had a 
terrible time, and he lost one job 
after another because he wouldn't 
work, and they were always about to 
be evicted. But the last three years or 
so he's settled down and tended to 
business. He's been making plenty 
of money, and they moved down to 
a first-floor apartment and got all 
new furniture, and you should see 
the new television set they bought 
last month. I couldn't say — maybe 
he just got too old for it. Men get 
that way, you know, though he certainly doesn't look it . . ." 



Armstrong looked up, and saw 
the faces in the upstairs window. 
That nosey Mrs. Hallihan, and the 
other would be the new tenant who 
was just moving in when he left. 
Bah ! He really should get out of this 
dumpy apartment, and buy a house 
somewhere. But it wouldn't do to get 
prosperous too quickly. 

The Armstrong family poured out 
of the front door. The five girls 
jumped up and down excitedly on 
the porch, and five-year-old Charles, 
Junior, tore down the steps and hurled himself at his father. 

"Bring me something this time, 
Daddy?" 

"Sure," Armstrong said. "Lots of 
presents for everyone." 

Mrs. Armstrong greeted her husband with a motherly kiss on the 
cheek. 

"Sorry, I'm late," Armstrong said. 
"Had to make a side trip to Chicago." 

"Quite all right, darling. Have a 
nice trip? How was business?" 

"Not bad, my dear," Armstrong 
said, beaming. "Not bad at all. I 
landed a new account." 



NEXT ISSUE— 

H. Beam Piper's THE OTHER ROAD 
Miriam Allen DeFord's PRISON BREAK 
Louis Golding's THE SWITCH AT THE DOOR 
Bertram Chandler's TO HELL FOR A PASTIME 
Ivan T. Sanderson's WHAT COULD THEY BE? 
David C. Knight's BEANPEAS IN THE AFTERNOON 

—in FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



miss 
millie's 
rose 

by . . . Joy Leache 



The customs man announced he 
had an old dame there "with 
one of them Jap trees." How 
was he to know what'd happen? 



Generally speaking, we do not 
go in for publicity, but everyone is 
conscious of the trouble-shooting 
section of Inter-Galactic Customs 
just now. It was all ovet the news 
panels when we let that Cotianna 
ceramic pass inspection at Marsport, 
and it burnt down four square 
blocks. 

We try to hush up our mistakes, 
but we never apologize for them. 
We know that nobody can figure 
every possibility every time. No man 
or machine can calculate the probability of disaster when a commodity is taken from one environment 
to another. We do the best we can, 
that's all. 

Sometimes we slip, as we did on 
the ceramic, and sometimes we 
don't, as when the team at Venusport turned back that ancient art 
exhibit before the blue pigments 
changed to bright yellow. Venusian 
atmosphere does that to cobalt 
when it is suspended in certain 
oils. 

Sometimes it ends in a draw, as 
in the case of Miss Millie's rose. 

Miss Millie and her rose arrived 
on the Tuesday flight from Northwestern Terraport, It was only by 
the merest fluke that we ever saw 



Joy Leache reports that she is twenty-four years old, and that she has 
been trying to mite since she was ten. "The only outstanding characteristic I have is keeping two dogs and three cats" she writes. She also, 
us you'll discover, tells a very different story about Tomorrow's Mars. 



S3 



84 FANTASTIC 

the rose at all. Umpty-zillion, types 
of roses have been planted in the 
gardens of Mars, with no ill effects 
other than the gnashed teeth of 
Terran rose fanciers. Roses do better here than on their native planet. 

The fluke was that George Haskins, our most inefficient checker, 
had smashed his glasses while taking a shower on Monday. If he had 
seen it, he would have known it 
was a rose, and let it pass through. 

"Carrie," he said, into the intercom mike. 

"Yes, George," I said. 

"I got a ole dame here wit one 
of them Jap trees," he said in his 
most charming customs-shed manner. 

I should have made him call 
Records and see if the ole dame's 
particular variety of Jap tree showed 
up on the lists of imports, but Sam 
and I had been doing Professor 
Phillips' beetles for two days, and 
I needed variety. 

"Send her up, George." 

"Wit da tree?" 

"Yes, George," I said, and clicked off my mike. "That George 
should have been a video star," I 
told Sam. "Such wit, such grace of 
manner, such beauty." 

Sam is the conscientious type. He 
went on trying to match a beetle to 
one of half a million colored photographs. "Beauty?" he said. 

"The way that lock of hair, lonely as it is, contrives to fall into his 
face is devastating," I said. "He's 
sending up 'a ole dame.' Put down 



UNIVERSE 

your beetle, and put away the beetle 
book." 

Sam shook his head at me. "You 
handle it alone," he said. "I want 
to finish this before I die." 

"The museum said there was no 
hurry," I reminded him. 

"That was three months ago," 
Sam said. "One of these days, 
Smeltzer will get a letter asking 
where they are. He'll come down 
here and find them in two Calofiz 
containers and a cookie jar. We'll 
be fired again." 

"All right," I said. "Ruin your 
eyes on the beetles. I'll be happy to 
examine the tree." 

"It ought to be here by now," 
said Sam, "unless it exploded in the 
grav shaft." 

"I'll go out and have a look," I 
said, leaping from my chair. 

"I admire your frankness," Sam 
said, squinting at the pincers of a 
purple beetle. "When you're bored, 
you let everyone know about it." 

"I'm the soul of honesty," I said 
as I closed the door. 

Halfway down the hall was a 
little old woman, walking from 
door to door, bending down to read 
the lettering on each one. She held 
a blue china dish in front of her, 
supporting it carefully with both 
hands. There was a purse under one 
arm and the strings of a flight case 
wrapped around the other. She was 
an exceedingly strange exhibit for 
Mars, which is a young people's 
planet. Most people live here for 
their working lives, and go to Terra 
or Luna when they retire. The old 



miss millie's rose 



85 



woman with the miniature tree was 
ninety at least, and that was presuming a life of hard work. 

She had Terra written all over 
her. She was wearing a black coat 
with a fur collar, which was highly 
impractical, since Terran furs become bald in a few weeks on Mars. 
Under the coat she was wearing a 
dress. Dresses are only worn for 
formal occasions on Mars, and indoor formal occasions at that. There 
is always a wind blowing on Mars, 
not strong, but terribly persistent. 
We wear pants. And hoods. She 
had on a hat of black pseudostraw 
with a black feather on it. 

Smeltzer does not like for the 
employees to go around shouting in 
the halls, since the Customs building is constructed of unadorned 
aerogranite, which sets up an echo 
unequalled in volume. So I set off 
toward the old woman, sounding 
like a regiment of cavalry coming 
down a paved highway. She didn't 
look up until I was almost on her, 
and the cavalry had been joined by 
a few light field pieces. 

"Were you looking for the Special Examination Office?" I asked. 

She stared at me over her glasses. 
"Speak up, young woman," she said 
coldly. "Open your mouth. Don't 
mumble." 

"Yes, ma'am," I said automatically. I raised my voice a few decibels and had another try. "Are you 
looking for the Special Examination 
Office?" 

The walls threw this all over the 



building. Smeltzer's door banged 
open, and that echoed too. 

"Yes, I am," said the old woman. 

I sent a mental apology upward, 
and shrieked, "Right this way, 
please." 

"You needn't shout," said the old 
woman. 

She walked ahead of me, feather 
waving, coat flapping. 

This apparition thrust her china 
dish under Sam's nose. He looked 
up and dripped a beetle. "Un-haw," 
said Sam, recovering slightly. "Miss 
Grovener will take care of you." 

"Speak up, young man," said the 
old woman. 

I touched her shoulder. "May I 
see the tree, please?" I shouted. 

She turned those cutting blue 
eyes on me again, decided I was 
incompetent, and turned back to 
Sam. 

He saved the situation by diving 
under his desk for the beetle. She 
had to show the tree to me. 

It was a lovely little thing, gnarled and elderly as the old woman 
herself, reposing serenely in its blue 
china dish. 

"It's a rose tree, isn't it?" I 
screamed. 

Sam winced. 

"Yes," she said shortly. 

I got out a receipt form. "Your 
name?" I began loudly. 

"Mildred Harfluer," she said, 
hanging onto the dish with one 
hand. 

The form had reassured her. 
When Council agencies start filling 
out forms, the public feels that 



86 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



something is being done. "May I 
see your passports, please?" 

She let go of the dish reluctantly, 
fished in her bag for the plastileather folder. 

"On vacation," I said. I raised 
my voice. "Since you're here on vacation," 1 screamed, "why don't 
you leave the rose tree in quarantine until you're ready to leave?" 

"It just says that about the vacation," said Mildred Harfluer, gripping the edge of the dish with bodi 
hands. "I really came to Mars to 
die." 

I gaggled over that one, but it 
didn't seem too unnatural for her 
to expect death before long. "You'll 
want it with you, then," I screamed. 

She nodded emphatically, her 
feather waving above her head. 

I was in for it. I buzzed Record-; 
for the books on Roses Imported to 
Mars. "What species is it?" I shouted hopefully. 

"Miniature," she said firmly. 

I was stymied. "A miniature rose 
tree is unusual, isn't it?" I shouted, 
hoping to find out circuitously. 

"I think it's the only one in 
existence," she said proudly. "It 
was started by my great-great-great 
grandfather." She grew more confidential. "He was a missionary to 
the Japanese." 

I smiled brightly and went back 
to the receipt form. "You're from 
the U. S. N. A.," I said. 

"Speak up, young woman." 

"You're from the United States 
of North America," I repeated, 
louder. 



"Vermont," said Mildred Harfluer. 

Length of stay: indefinite, I 
wrote. Description of article: miniature rose tree in blue china bowl. 
Reason for retention: Terra import, 
species uncertain. 

"Sam, that is, Mr. Graff, will 
identify your rose and O.K. it." I 
was getting hoarse. "Where will 
you be staying? We'll send you 
word when you can pick it up." 

"I'll wait here," said Mildred 
Harfluer. 

"But it may take all day today, 
and part of tomorrow," I screamed. 

She wavered. "I've got to get 
some more batteries," she said. "I'll 
sign your paper, but I'll be back." 

She took her half of the identicket in a firm hand and trundled 
out. 

"She has a hearing aid after all," 
I said. "Now we'll be able to reason 
with her." 

"Want to bet?" Sam muttered. 
He was bent over the beetle book. 
His neck was red. 

"Sam, are you angry?" 

"No," said Sam slowly. "I just 
wonder what you have against Professor Phillips, and why you don't 
want his collection of Martian 
beetles to go to Terra." 

"I'll do the rose," I said indignantly. "I wouldn't dream of taking you from your precious bugs." 

"Beetles," said Sam, "are not 
bugs." 

"It's pretty isn't it?" I said, 
touching a leaf of the rose tree with 
a fingernail. 



miss millie's rose 



87 



"Ancient," said Sam. 
"Don't you want to look at it?" 
I asked. 

"No," said Sam quietly, turning 
red around the ears. 

I memorized the leaf pattern of 
the little rose tree, and set to work 
industriously as soon as Records 
sent in the rose books. I had ruled 
out six possibilities when Mildred 
Harfiuer came back. 

"You see, Miss Harfiuer," I said, 
"there are three books of plates to 
go through. You can't possibly 
wait." 

She picked up the rose tree and 
glared at me. "I'll wait," she said 
firmly. 

I had to keep on going through 
the rose plates. I had looked 
through about half of the first book 
when the time came to leave. Sam 
put down the beetle he was working on, and reached for his windbreaker. 

"Found five of the little devils," 
he said cheerfully. "It's been a good 
day." 

"We go home now, Miss Harfiuer," I said hopefully. "You see 
that I haven't found it yet. I'll keep 
trying tomorrow." 

She started toward the door. 

"You'll have to leave the rose 
here," I said apologetically. 

"Then I'm staying with it," Mildred Harfiuer said, sitting down 
with a plunk. 

"We'll take good care of it," Sam 
said, helpfully. 

"What do you know about miniature rose trees?" she demanded. 



Sam hemmed and shut up. 

"We are both biotechs," I said. 
"We'll see that it gets water and 
sun." 

The ice-blue eyes went through 
me again. "And suppose it starts to 
grow?" she asked. 

I shut up. Sam slipped out the 
door. I ran after him. 

"Look, pal," I whispered, making 
the corridor hiss all around us, "you 
can't leave me here. I'm afraid I 
won't be able to get rid of her, and 
I can't leave her alone. She waited 
all day. She might wait all night." 

"I'll send you some coffee and 
two cheese sandwiches," said Sam. 
"Sleep tight." He pulled his sleeve 
out of my hand and vanished down 
the grav shaft. "I'll relieve you in 
nine hours," his voice echoed back. 

"Give my love to George on your 
way out," I called. 

Smeltzer's door banged open, 
and I retreated into the office. 

Mildred Harfiuer and I glared at 
each other for a moment, and then 
I went back to the rose book. The 
last office doors banged. In the ensuing silence I could hear faint 
crashes as the porters went on 
smashing luggage. It was all very 
depressing. 

Half an hour later the coffee and 
sandwiches arrived. I had hoped 
that the smell of food might starve 
Mildred out, but dear, thoughtful 
Sam had sent enough for two. 

"Thank you, young woman," said 
Mildred Harfiuer. She bit into a 
sandwich in a manner not quite 



88 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



ladylike enough to disguise her 
hunger. 

"My name is Carrie," I said, the 
coffee warming my throat. 

"You can call me Miss Millie," 
she said, unexpectedly gracious. 

I smiled. 

"I appreciate your working overtime, and all," she said. "I'm sorry 
to be stubborn about the rose, but 
it's important that I keep it with 
me." 

"Oh, I don't think you're being 
stubborn," I said politely, biting 
into a sandwich. The cheese was a 
little older than Miss Millie and 
nearly as brittle. 

"I'm glad you see how important 
it is," she said. 

"Would you mind telling me 
why it's so important?" I asked. 

"If you won't think it odd," said 
Miss Millie doubtfully. "It's all 
true, every word." 

"I'm sure it is." 

She leaned forward a little and 
lowered her voice. "Well, my 
great-great-great grandfather died 
at age ninety-four," she said expressively. 

I nodded, wondering where this 
would take us. 

"He killed himself," she continued, dabbing at her mouth with 
her handkerchief, and taking a sip 
of coffee. 

I choked on a piece of cheese. 

"My great-great grandfather 
killed himself at ninety-six, my 
great grandfather at ninety-nine, my 
grandmother at one hundred and 
one, and my father at one hundred 



and two." She paused and looked at 
me. "I will be one hundred and six 
in four months." 

I gasped. "Congratulations." 
That was all I could think of. 

She hunched her shoulders secretively, and leaned farther forward. I 
leaned back. "I'm determined to die 
a natural death," she said. "I heard 
that heart cases on Mars have to 
go back to Terra to survive. I've 
had four attacks on Terra. Each one 
of them should have been fatal." 
She looked indignant. "Now I've 
come to Mars." 

I assumed she was harmless. 
"How did you get by the medics?" 
I asked.
"My heart gets a little better after each attack," she said gloomily. 

"Why don't you just let the rose 
tree die?" I said, with my best 
Alice in Wonderland logic. 

"I want to beat the curse," she 
said, glaring at the rose. 

"Isn't it suicide to come to Mars 
with a weak heart?" 

She nodded. "We can't break 
away from it all at once," she said. 
"This way is a little better than a 
knife or a rope." She finished her 
sandwich and started in on the coffee in earnest. "You see, I've no 
one to leave it to, so it will go to a 
botanical garden. I don't want an 
innocent curator or attendant to be 
visited with the curse." 

"A lot of people wouldn't think 
of immortality as a curse," I poinfeed out. 

"When they got as old and 
creaky as 1 am, they would," she 



MISS MILLIE S ROSE 



said. "I get weaker all the time. I'm 
deaf now, and soon will be blind 
and bedridden. If I ever break a 
bone, it will never heal." 

The office seemed colder and 
darker. I felt sorry for Miss Millie, 
suffering under her imaginary curse. 
"What color are the blossoms?" I 
asked, pulling the rose book toward 
me. 

"It has never bloomed," said 
Miss Millie. 

She took the second book to 
Sam's desk. I worked as quickly as 
I could, still hoping to find the 
thing before Sam got there. 

I finished the first book, and 
started through the third. Miss 
Millie was about a quarter through 
hers. 

The night ship from Luna City 
came, shaking the building. 

The rose kept vibrating after the 
rest of the room quieted down. 

"It moves around like that sometimes," said Miss Millie. "Usually 
when it's in the sun." 

I kept on with the plate comparison. 

Sam came in about half an hour 
after that, needing a shave. The 
rose tree was still fluttering. 

"You are an angel," I said, pushing an arm into my windbreaker. 

"Have a bite before you go?" 
Sam held out a fhermolunch. 

"No thanks," I said. "What I 
want is sleep." 

I was never so glad to lie down 
in my life. 

Nine hours later, the rose tree, 
rose books, and Miss Millie were 



89 

gone. There was Sam, peering at 
the beetle book with red eyes. He 
needed a shave worse than ever. 

"You identified it?" I said joyfully. 

Sam shook his head. "It's not in 
the books," he said. "They've gone 
over to the bot lab to be tested." 

"If she doesn't get some sleep 
soon, it'll kill her," I said. 

"That's the idea, isn't it?" Sam 
said wearily. 

"She told you about the rose 
tree?" 

"And her great-great-great grandfather, who committed suicide at 
the age of ninety-six," Sam groaned, "and her grandfather who shot 
himself at the age of one hundred 
and one. And Miss Millie will be 
one hundred and six in four 
months." 

"It was her grandmother," I 
said, "who shot herself." 

Sam sighed. 

"Look, Sam," I said. "She's awfully old, after all, and she's getting 
feeble. I feel sorry for her." 

"Me, too," Sam admitted. 

"You go home," I said. "I'll hold 
the fort." 

"Hah!" said Sam. "The fort, 
maybe, but how about the beetles?" 

"I swear by the sands of Mars," 
I said solemnly, "that I will do 
beetles all day long." 

He didn't seem convinced, but 
he was too sleepy to resist. 

I decided to fool him, and went 
at the beetles with vim. By lunch 
time, I had identified nine of the 
little beasts, two above the previous 



90 FANTASTIC 

record for any one day, so I took 
my lunch, and Miss Millie's, over 
to the bot lab. 

Somebody had loaned her a 
blanket, and she had set up housekeeping in the Ladies' Lounge. She 
was doing up her hair when I walked in. She looked as fresh as paint. 

"How about some breakfast?" I 
asked. 

"Thank you, Carrie," she said. "I 
just woke up, and I must say, I had 
a wonderful sleep." 

I set the tray on the table, and 
we fell to. 

"How's the rose?" I asked. 

"Fine," she said cheerfully. "It's 
in that next room, there. They 
brought in a chair for me. They've 
been working on it while I was 
asleep." 

"They won't hurt it, I'm sure," 
I said. 

She nodded. "I told them about 
it," she said confidently. "They 
know how important it is to me." 

I recognized the fine hand of 
Fergusson in this. Fergusson is the 
Casanova of the Research Department. He can make any woman believe anything. I saw Miss Millie 
seated safely in his lair, and returned to the blessed beetles. 

An hour later, I received a procession. Fergusson opened the door 
with a flourish, and handed over 
Miss Millie and her rose, together 
with his report. 

"Such a nice young man," said 
Miss Millie, putting the rose in the 
sun on Sam's desk. "He had the 
couch brought over and put in the 



UNIVERSE 

Ladies' Lounge here, in case I 
wanted to lie down." She looked at 
me, smiling. "He said I would be 
out before closing time this evening. He said all you have to do is 
read his report and sign it. That 
won't take long, will it?" 

"That depends on what's in the 
report," I said. "You'd better hang 
your coat up." 

She looked at me suspiciously, 
but she put her coat in Sam's locker. She went over to his desk, and 
picked up a beetle. 

I opened Fergusson's report. It 
was verbose and difficult. Fergusson 
fancies himself a poet. 

I began to hear a whispering 
noise, and looked up, wondering if 
Miss Millie had started to talk to 
herself. 

She was turning the pages of the 
beetle book, absorbed and anxious. 
The rose was rustling around in the 
sun. 

I turned my head quickly, to see 
if the window was open. It wasn't, 
which cut out the possibility of a 
draft. All buildings on Mars are 
draft-proof, on account of the continual wind, and occasional accompanying dust. The rose was waving 
its leaves by itself. 

I dove into the report. The sooner 
I finished it, the sooner Miss Millie 
and her rustling rose could pass out 
of my office and my life. 

The whispering grew, until it 
sounded like the first grade when 
the teacher's back is turned. 

"It never carried on like that before," said Miss Millie. 



MISS MILLIE S ROSE 



91 



I turned my head. She looked 
worried. The rose was fluttering 
like a song bush in the Mars wind. 

"I think I'll move it out of the 
sun," she said. 

"The plant is so fragile that it 
moves in the slightest current of 
air," said Fergusson's report. 
"When even our most sensitive instruments can detect no motion, the 
plant in question rustles slightly." 

"I know, Fergusson, I know," I 
thought. 

On the shady side of the Kxm 1 
the rose rustled more loudly. All .it 
once, the rustling coalesced. 

"Miss Millie, Miss Millie," the 
rose whispered. "Miss Millie." 

At this juncture, the intercom 
mike buzzed. 

"Carrie," said George's voice. "I 
got a man down here, wit a pitcher-thing from Corianna. We never 
imported nuttin like it before." 

"Pitcher," I said hysterically. 
"What can a pitcher do? Let it go." 

"You're da boss," said George. 

I cut off the mike. Miss Millie 
looked like she was going to pass 
out. "Is it really talking?" she asked faintly. 

"Miss Millie, Miss Millie," the 
rose whispered. "Miss Millie." 

I nodded. "It sure is." 

Her color began to come back. 
"I'm glad of that," she said. "I was 
afraid I was hearing things." 

I was not relieved. I buzzed Fergusson. "What did you do to that 
rose tree?" 

"Examined it," he said. 



"Did you spray it, or inject it 
with anything?" 
"No. Why?" 

"No reason. I was just curious," 
I said. "Did you have any other 
plants in the lab?" 

"Just the song bushes," he said. 
"Look, what's this all about?" 

"Nothing, really," I said, my 
mind whirling around. Fergusson 
has been breeding song bushes for 
years, trying to get one that will 
reproduce a musical scale. 

"I'll come up and see for myself," he threatened. 

"Never mind," I said. "The rose 
tree has started to talk." 

"Talk?" 

"Listen." I held the mike down 
near the tree. 

"Miss Millie, Miss Millie," whispered the tree. 

"You being funny, Carrie?" 

"Word of honof, it talks," I said. 
"You know how it rustles? Well, 
now it's rustling what you just 
heard." 

"I'll be right up," said Fergusson. 

"Oh, no you don't," I said. "It 
might have been the song bushes 
that got it started, and you're covered with stuff from them. We'd 
better wait until it quiets down, if 
it does." 

"O. K.," said Fergusson. "Don't 
forget to keep me posted." 

I switched off. The rose was still 
buzzing. 

Miss Millie gathered herself together until she looked all stern 
New Englander, and bent over her 



92 FANTASTIC 

talkative house plant. "What do you 
want?" she demanded. 

"Miss Millie, Miss Millie," the 
rose tree whispered, fading off into 
incoherencies. 

"Maybe it just mimics speech, 
like a parrot," I said hopefully. A 
rose tree that mimics is not as aweinspiring as a rose tree that talks. 

"Miss Millie, Miss Millie," said 
the rose tree again, more clearly. 

"What do you want?" Miss Millie sounded annoyed. 

"Miss Millie," the tree whispered, "put me in the sun." 

"There's one theory gone," I 
said. 

"Please," the rose added. 

"Do you think I should?" 

"Please, Miss Millie," said the 
rose tree, getting louder. "I love the 
sun." 

"It's going to knock all its 
leaves off, thrashing around like 
that," Miss Millie said. 

"I guess you'd better put it back 
on Sam's desk." 

She lifted the dish gingerly, keeping her hands and arms clear of the 
fluttering leaves, and set it in the 
sun. 

The rose tree rustled happily. 
"Now I can sing aloud," it whispered. It began an eerie humming 
song about the sun, and running 
water, and the pleasure of being 
beautiful. 

It was too Hans Christian Andersen for words. I called Sam. 

When he got there, the rose was 
singing a song about night and the 
feeling of starlight on leaves. 



UNIVERSE 

"Good grief," Sam said. "How 
long has this been going on?" 

"About an hour," I said. "It was 
with the song bushes down in the 
bot lab, and they may have stepped 
up its output." 

"It always rustles in the sun," 
Miss Millie put in, "even when 
there isn't any wind, but it's never 
done anything like this before." 

"Get Fergusson up here," said 
Sam. 

"We're waiting for it to quiet 
down," I said. "Fergusson's always 
messing around with song bushes. 
If they caused the trouble, he'll 
make it worse." 

"Ugh," said Sam. 

"What are we going to do with 
it until it quiets down?" Miss Millie asked. 

"Kill it?" I suggested. "Solve all 
our problems at once?" 

"It's up to Miss Millie," Sam 
said firmly. He was pale around the 
eyes. "It's her rose." 

The mike buzzed again. It was 
Smeltzer's office slave and whipping 
girl. Sam and I were wanted upstairs. 

Smeltzer was red and sputtering. 
"Look out that window," he roared. 

We gazed upon the valuable 
warehouses blazing in the sun. ■ 

"What happened?" asked Sam. 

"That is the fault of you two incompetents," Smeltzer raged. "You 
let a Corianna ceramic through unchecked. 

"George's pitcher," I said involuntarily. 

Smeltzer turned on me. "So it 



MISS MILLIE S ROSE 



93 



was Carrie, this time. Dear little 
Carrie, shaking her merry curls, too 
busy to be bothered." 

"What happened, exactly?" Sam 
asked, drawing fire to himself. 

"The ceramic came into contact 
with some atigl spores, and ignited, 
widi a medium-sized explosion," 
said Smeltzer, falsely calm "A 
stevedore barely escaped with his 
life. Ten million credits worth of 
goods have been destroyed already, 
and the fire isn't under control yet." 
He glowered at me. 

Tm sorry," I said. 

Smeltzer burst "Sorry! So am I. 
So's the port authority. So's die 
Council," he screamed. "What were 
you doing that kept you too busy 
to look at that ceramic?" 

"Reading a report on a miniature 
rose tree," I said. "New species. 
Terra import" 

"Rose tree! Stars of the Cosmos P 

"This rose tree is different," I 
said. 

"It might be dangerous," Sam 
said. 

"Indeed?" said Smeltzer, quietly, 
turning blue. "Has it threatened 
either of you?" 

"No, sir," I said, "but it talks." 

"And sings," Sam added miserably. 

Smeltzer glared at us suspicious
If
"Honestly, Mr. Smeltzer," I said. 

"I advise you both to visit a competent psychotech," Smeltzer said. 
"I expect to find your resignations 
on my desk tomorrow." 



"Just let me use your intercom 
mike," I said. 

Smeltzer waved a hand at it. 

I buzzed Miss Millie. "Put the 
rose on," I said. 

The rose was still singing. 

"All right" said Smeltzer. "So 
you've got a singing rose bush . . ." 

"Tree," said Sam. 

"Rose bush," Smeltzer went on. 
"Maybe that's a reason for that bonfire, but it's not good enough. Singing and burning are two different 
things. You're still fired." He 
sounded mollified. 

"Cheer up," I whispered to Sam 
in the halL "He'll hire us again 
next week. He always does. We'll 
remind him of the way we tracked 
down the red clover poison." Red 
clover runs amuck on Mars and 
sucks up so much nitrogen that it's 
poisonous to native wild life. 

"I know that," Sam said. "I'm 
wondering what will happen to 
Miss Millie and the rose tree until 
we can get back." 

"We'll have to come in tomorrow anyway," I said. "He can't accept our resignations until he gets 
here." 

The rose tree was humming softly and sweetly when we came in. 

"It's going to sleep," Miss Millie 
whispered. 

"Do you think we could send for 
Fergusson?" I asked. 

Sam buzzed for Fergusson. 
"Dance barefoot through those song 
bushes for a while, and then come 
up here," he said. 

The rose knew Fergusson was 



94 FANTASTIC 

coming even before we heard his 
feet sending echoes through the 
hall. "I feel so beautiful, so strange, 
so happy," it sang. "I love the sun. 
I love the earth. I love." 

"Mars," I said, "does wonderful 
things for roses." 

Fergusson came in. "It seems to 
have learned some new words." 

"It must be the song bushes that 
do it," Sam said. 

"There you are, Miss Millie," I 
said. "You just have to keep your 
rose tree away from song bushes, 
unless you want it to talk." 

"Would that be difficult?" Miss 
Millie asked. 

"Song bushes are as prevalent on 
Mars as milkweed in Vermont." 

"I don't know what I'm going 
to do," said Miss Millie. "I feel so 
tired and depressed, I'm just about 
ready to give up." Her Vermont 
look came back. "It's the rose," she 
said. "I'm not going to give in to 
it." 

"We'll think of something," I 
said. "Won't we, Sam, Fergusson?" 

"Oh, sure," said Sam. 

"We're the experts." 

"Well, I won't take my life, even 
if you can sing," said Miss Millie 
to her rose. 

"Miss Millie," whispered the 
rose tree. "After all the ages I have 
lived, at last I'm going to bloom. I 
believed I didn't want to, but now 
I know I do." 

"Does it answer questions?" Fergusson asked. 

"We haven't asked it any," Sam 
said. 



UNIVERSE 

"It's not a Ouija board," I said. 

"I don't mean that kind of question, " said Fergusson. "What species are you?" 

"Miss Millie, Miss Millie," said 
the tree. "Please bring me some 
clear water." 

Miss Millie went out of the 
room, glass in hand. 

"Let's kill it," I said. "She thinks 
it keeps her from dying. A short 
snort of alcohol instead of water 
will do it, and neither of them will 
know what happened." 

Sam shook his head. "It's Miss 
Millie's rose." 

"Miss Millie, bring me some 
clear water," said the tree. "I feel 
so happy and so strange." 

"Strange is the word," I said. 

"I am going to flower," the rose 
whispered. 

"Do you know what species you 
are?" Fergusson asked again. 

"Miss Millie, some water," said 
the rose. 

"Self -centered, isn't it?" said 
Sam. 

Miss Millie came back in, and 
poured water into the blue china 
dish. 

"Water, water," the rose tree 
hissed. It started to sing again. 

"Not even a thank you," said 
Miss Millie. 

"Let's see if we can finish those 
beetles before Smeltzer accepts our 
resignations," Sam said. 

"Anything would be better than 
watching a rose tree sing," I said. 

"I'll leave so it can quiet down 
again," said Fergusson. 



MISS MILLIE S ROSE 



95 



"I feel so wonderful, so strange," 
it sang. "At last I am going to 
bloom." 

"I wonder what will happen 
when it blooms," I said. 

Miss Millie looked worried. "It 
never did it before." 

"Flower, blossom, bloom," said 
the rose. 

"Look," said Miss Millie. "It 
has a bud." 

"Petal, stamen, pistol, calyx," 
sang the rose tree. 

"Beetles," said Sam firmly. 

During the afternoon, we identified three beetles, while the rose 
tree's song died away, and the bud 
grew and swelled. Miss Millie 
watched it. 

At quitting time, she seemed 
calm and contented. "You young 
people run along home," she said. 
"I'll take the rose tree into the 
Ladies' Lounge and have a nice 
rest." 

"Are you sure you'll be all 
right?" I asked. 

"Oh, yes, indeed," said Miss Millie. 

"We'll send you some supper," 
said Sam. 

"Do that, please," said Miss Millie. 

"That bud will open in the morning," said Sam, sealing his windbreaker. 

"I do believe it will," said Miss 
Millie, pink and smiling. 

"She's awfully pleased about the 
rose tree," I whispered in the grav 
shaft. 

"She looks twenty years young


er than when she came, Sam agreed. 

"I wonder if she'll do anything 
foolish?" I said. 

Sam shook his head. "She's got 
her curse beat," he said. "Let's go 
over to Magnus's for dinner." 

"We'll send something for Miss 
Millie from there," I agreed. 
"Those cheese sandwiches last night 
were horrors." 

Two hours after the next sunrise, 
I walked into the Ladies' Lounge. 
Miss Millie was lying on the couch 
under the window, covered with 
Fergusson's blanket. I ran toward 
her, frightened. 

She was asleep, smiling and contented. On the table, in the full sunlight, was the blue dish, and the 
biggest blood red rose I have ever 
seen. The room was still. The rose 
tree's leaves were turning brown. 

"Miss Millie," I said softly. 

She opened her eyes. "Well, my 
dear?" 

"What happened?" 

Triumph shone around her. "I 
waited until the sun rose, and when 
it bloomed, I took the flower." She 
touched the rose. "Isn't it lovely?" 

"It killed itself, blooming," I 
said. 

Miss Millie nodded. 

"Well," I said, recovering. "Now 
you can come and stay with me, and 
Sam and I will show you the wonders of Mars." 

Miss Millie shook her head, 
smiling. "Thank you, dear," she 
said, "but I can't I've got to go 
back to Terra. I'm a cardiac, you 
know." 



universe 
in 
books 

by ... Hans Stefan Santesson 



Comments on the new books 
—on novels and "conventions" 
and on other matters which 
may perhaps interest you. 



I've been known to say unkind 
words about space opera from time 
to time, and I suspect I will continue 
to do so, if the circumstances warrant it. However, Poul Anderson's 
THE WAR OF TWO WORLDS 
(Ace Double Novels, 35 cents) is 
unusually good space opera ! There ! 
I've said it! 

It's an oversimplification to summarize it, as the publishers do, — 
"Earth Must Choose — the Martians 
or the Monsters". The issue is decidedly less simple, envisaging, as 
it does, the possibility of cooperation 
between Martians and our people 
against a third force, a third element, that menaces the security of 
both invading Martians and invaded 
Earth. Intelligence Prime, self-styled 
Lord of the Solar System and keyfigure in the plans of the Tahowwa, 
is far from a "monster", and Regelin dzu Comthan is a decidedly unusual Martian. 

And read also the companion 
volume, John Brunner's THRESHOLD OF ETERNITY, the vivid 
and dramatic story of the meeting, 
thanks to a twist in Time, of Chantal Vareze of London, Lawrence 
Hawkins of California, and Burma 
— a man from the 41 st Century, and 



Another report on some books of interest to science fiction and fantasy 
readers — and on science fiction fan activities, when these may interest 
you— it all reflecting the many-sided aspects of life and speculative 
thought and activities in this field still simply called science fiction. 



9 o 



UNIVERSE IN BOOKS 



97 



how these and others help to save 
this World. A first rate action story, 
by one of the most interesting 
writers in the field. Don't miss this 
Ace novel. 

Kenneth F. Gantz, author of 
NOT IN SOLITUDE (Doubleday, 
$3.50), is an editor of the Air 
Force's professional journal of strategy and techniques, The Air University Quarterly Review, and is the 
editor of The United States Air 
Porce Report on the Ballistic Missile. As a result, NOT IN SOLITUDE is an exciting and plausible 
novel about the first of our people 
to arrive on Mars and the conditions 
they are likely to encounter. There 
are moments when Dr. John Dane, 
newspaperman and physicist, may 
seem to have some of the qualities 
of the idiot hero in some mystery 
novels you can recall. Dane gets an 
obvious, almost masochistic delight 
out of his frequent tangling with 
Colonel Cragg, commander of the 
expedition to Mars. But Cragg's 
doubts about Dane change as — no, 
I'd better not go on. Read NOT IN 
SOLITUDE instead. You'll enjoy 
it! 

THE FITZGERALD REPORT, a 
pamphlet published by the UFO Research Committee of Akron, Box 
5242, Akron 13, Ohio, at $1., reports on a sighting in Ohio this fall 
and on the Air Force handling of 
the subsequent investigation. The 
Committee expresses considerable 
dissatisfaction with this investiga


tion, which it feels is typical of the 
treatment given UFO reports over 
the past ten years. In fact the Com 
mittee uses some rather unfortunate 
language in making this point, 
which does not encourage faith in 
their own objectivity. 

It's quite possible that I am 
wrong, but a description of how 
some people — thrown together by a 
cataclysm — somehow survive that 
cataclysm, is not necessarily science 
fiction. John Bowen's AFTER THE 
RAIN (Ballantine Books, 35 cents) 
describes such a cataclysm and the 
behavior of a group of people, 
thrown together by circumstances beyond their control, as they struggle 
and scheme and fight to survive in 
a world where familiar mores and 
the familiar things that guide you 
are no longer present. Angus Wilson, describes it, with some justification, as "a satire of the first order," 
and to the extent that it takes apart, 
with superb British quietness, some 
very distressingly credible people, — 
to that extent it // a satire of how 
we would behave, facing such situations as these people do. But is this 
Science Fiction ? Hm .... 

James Blish's THE TRIUMPH 
OF TIME (Avon, 35 cents) is another novel, apparently the final 
novel, about John Amalfi and the 
way of life which that incredible 
man rules. Ruled. As is usually the 
case with a novel by the author of 
A CASE OF CONSCIENCE (Ballantine, 35 cents) there is an ap


98 FANTASTIC 

proach to history and, in this case, 
to the finite quality of that history, 
signally lacking in the writing of 
some one can think of . . . The fact 
that there are some unusual people 
working in this field, genuinely 
dedicated craftsmen, people with 
vision — with imagination — and 
with the ability for compassion, at 
least in their writing, is perhaps a 
reason why the field has survived 
the flocking to it of people who 
were (and are) neither dedicated 
nor compassionate. James Blish is 
one of these unique craftsmen, and 
in this novel of the passing of a way 
of life he has some beautiful and 
sensitive passages. Do read this. But 
don't read it if you're looking just 
for relaxation .... 

Alfred Bester's THE DEMOLISHED MAN (Signet, 35 cents) 
has just been reissued. I am frank 
to admit that I have never been too 
fond of this novel of a 24th century man who commits murder in 
a crime-proof society, but those of 
you who missed it ( were there any, 
I wonder?) should certainly read 
it. 

Edmund Cooper, as readers of 
this magazine have already discovered, likes to wander far in space, 
fascinated by the riddle of time, 
interested in people and how . they 
will behave, given certain situations. 
TOMORROW'S GIFT (Ballantine 
Books, 35 cents) is a group of ten 
stories by the author of DEADLY 
IMAGE, stories which have ap


UNIVERSE 

peared in this magazine, in the 
Saturday Evening Post, and elsewhere. Don't miss this. 

Andiony Boucher's THE BEST 
FROM FANTASY AND SCIENCE FICTION (Doubleday, 
$3.75) is with us again. This eighth 
appearance of the anthology has 
some lovely stories, including Fritz 
Leiber's A DESKFUL OF GIRLS 
and Avram Davidson's delightful 
THE GRANTHA SIGHTING. Do 
read this. 

Some of you will recall that we ran 
a brief article by Sam Moskowitz in 
this column, some months ago, 
which stressed the importance of 
conference committees incorporating, in the interest of contributing 
conference "members" who are in 
effect— when contributing their dollar or two dollars — co-sponsors of 
the conference and thus technically 
responsible, in the event of any deficit, whether or not they actually 
attended the conference. I still 
agree with Sam, and this on the 
basis of more than twenty-five years 
of organizational experience. 

Few tears seem to have been shed 
for book dealers at the January 4th 
meeting of the Eastern Science Fiction Association in Newark where 
dealers and collectors, including 
Julius Unger and Milton Spahn, 
Sam Moskowitz and Henry Moskowitz (not relations!), joined in a 
discussion of Dealing in and Collecting Science Fiction. We are told 



UNIVERSE IN ROOKS 



99 



"some amusing episodes of outwitting book dealers were related." The 
meeting ended with a dramatic reading of science fiction poetry by Sam 
Moskowitz and his wife, Dr. 
Christine H. Moskowitz. 

The previous weekend, this column had looked in on the Fanarcon, 
' New York's Own Beatnick Con" 
(to quote the invitations), an interesting experience. While I am 
afraid I would question the interest in Science Fiction of some of 
those present (I am not necessarily 
thinking of the lean young man seated in a Buddha pose on a rug, in 
the middle of the floor, while all 
sorts of characters swirled around 
him ....), the affair was certainly 
well attended. More than a hundred 
people, including fans from Baltimore, Cleveland, Detroit and the 
Village, attended the three day con 
(which included a showing of the 
Czech film Krakatit, based on Karel 
Capek's novel). Perhaps the most 
impressive participant, in a way, was 
a Canadian bagpipe player, complete 
with kilt and cigar. When he 
stopped to breathe, the hi-fi set 
would go on. 

There have been some interesting 
reactions to Harry Harrison's letter 
in our last issue. A correspondent in 
Dunbar, West Virginia, wrote 
Harry that the trouble was that 
"Fandom is no longer independent", while a local reader (incidentally an officer of a local group) 
wrote: 



"Isn't it possible that the reason 
fans no longer talk about science 
fiction is that there isn't anything 
to talk about? I don't know whether 
the change is in myself, or in the 
science-fiction that is being written 
and printed nowadays, but I find 
that s-f falls into the category of 
light, relaxing reading for me, and 
I rarely find a story that makes 
enough of an impact on me to be 
remembered long enough to come 
up in discussion." 

What do the rest of you think? 
Is she right ? 

The Detroit Committee reports 
that it's beginning to look like the 
Detention ^ the 17th World Science Fiction Convention — will be 
the biggest World Convention in 
years. The number of memberships 
already received has gone beyond 
all expectations — more than 200 as 
of January 1st. 

Meanwhile, the program is beginning to shape up. In addition to the 
items reported last time, a collector's 
panel has been scheduled, with 
Dr. C L. Barrett as chairman. Doc 
Barrett owns one of the biggest science fiction collections in the country. Isaac Asimov, who obviously 
needs no introduction, has agreed to 
serve as toastmaster at the banquet, 
where he will introduce everyone 
else. 

Membership in Detention is $2. 
($1. overseas). To join — or simply 
to get more details — write Detention at 12011 Kilbourne, Detroit 13, 
Michigan. Detention meets Labor 



100 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Day weekend at Detroit's PickFort Shelby Hotel. 

Apparently ESFA is determined 
to prove Harry Harrison wrong 
when he suggested, in last month's 
FU, that "SF fandom as I knew it 
is dead." 

The Newark fan group, headed 
this year by Alex Osheroff, Director, and Belle Dietz, Vice-Director, 
announced a discussion of "the 
state of the Weird and Fantastic in 
Fiction" for their February meeting, just as we were going to press. 

And assorted ghosts shuddered, 
we understand, as members of the 
Futurians (sponsors of the Fanarcon, commented on above) heard a 
talk, the previous weekend, on 
"The Secret History of the First 
Futurians." 

Readers will recall the excellent 
series of articles on UFO sightings 
and phenomena, prepared specially 
for this magazine by the Research 
Section of Civilian Saucer Intelligence of New York. Members and 
friends of CSI will celebrate that 
organization's Fifth Anniversary at 
a meeting at the Hotel Diplomat, 
43rd Street near Sixth Avenue, in 
New York, Friday evening at 8:30 
P.M., March 27th. Speakers announced, as we go to press, include 
Major Donald E. Keyhoe of 
NICAP, and John Nebel. Admission will be $1.50. 

"Long John" Nebel, as we have 
said in this column previously, has 
what is undoubtedly the most un


usual program on the air today. 
Night after night, in 27 states, people stay awake from midnight to 
5:30 in the morning to hear all 
sorts of topics, from the exotic to 
the anti-exotic, discussed over WOR 
on "Long John's Party Line." 
Guests on the program have included Fantastic Universe authors Ivan 
T. Sanderson, Lester del Rey, Isabel Davis of CSI, and Morris K. 
Jessup, and others interested in 
UFOlogy and also other subjects 
such as juvenile delinquency, minority problems, and others of our 
social ills. "The Party Line" has 
come to be recognized as a platform 
for the exchange of views and 
opinions on a variety of subjects — 
views and opinions which some 
may not always agree with but the 
airing of which represents a continuation, on the air, of the old 
Town Meeting principle. As such, 
the program is important and merits our respect 

Just as we went to press, we received an advance copy of Isaac 
Asimov's NINE TOMORROWS 
(Doubleday, $3.50). Dr. Asimov is 
of course one of the most important — and interesting — of the writers in this field, important because 
of his ability to combine scientific 
fact with the unpredictable and unscientific actions of that Man who 
may inherit the possible Tomorrow. 
His people — and his Intelligences 
— are therefore real and vivid, as, 
for instance, in THE GENTLE 
VULTURES. Don't miss this! 



the 



amnesic 



men 



by... John Victor Peterson 



A gleaming metallic tape crept 
through an autopilot / computer , 
nearing its end. Those who fascinatedly watched it knew the Starship approached destination. 

Abruptly relays were clicking. 
Anticipatory excitement leaped in 
the hearts of the crew as keyers 
activated retranslation apparatus. 
Their eyes gleamed with tearfilled 
release as the ship emerged from 
the featureless deep purple of 
hyper-space into starshot normalcy 
above Sol's ecliptic plane. 

Home! 

Home in bewildered thankfulness 
but, curiously, without sense of 
loss. 

There had been loss — loss beyond their capacity to recall. 

Which those awaiting their return would instantly recognize. 

But, for the greater part, soon 
forget— 



Venus! She remembered the 
harsh record of history and 
shuddered at the thought of 
the many men who had died. 



It was early morning. Bright 
sunlight streaming through her 
apartment's windows failed to bolster Dr. Martha Cowan's waning 
spirits. 

She stood dully surveying the 
dark roofs of Baltimore's older 
quarter from the twentieth floor of 



John Victor Peterson, prominent in the field for many years, returns 
after a much too long absence from these pages with this story of an 
expedition to a distant earth-type planet inhabited by very friendly, and 
cooperative humanoids. But what was the secret of this strange planet? 



IOI 



102 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Doctors' Quarters at Space Medicine Institute. 

Will there ever be an end to 
waiting? she thought, her sensitive 
features somber. Will I ever see 
Pat again? 

It had been a year since the Starship's vanishment into hyperspace 
on its maiden interstellar voyage — 
to Barnard's Star which radioastronomy had indicated to be the 
nearest system with a planet close 
enough to its primary to be humanly habitable. The ship's return was 
long overdue. 

There had been no word. But 
then no word could be expected 
until the ship's return and emergence from hyperspace within reasonable detection distance. Astronomy cannot visually or photographically trace a ship's passage within 
a spacewarp. Electronics, similarly 
limited by time and light-speed, 
cannot track or communicate. 

The visifone chimed. 

She responded automatically, 
dully; then viewed her father's 
smiling face and cried, "Pat's 
back! The ship's back! You said 
you'd not call again until it was!" 

She choked up. Her dark eyes 
flooded. Her father waited patiently in the faraway White Sands 
Spaceport tower. 

Finally she said shakily, "I'm 
sorry, Dad, acting up so." 

"You're acting as a grown and 
loving woman should," he said, 
ineffable sadness in his tone. His 
eyes swept her face. She knew he 
was thinking of her mother. 



He, too, had watched the cold, 
unyielding sky for many an empty, 
endless night, hopelessly awaiting 
the return of the torchship which 
had borne his lovely actress wife 
on the beginning of a tour of Sol's 
outer colonies. 

He had never accepted, as Martha had, radar evidence that the 
ship and its late occupants were 
debris orbiting near Ceres, obviously victims of a breakdown of automatic recycling controls foilowing 
failure of the main evasion radar 
amid the asteroids. 

For a sudden, savage moment 
Martha resented the imminence of 
happiness he could never truly 
share. 

He shook his graying head and 
said, "The Starship's orbiting at 
five thousand miles. We've a brief 
dispatch from Commander Talix, 
indicating all have returned in 
good health." 

That had been her chief concern 
— the question of possible infection 
or mental aberration. 

Her father continued, "Chet 
Talix indicates they found an 
Farthtype planet inhabited byfriendly, cooperative humanoids. 
Pat certainly chose the right star! 

"Of course we must verify the 
men's health. As a precaution we've 
sent up the robotic shuttles. Thank 
God for telemetry; Ve'U be almost 
positive of their condition before 
they surface. It's obligatory. We 
can't chance another Venus case!" 

Venus! She recalled the harsh 
record of history and shuddered. 



the am: 

Two hundred years before telemetry 
had shown that those returning 
from the maiden voyage to Venus 
had unknowingly contracted a 
virulent plague. An attempt to cure 
them had not been chanced; the 
World President had activated remote keyers which sent the torchship, its attendant shuttles and its 
crew to sure decontamination: incineration in Sol. 

"But, Dad, you said Chet said 
they're all right!" 

He smiled gently. "I'm sorry. 
It's just that I know how impatient 
you are. They'll still have to go 
through decontamination and customs. The clearances will take time. 

"Now, come down, Martha. 
You've security clearance." 

"I'm on my way, Dad. Thanks!" 

Only after she had excitedly 
punched the autopilot button which 
took her gyrotomic monocoupe up 
from the building's roofstage did 
she realize that she had failed to 
call the Desk. 

But she was one of dozens training the men who would staff Starship II when it was completed a 
year hence. Someone would assume 
her responsibilities: Peter Dowd 
and Tom Gentry would understand. 
They knew how she felt about Pat 
D'Agostino. 

And Fat wasn't just another man 
returning from elsewhere. He had 
conquered interstellar space. He 
had invented the hyperspace drive, 
had supervised the building of the 
Starship, and now had taken man 
to Barnard's Star and back. He was 



!SIC MEN 103 

most certainly not just another man 
but one whose name was in everyone's mind, whose name was secure 
in history. 

Detailed testing of the men was 
purely routine! Every spaceship's 
crew returning from other worlds 
was cautiously subjected to telemetric examination before being permitted to surface. And they were 
brought down in antiseptic robotic 
shuttles sent up from Earth while 
their own scoutships remained in 
the mother ship in the frigid quarantine of space. 

Talix had said the men were all 
right. 

Yet she could not help wondering what the surface charts might 
be recording through telemetry 
now — 

Tremblingly tense, she buttoned 
the ship's stereo for urgently needed distraction. The news disclosed 
nothing her father had not already 
told her. 

The monocoupe suddenly began 
to circle, twisted into Winthrop 
Field's landing traffic pattern 
through radar-robotics which 
brought it swiftly to surface and to 
the Terminal Building serving both 
field and spaceport. 

Tall, ramrod-straight, her father 
waited on the ramp. 

"Any news of Pat, Dad?" 

"Telemetry doesn't check by 
names," he said gently. "Only ten 
men have been enshuttled in any 
event. But I must tell you straight: 
there's an extreme excitability of 
their nervous systems." 



104 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



'May I see, Dad?" she asked 
with forced calmness. 

He walked with her into the 
Terminal Building, excusing himself abruptly as the public address 
system blared, "Manager Cowan 
report to Reception. The Presidential plane is in final approach." 

She slipped into the tense semidarkness of the telemetry room 
where doctors and electronics specialists were tensely surveying radiant kinescopic charts across which 
pulsed purple waves spelling out 
the workings of the enshuttled 
men's vital organs. 

Now she fascinatedly observed 
the electroencephalographic recordings, expertly noting the slightest 
peaking of brainwave patterns. 
Curious — but, again, perhaps not. 
Certainly the men would be mentally exhilarated, coming home in 
triumph from the first transit to 
another star! 

Her father's voice came over the 
public address: 

"Your attention, please! Shuttle 
one is surfacing. No personnel are 
permitted on the observation ramps 
or port." 

Martha turned alone to a stereo 
viewer; the others had picked up 
signals from a second shuttle and 
were conscientiously continuing 
work. 

As the stern-ended shuttle surfaced on a blazing energy tripod, 
she recalled Pat's departure a year 
before. She had clung to him almost frantically then, praying he 
would not go, knowing the solar 



system could not stand his loss, 
knowing with a deeper conviction 
that she could not. For only he of 
all men understood the hyperspace 
drive and the math behind it. And 
only he of all men understood her. 

A remote controlled gantry moved up to the surfaced shuttle, hesitated for disembarkation of its 
passengers and withdrew from the 
radiation-contaminated area. 

Stereo cameras traced the gantry's 
elevator's descent. 

Martha instantly recognized the 
heavy, squarish figure of the first 
man who emerged; it was Commander Talix — Chet, dear friend! 

Others . . . Martha counted 
them, straining for sight of Pat. 

Ten — and Pat was not among 
them! 

She told herself then that he 
would stay aspace until the last, 
making certain all was in order. He 
would be among the last tenth, not 
the first as when they'd left. 

World President Batchelder 
came on the stereo then from Reception. 

"I am pleased to greet the men 
of the Barnard's Star Expedition 
but afraid that what I came prepared to say would be redundant. 
All I will say, Commander Talix, 
is 'Welcome home!' " 

What a pity those two great men 
could not be face to face, that 
thronging thousands were not here 
to greet the returned men with 
thunderous applause, that those returning must be isolated as potential lepers until the report from the 



THE AMNESIC MEN 



105 



Starship's surgeon had been verified! 

Talix was approaching a remoted 
camera now. Martha, certain his 
round, open face would be animated, joyous, was shocked to see a 
singular dullness instead. 

"It's good to be back," Talix said 
without conviction. "I bring greetings to Sol's people from the nobles 
of Barnard One and expressions of 
regret that it was not convenient 
for the nobles to send an ambassador at this time. 

"We truly appreciate your greeting but ask you to give the credit 
for our success to those who did not 
go with us, to those who formulated the equations upon which the 
drive is based." 

President Batchelder cut in 
swiftly, "But, Commander, one 
man — not a group — -formulated the 
equations and designed the drive. 
Surely you know that! Surely you 
know Patrick D'Agostino deserves 
all the credit!" 

"Who?" Talix asked, his face 
twisted, confused. 

"D'Agostino," the President 
said. "Patrick D'Agostino." 

The Commander's round face 
was expressionless. 

"Well, Talix?" Batchelder said 
with a trace of exasperation. . 

"I thought you were going to 
tell me a name," Talix replied. 

"Patrick D'Agostino," the President said again. "He was one of 
the ninety-nine men who accompanied you." 

And Talix responded irritably. 



"Only ninety-eight men went with 
me to Barnard's Star. All have returned. There certainly isn't and 
never was any genius with us such 
as you've intimated. Now, Mister 
President, what was the name of 
the alleged superman?" 

Martha stood stunned before the 
stereo in Telemetry. Slowly she became aware that a male doctor was 
saying something about the Quarantine Room. 

"Quarantine?" she echoed. 

"We're about to perform exhaustive tests there on Talix and the 
others. Would you care to join 
us?" 

She nodded and followed the 
doctor stumblingly, her mind chaotic. 

Talix was not a practical joker. 
In any event, complete public denial of a man's existence at a time 
of such tremendous historic significance was not the proper subject 
for a practical joke regardless of 
any anticipatedly uproarious denouement. 

She had met diet Talix at the 
innumerable briefings Pat had held 
to endoctrinate the Starship's crew, 
had come to know him well. 

There was no logical reason why 
Chet should disclaim Pat's very 
existence unless — unless Pat had 
contracted a leprous alien contagion which had caused his abandonment on Barnard One — or the 
jettisoning of his disease- wracked 
body in hyperspace. Could the Starship's psychologists, as a conse


100 FANTASTIC 

ouence, have conditioned the men 
to believe that no such companion 
had ever existed, that even such a 
name had never been? 

"It's a joke, a cruelly ill-timed 
practical joke," she told herself as 
they entered Quarantine's console 
room. 

The room's occupants — doctors 
and electronics specialists — were 
feverishly manipulating the console's potentiometers. 

Behind the double glass partition separating the room from 
Quarantine proper j Talix and his 
nine companions were being subjected to integrated clinical tests. 
Machines, dials and tanks were 
corroborating the physiographic 
tests of body functions which had 
been telemetrically transmitted 
from the first shuttle. 

Martha studied the recorded results. There was no bacterial infection, cel'ular changes, hyperkinesia 
— nothing classifiable by symptoms. 

Yet there was an obvious exhilaration of the men's nervous systems. Why? 

Psychoanalysts questioned the 
ten men individually through closed 
circuit intercoms. When the other 
nine independently expressed concord with Talix' statements, stereo 
recordings of the departure for 
Barnard's Star were flashed before 
them. 

They all swore unhesitatingly 
and without positive reactions on 
the polygraphs on the number of 
the men they counted in the stereo 



UNIVERSE 

stills. Their counts amounted to 
those actually in the stills less one ! 
They named the men they said they 
saw. They did not name Patrick 
D'Agostino. 

Martha fled the haunted room, 
racing hysterically up an escalator 
to the tower where her father sat, 
his eyes fixed upon radarscopes recording another shuttle's descent. 

"Dad," she cried urgently, "hold 
me!" 

Caught in his arms, she said almost incoherently, "It's madness, 
Dad. They say no one of Pat's description was with them. They seem 
to be stone deaf when his name h 
spoken, completely blind when it 
is written. Why? Can't you tell me 
why?" 

"Easy, Martha," he said gently. 
"The doctors will find an explanation. Don't think for a moment 
that Pat wasn't with them or that 
he hasn't returned." 

His words held convincing fervor. She found momentary assuagement; then realized that, refusing 
to accept her mother's tragic death, 
he undoubtedly thought she should 
similarly reject the possibility that 
Pat was lost forever. 

"Dad," she cried, near hysteria, 
"are you — " 

The visif one's chime interrupted. 
One of her father's arms moved 
from her to answer it. She recognized the caller's voice instantly: 
that of the chief psychoanalyst in 
Quarantine. 

"Mr. Cowan, we've completed 
the tests. It's obvious these men are 



THE AM 

both physically and mentally acceptable. We're convinced there 
never was a man associated with 
the expedition with a name like—" 
He paused. " — well, whatever it 
was!" 

Her mind was caught then in a 
maelstrom and she forced her face 
almost suffocatingly against her 
father's taut chest. 

"I understand," Tom Cowan 
said. "I'll clear the others to surface without further examination." 

She fought fearfully free from 
him, cringing back against the 
radar console. 

"Dad, can't you see?" she cried. 
"He's a somnambule like Talix and 
the others now. Someone in Barnard's Star performed somnambulistic hypnosis on those men — and it's 
infectious!" 

There was upon his face the 
same robotic look that had been on 
Chester Talix'. 

"Dad!" She slapped his face 
stingingly. 

He touched his reddening cheek 
and said bewilderedly, "Martha, 
why are you so upset?" 

"Because of Pat," she cried. 
"Because you don't believe in 
Pat!" 

"Because of whom?" 
His expression was almost 
idiotic. 

"Oh, God!" she screamed and 
ran from him, down an escalator 
and out on Winthrop Field, not 
knowing where she was going but 
only that she must flee the now 



ES1C MEN 107 

fully freed posthypnotic virulence 
of the returned men. 

A stratojet was being readied for 
takeoff. She hurried up its ramp, 
frantically clutching at the closing 
door. 

A man attempted to thrust her 
away, rasping, "Stand back. This is 
the President's plane." 

"I must see him! I must see the 
President!" she cried. 

The man hesitated, turned, saying, "It's a woman, sir, who 
says—" 

"I'm Doctor Cowan," she cut in 
breathlessly. 

Suddenly President Batchelder 
was confronting her, saying, "You 
must be Tom Cowan's girl. What's 
wrong?" 

"They all swear Pat D'Agostino 
wasn't on the ship!" 

"All of them? That's curious. I 
thought it a mental aberration personal to Talix. Well, we know 
D'Agostino was on the trip. And, 
my dear, I still think it may be a 
practical joke and that D'Agostino 
will be the last man to surface with 
a quip climaxing Talix' pronouncement!" 

They hadn't touched the President's mind. Apparently neither his 
exposure nor her own had been 
sufficiently direct for that! 

"Oh, God!" she said hoarsely, 
"if it were only that! But it's not; 
it's more, much more! I must go 
with you." Her voice rose. "In 
God's name, please!" 

The tenth and final robotic 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



shuttle homed in on the Starship in 
the dark loneliness of her orbit. 

Eight men staggered toward the 
juxtaposed locks, brandishing bottles of medicinal alcohol purloined 
from the dispensary for this very 
special occasion. 

A ninth man lingered, completely oblivious to his fellows' drunken 
summons; then turned with robotic 
precision toward the now silent 
autopilot / computer. 

There was something — something he must do . . . 

His trembling hand reached for 
the tiered potentiometers and began twisting them from zero settings. 

16-1-20-18-9-3-11
He paused wearily, brushing his 
right forearm across his brows; 
then abruptly continued. 

Done! 

He removed the perforated tape 
from the autopilot/ computer and 
turned its glistening thread in his 
hands, hesitating. 

"Come on, lieutenant," one of 
the others cried, stumbling toward 
him, "let's drink to good old 
Earth!" 

The lieutenant ignored him. 
Pulse accelerated, he bent to the 
mechanism, reversing the tape, preparing to feed it. The other slipped, 
falling against him heavily. The 
lieutenants temple struck against 
the equipments edge. His mind 
went into strangely welcome night. 

"I'm sorry, lieutenant . . ." The 
drunken man's voice trailed off, 
"Hey, fellas, he's cold as space.' 



And, damn it, I dropped my bottle!" 

"he's gittim in th' shuttle," another said thickly. 

The tape lay amidst shards of 
glass in a slowly spreading pool of 
alcohol on the deserted Starship 's 
deck. 

Waiting for another hand, 

As the stratojet sped toward 
New York, Martha related all she 
had witnessed at White Sands. 
President Batchelder immediately 
caused a receiver to be buttoned to 
Solar News. 

Martha concentrated on the cast, 
seeking clues to the strange rejection of Pat in the newsman's revelations of what the expedition's 
members had experienced on Barnard One — or what they thought 
they had experienced. 

They had reportedly met and 
throughout their stay only associated with male nobles of the alien 
race. Male commoners they had 
seen only from a distance working 
in the fields. Of females of the 
race they had seen nothing. 

The newscaster said there was 
only one city — a beautiful, towering, ultra-modernistic metropolis, 
evidently product of a highly advanced anthropology. He blandly 
continued with the paradox that 
there was no apparent industry, 
commerce or scientific research in 
progress, no vehicular or aerial 
traffic, no roadways — only footpaths which the commoners followed going to and from work in 



THE AMNESIC MEN 



109 



the surrounding fields, the only 
signs of activity being rather primitively agricultural. 

It didn't add. Why would a race 
whose artifacts were so advanced 
pursue agriculture and nothing 
else? 

And yet, if Patrick D'Agostino 
had been erased from the crew's 
minds, what else might have been 
erased — or added? 

The newsman turned then to 
what he lightly called, "The Legend 
of the Mastermind." 

He called it a Paul Bunyon complex, blaming an unknown Winchell for creating a mental giant to 
symbolize man's drive into interstellar space; then he laughingly 
said that if someone knew the legendary one — whatever his name 
was — he'd better do it fast since certain drive activation data appeared 
to have been lost. 

"The pattern is showing now," 
Martha said bitterly. 

The President bowed his head 
without comment. 

"It's an obvious attempt to blot 
the memory of Pat from the minds 
of men," she continued. "You must 
seal off the White Sands-Santa Fe 
area before it is spread further." 

"You've noticed I've used no 
video on the stereo. My aide has 
sent a message denying stereo time 
to the expedition's members. What 
persuasion they may be able to exert to circumvent my order I do 
not know. We can only hope 
none. 

"I feel sure that D'Agostino did 



not return. I also feel the Starship's 
medics could not conceivably have 
produced this infectious amnesic 
hypnosis. It must come from an 
alien causative agent!" 

Martha burst, "And almost 
everyone he personally trained is 
within the infection area ! He taught 
the drive activation data only to 
key personnel — but / was at the 
briefings. I learned the data, too! I 
couldn't forget the data ever unless 
I were to forget Pat and the personal training he gave. Wipe out 
the one and you wipe out the 
other. 

"The Starship's orbiting empty 
now at five thousand miles. They'll 
probably send up a skeleton crew 
soon since the Interstellar Board's 
convinced there's no infection 
aboard. 

"We must reach the ship first 
and return to Barnard's Star. The 
trainees at Space Medicine Institute 
can help me with the transits. My 
colleagues will come to try to combat whoever or whatever implanted 
the infection in the minds of those 
poor men. 

"We've got to take the chance. 
We've got to do it now before we 
all become amnesic! We've got not 
just Pat to lose but the stars!" 

President Batchelder was staring 
blindly out at fleeting strato-cirrus 
clouds strung thinly across the afternoon sky. 

"There's an immediate way, thank 
God!" he said. "The torchship 
Gegehschein is about to leave Balti


1 10 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



more Friendship Spaceport for 
Mars. It can be routed via the Starship. I'll order it to hold blastoff 
for you and the others." He reached 
for an air-ground visifone. 

"May I call the Institute? I've 
got to get the men there before — 
Her voice trailed off. 

Wordlessly he indicated another 
visifone. 

Time rumbled. 

She stood atop the Gegenschein's attendant gantry's ramp, immediately adjacent to the port's 
closing mechanism, her mind crying Hurry! Hurry! to the last of her 
colleagues. The Starship's prospective new crew was already aboard. 

She looked across Baltimore 
Friendship Spaceport toward the 
terminal building where she , had 
bade farewell to President Batchelder. He had held the latest stereofax, headlined 

STARSH1P CREW EXPLODES 
SUPER-MATHEMATICIAN 
MYTH 
Worldwide Stereocasts 
Scheduled by Crew 

Batcheider's face had been gray; 
he had sickeningly realized that his 
direct orders had been circumvented. 

"We're depending on you, Martha," he had said . . . 

The last man was aboard, the last 
cargo handler going out. A turbojet police car lanced across the field 
from the terminal building. A purposeful officer descended and rushed 
toward the ramp, crying, "Presi


dent's orders: the ship is grounded!" 

They had reached Batchelder, 
too! 

Thank God he had ordered communications silence for the Gegensche'm until after rendezvous with 
the Starship ! 

No one but she and the turning 
handler could have heard. She acted then with primitive instinct, forgetting the holstered stungun Dr. 
Dowd had brought her. Her sharply 
out-thrust right hand caught the 
handler in the chest, toppling him 
backward with startled outer)' to 
collide with the ascending officer. 

She entered the ship, instantly activating the port's closing mech and 
buttoning the intercom. 

"Doctor Cowan to Control," she 
said tersely. "Alert for blastoff!" 

Through the port's viewscrcen, 
she saw the handler and policeman 
fleeing from the imminent blast 
area, impelled by the torchship's 
screaming siren. 

She hastily entered an acceleration couch as the torchship's commander started the countdown. 
There was the sudden, mighty 
thrust of the fission-charged jets. 
They were away! 

G's pressed inexorably — G's 
coupled with exhaustion . . . 

And suddenly, it seemed, her 
close friend and associate, Dr. Peter 
Dowd, was bending over her concernedly, saying, "Are you okay, 
Martha? We've rendezvoused with 
the Starship!" 



THE AMNESIC MEN 



III 



The airlocks had been juxtaposed 
and sealed. Martha crossed the 
coupling and unhesitatingly activated the Starship's lock — a mechanism made deliberately simple, since 
who in Sol would ever dream of 
stealing the Starship? 

She went forward to Astrogation, 
approached the autopilot/computer, 
and stopped, perplexedly regarded 
the metallic tape amidst shattered 
glass on the deck; then raised her 
gaze to the potentiometers. 

16-1-20-18 . . . 

The key setting was already 
made ! 

She had only to doublecheck the 
star-fix with Control, to reinsert the 
tape and then to press the master 
activator to launch the ship again 
toward Barnard's Star. 

"Oh, Pat!" she cried. 

The lonely echo of her voice 
alone came back. 

Resignedly she returned to the 
lock corridor, supervised the crossover and sent the men quickly to 
their posts. The Gegenschein had 
fallen away and blasted into a 
trajectory for Mars. 

She returned then to the autopilot/computer, tremblingly inserted 
the equation tape; then buttoned 
the intercom resolutely. 

"Doctor Cowan to Control," she 
said. 

Montemurro, the trainee commander, acknowledged. 

"Tony," she said, "fix on 
Barnard's Star. Parallax point five 
three zero, proper motion ten point 
three zero. Extrapolate arrival posi


tion against lapse of six point one 
light-years squared to the cube of 
the parallax." 

Montemurro verified. 

"Prepare for hypertransit!" Martha cried into the public address. A 
moment later she prayerfully 
pressed the master activator. 

Nothing seemed to happen. She 
felt no physical reaction yet in a 
viewscreen the stars abruptly 
dimmed and vanished into featureless deep purple as Pat had said 
they would. 

She turned elatedly from the console. 

Sudden shock drained her residual 
strength. Confronting her were the 
silently accusing figures of Chester 
Talix and her father. Her right 
hand, reaching for her stungun, fell 
strengthless to her side. 

Before their staring eyes her mind 
whirled into madness, recently-surging thoughts of Pat tearing into 
shreds of disassociated memory under the impulse of some psychic 
centrifuge. 

She screamed and knew night . . . 

Awareness returned. She was lying on the deck near the unconscious 
body of her father. Peter Dowd was 
standing over him, a stungun in 
hand. 

"Sorry, Martha," he said. "I had 
to do it when I saw your face." 

"But where's Talix?" she asked 
anxiously, regaining her feet unsteadily. 

"Talix?" Dowd echoed. "My 
God, was he here, too?" 



112 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"Yes. And thank God I fainted ! 
Pete, you should have seen his 
eyes !" She shuddered. "They probe 
your mind and tear it!" 

"But where could he have gone? 
He didn't go forward; I came from 
the control room." 

"Let's go there!" 

They rushed to Control. Montemurro turned from the console. 

"Tony," Martha cried, "lock all 
compartments. The contra-meteor 
lock — there!" 

She turned to Dowd. "That will 
contain him momentarily. It seals 
off each compartment so atmosphere 
won't be lost in case of a meteor 
penetration. Now, Pete, I want you 
and Gentry to take my father to the 
isolation room and revive him. 
Tony will activate the individual 
compartment locks so you can pass. 
Use hypnotherapy the moment my 
father regains consciousness. Try 
the Garland-Sosnowski technique 
coupled with hypnotic discs. You 
and Gentry will be kept under surveillance. If my father is a carrier 
and therapy fails you'll both have 
to be kept in Isolation, too." 

He nodded grimly; then said, "It 
won't fail, Martha !" 

She turned to the scanning board 
as Dowd departed, began viewing 
the ship's other compartments one 
by one. What she saw in nearby 
compartments caused no alarm. Her 
colleagues were either sleeping or 
pursuing various activities in a normal manner. But as she went from 
pickup to pickup she saw crewmen 
staring into nothingness with the 



vacuous aspect of hypnotic amnesia. 

Where was Talix? Had his posthypnotic mission been to gain access to the nuclear reactor powering 
the drive if faced with the possibility of non-amnesic men seizing the 
Starship? Then to bring the pile to 
critical mass? Or to threaten to do 
so unless they went to him for — 
for forgetfulness ? 

Oh, thank God! she thought. The 
scanner was picking up the sealedoff compartment directly adjacent to 
the reactor room where protective 
garments were donned before men 
entered the radioactivity emanating 
from the pile. Talix stood there, a 
terrible, unearthly rage upon his distorted face. As if sensing her watching eyes, his eyes swung toward the 
pickup. 

She switched the scanner off, 
frightened, trembling, knowing his 
eyes would strip her memory now, 
knowing her will had already been 
blunted. 

For the moment Talix was harmless. 

She grew a little calmer; then reactivated the scanner, buttoning the 
pickup in the hull hangar. She immediately spotted a shuttle among 
the berthed scoutships. Apparently 
Talix and her father had reached 
the Starship before the Gegenschein. 
Radar would have warned them 
otherwise. 

She established another fact: a 
scoutship was missing. The ship 
normally carried twelve. Since none 
had descended to Earth and the 
hangar now held only eleven, one 



THE AM] 

had obviously remained in Barnard's 
Star. Was it now awaiting the Starship's emergence from hyperspace? 

The plot included not only theft 
of the memory and accomplishments 
of Pat D'Agostino but undoubtedly 
theft of the Starship as well. 

Switching off the scanner, she 
hurried to the corridor outside Isolation and peered through a unidirectional view-screen. She was only just 
in time: her father was stirring, 
rising now. She could see him in 
profile. 

Within the semi-darkness of the 
isolation room mechanical hypnosis 
equipment activated by Peter Dowd 
performed involved rotations. Hypnotic discs spiraled into a maelstrom-infinity. Multi-hued lights 
flickered and swayed, cobra-shafts 
beyond the spotlight which blazed 
remorselessly into Tom Cowan's disturbing eyes. 

Dowd's gentle voice began, "We 
want to help you to remember a 
great and good man, a comrade 
someone has convinced you that you 
have never known. But you haven't 
forgotten him, Tom, you haven't 
forgot Patrick D'Agostino. Your 
daughter Martha, Tom — why, Martha's engaged to Pat. You should 
well remember that time back at the 
Sands — " 

Rise and fall of finely trained 
voice, persuasively weaving a mesmeric spell. 

Tom Cowan shook his graying 
head, shut his eyes against the spotlight's blaze, opened them again and 
kept his gaze averted, fixed first 



!SIC MEN 113 

upon the spiraling discs; then upon 
the chatoyant lights . . . 

It seemed like days but was only 
eight taut hours before Tom Cowan 
suddenly cried out, "My God! must 
you keep telling me what I already 
know? Certainly I know Pat 
D'Agostino! Why in Heaven's 
name shouldn't I?" 

It was Martha who told him. 

But the hypnotic prowess of 
Chester Talix' aberrated mind was 
not so easily to be bested. 

It was only hours after Martha 
had left her father and had fallen 
into exhausted sleep in her cabin 
that Montemurro called her urgently 
from control. 

"Talix is in the reactor room," 
Montemurro said. "Bill Rowe'd 
taken over control and apparently 
responded to an intercom call from 
the ready room where Talix was. I'd 
told Bill not to; he must have answered automatically. It's lucky I'd 
forgotten my pipe and wanted a 
smoke. I went back and found Bill 
glassy eyed, nearly unconscious — 
he must have a low threshold to 
hypnosis — and I used my stungun 
without asking any questions. I 
threw back the contra-meteor lock 
but Talix managed to get into the 
reactor room while Rowe'd had it 
switched off." 

She curbed angry words on her 
tongue; the damage was done. 
"Have Rowe brought to Isolation," 
she said. "Stay in Control yourself; 
I'll join you soon." 

Quickly she aroused Dowd and 



1 14 FANTASTIC 

Gentry. "I know you're exhausted," 
she said quickly, "but we've got to 
work fast. You brought my father 
out of the second-stage spell he was 
in. You've got to bring Rowe out 
now — and fast. Talix may be deciding to infect us all, one by one. 
If we can manage to restore the 
men as quickly as he infects them — 
and we've got to! — we may still 
win! Will you try?" 

"You're damned right we will!'' 
Dowd said. 

She hurried to Control. The intercom was buzzing madly. The red 
light on the board said Reactor 
Room, She looked at Montemurro. 
He shrugged his heavy shoulders 
helplessly. 

"Kill the video pickup," she said. 
"Remove the 1X2Z from the master 
unit; it won't affect the audio circuit." 

Montemurro moved tiredly to respond. 

She turned on the intercom and 
said, "Control!" 

"This is Commander Talix," the 
speaker rasped. "You will immediately cut the contra-meteor lock 
and direct all personnel to proceed 
singly to the reactor room." 

The voice held incredible strength 
of command; she caught herself 
reaching for the public address button. 

She began to tremble. Montemurro came up behind her and gripped 
her shoulders with his big hands. 
She felt a sharp fear before she 
realized that he was only seeking 
to steady and encourage her. 



UNIVERSE 

"Yes, Commander," she said and 
cut the intercom switch. "Oh, Tony, 
what can we do? He's at the pile. 
He can bring it to critical mass and 
destroy us all." 

Dcwd's voice said from the doorway, "Do what Talix says, Martha. 
Start sending the men back. The 
crew, not the doctors. We all know 
the Garland-Sosnowski technique. 
We learned a lot from treating your 
father, enough to restore Rowe in 
minutes. One thing is certain: only 
Talix can infect us. Those whom he 
infects become amnesic, certainly, 
but do not appear to spread the contagion to others. Gentry faced Rowe 
without attempting therapy first; he 
felt no reaction at all! 

"Counting you, there are fourteen 
doctors and none of us amnesic. We 
must confront Talix en masse; it's 
our only hope!" 

"I'm afraid, Pete — " 

"We've got to do it, Martha." 

She turned nervously to the public 
address and gave the orders while 
Montemurro released the locks. 
Realizing then that Talix would be 
concentrating on those who moved 
to confront him, she had the video 
circuit restored and activated the 
scanner in the ready room adjacent 
to the reactor. 

They viewed the first few crewmen who approached Talix. Like a 
virulent contagion spawned in some 
fetid alien abyss his aberrated mind 
seized upon theirs, leaving them 
standing vapidly before him, pawns 
of a will working through him. 

Dowd assembled the other doc


the am; 

tors, motioned for them to follow 
him. 

"Scan us, Montemurro," he said. 
"When we reach the ready room, 
restore the lock. That will block 
Talix from us until we're ready. I 
will raise my right hand when we 
ate ready. You will then cut out the 
lock again." 

Montemurro nodded. 

Dowd led the way along the central corridor, striding swiftly, confidence evident in his erect posture 
and determined face. 

Suddenly — too suddenly, Martha 
thought! — they were in the ready 
room and Talix' eyes were upon 
them from his position by the pile 
and she felt the maelstrom forming 
in her mind again when Montemurro restored the lock which shot 
a sealing door between them and 
Talix. 

Dowd grouped them into a semicircle facing the reactor room. 

"Steady now," he said. "This is 
the only chance we'll have." 

He raised his right hand. The 
door flashed back. 

The doctors' voices joined then in 
most unusual choir. Talix' eyes 
flashed, his face grew taut — and 
suddenly he was wavering, trembling, and cringing away from 
them, utter terror flashing on his distorted features as he screamed, "No, 
not again!" 

Again? 

As they intensely pursued the 
harsh routine, Talix flinched as 
though buffeted by physical blows, 
backing to a bulkhead, shielding his 



5SIC MEN 115 

contorted face in palsied hands and 
suddenly collapsing, convulsed; then 
abruptly becoming still, a curiously 
peaceful smile on his curiously relaxed features. 

"Pete," Martha said, "have him 
taken to the Isolation room and 
closely watched. Have some of the 
other doctors restore those he infected. Call me when Talix awakes. I 
must get some rest before I collapse." 

Mercifully it was fully sixteen 
hours before she was awakened 
with the news that Talix was 
conscious. 

The strange luster was gone from 
Talix' eyes. 

"Martha!" He came forward, 
arms outstretched. "It's been a long 
time!" 

"Hello, Chet. You're looking 
fine — " She curbed the "now" on 
her lips. 

"And you're still the most gorgeous girl who ever graced the 
Starship's corridors," he responded 
warmly. 

"Chet, why have you disclaimed 
knowing Pat?" 

"Pat?" His perplexity seemed 
honest. 

"Pat D'Agostino." Her eyes 
plumbed his anxiously. 

"I'm sorry. There may have been 
a man named Pat D'Agostino but I 
don't recall him." 

Be patient, she told herself. He 
couldn't even speak Vat's name before! 

She felt from the vagueness of 



1 1 6 FANTASTIC 

his eyes that he was plumbing his 
memory for the name now strange 
to him, seeking association — 

When they questioned him under 
deep hypnosis, they extracted much 
which he did not consciously recall, 
but the fragmentary nature of their 
findings only served to bolster their 
conviction that the expedition's 
members had spent most of their 
sojourn on Barnard One under 
somnambulistic hypnosis. 

His mind insisted the nobles were 
friendly and cooperative. It yielded 
no supporting data. 

It indicated that the city and related artifacts had been ultramodernistic, with an intricate network 
of rolling roads, with servo mechanisms for preparing food and drink 
— but all of which the natives 
shunned. 

There were vehicles abandoned 
and rusting on superhighways long 
unused — highways which Talix' 
memory strangely said led nowhere. 
It said that educated guesses made 
by the expedition's engineers indicated that mechanisms with a useful life of 20 years — with proper 
maintenance — were falling apart. 

The nobles had learned English 
easily and apparently through linguistic, not telepathic ability. 

Despite their apparent neglect of 
their own past scientific achievements, the nobles' interest in solar 
science was insatiable. 

His mind said the natives were 
humanoid, which would imply both 
male and female sexes, yet it paradoxically stated no women had been 



UNIVERSE 

seen and no males under 20 years of 
age— 

Twenty — twice! 

As Talix was coming out of hypnosis he burst, "The portrait ! They 
had it enshrined in the audience 
chamber. It showed a lovely woman's face, a grieving alien Mona 
Lisa — " 

He was conscious, exhausted. 

Twenty twice, Martha thought, 
and a mourning Mona Lisa! 

When Talix was rested, therapy 
was resumed, but nothing more was 
gleaned from Talix' mind — nothing 
ever of a missing friend named 
D'Agostino. 

Meanwhile the doctors unceasingly practiced hypnotherapy in groups 
upon one, remembering Talix' outburst "No, not again!" which he 
had not been able to explain, endeavoring to develop immunity 
against any form of auto-suggestion 
which might be group-imposed. 

Martha sought a partial answer in 
electronics, causing the technicians 
to build tiny transceivers which 
would consolidate their voices and 
auditory senses into one as they 
voiced the planned routine. 

They must be a gestalt, a single, 
indomitable Will. 

And the tape ran through. The 
Starship burst into normal spacetime. They felt the gravitational 
field of Barnard One gently twisting the ship's trajectory. 

Orbiting pole - to - pole, they 
probed the planet's surface with 
electrontelescopes. 



the am: 

There was but one city, located 
near the equator of one of the two 
huge continents, casting long shadows now at dawning, spelling high 
towers. 

But there had been others. There 
had been interconnecting highways. 
There had been bridges flung across 
vast chasms. 

The cities were leveled ruins, the 
highways cracked ribbons, the 
bridges sagging, twisted strands. 

Evidence of what? International 
warfare? Invasion from without? 

Or something else? 

Martha sought an answer in 
Talix' disclosures, in the things now 
observed. 

A friendly, cooperative race — 
reject that. 

Substitute: a covetous, secretive, 
grasping race. 

Add: apparent loss or deliberate 
rejection of their own science. 

Add: insatiable thirst for knowledge of another tongue, of another 
science. 

Add: a towering but neglected 
and decaying metropolis. 

Add: an agricultural anthropology. 

Add: a hundred toppled cities. 

Add: humanoids — but call them 
men only, for of women there are 
none. 

Add : twenty twice and a mourning Mona Lisa. 

And add a man named D'Agostino. 

Add them all and equate nothing. 
It was twelve hours since their 



!Sic men 117 

transition from hyper-space. Barnard 
One was a great hypnotic eye with 
swiftly lowering lid spinning into 
night. Then, with a suddenness 
which robbed Martha of breath, 
the intercom heterodyned and burst: 

"Radar to all personnel: unidentified object climbing from surface !" 

It would be— it had to be — the 
missing scoutship, coming to rendezvous as Martha had been sure 
it would. 

She turned to Dowd. 

"We're not ready, Pete," she said 
in momentary helplessness. 

"We are ready, Martha," he responded curtly. "We have to be. 
It's better than first facing them in 
their own habitat, probably many of 
them. Here we've a definite advantage. They probably expect the 
Starship to have returned empty on 
automatics. There can't be more 
than ten of them aboard that ship. 
With proper airlock manipulation, 
we can allow only two to inship at 
once. Surely we can face two of 
them!" 

"We certainly can, Pete!" she 
cried, infected by his confidence. 

Quickly she summoned the doctors to the lock corridor, ordering 
mechanical hypnotherapeutic equipments set up, transceivers checked 
out. 

Visual Observation verified that 
the approaching object was the missing scout. 

Martha stood in the midst of the 
semi-circle of men facing the inner 
lock as the scoutship homed in with 
contact clang of hulls. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



£18 

Her right hand trembled on the 
tiny remote keyer; then steadied and 
resolutely activated both lock and 
hypnosis equipments. 

Her eyes fixed fascinatedly on 
the opening lock, her mind cried, 
Oh, dear God! let it be 'Pat! and 
feared it would not be. 

It was not. 

Two men quickly emerged, somberly-robed, undoubtedly nobles of 
Barnard One. They looked apprehensively behind them; then cursorily at the waiting group. Their 
eyes darted as though seeking a 
route of escape. 

Martha sensed a deep sadness in 
them. She forgot then to activate the 
lock's closing mechanism and would 
have forgotten to begin the planned 
routine had not her colleagues 
chanted, "You have taken one of 
Sol, a man named D'Agostino — " 

The chant, electronically magnified, welded her consciousness to 
her companions. 

One noble faced abruptly right, 
the other left. They swept their suddenly lustrous eyes like paralyzing 
whips from the outer fringes of her 
companions toward the semicircle's 
center where she stood. 

She stood alone then before the 
nobles' concentrated gaze, whispering goodbye to her fondest memory. 

Their eyes were suddenly anguished, their faces flooding with 
mixed sorrow and adoration. They 
prostrated themselves before her, 
faces hidden in trembling hands, 
writhing in paroxysms of grief. 



She looked down upon them, 
utterly alone, utterly bewildered, 
looked up again and found her loneliness gone forever. 

Patrick D'Agostino faced her 
from the lock. 

She was in his arms therj, sobbing 
happily, relievedly, conscious only 
of his deep voice, of his close embrace. 

"I knew somehow you would 
come," he said. 

"Oh, Pat," she babbled. "I'm so 
giad you're all right. Where have 
you been? What have you done? 
What will we do now?" 

"Easy, girl!" he said. "I've been 
okay. They held me prisoner until 
the Starship left. Then — but I've got 
to explain them first ! 

"They've a psychic imbalance, 
Martha. They reject through completely involuntary self -hypnosis 
everything they will not or dare 
not face! 

"The motivating reasons go far 
back. They were practiced hypnotists before their cataclysm twenty 
years ago. Their culture was deteriorating through conflicting persuasions. Their leaders knew they 
had to find a new frontier before 
increasing repressions turned all 
their minds into a psychic racial 
womb. 

"Their science was great, greater 
than our own from the brokendown 
remnants I've seen. They discovered 
interstellar flight and sent a starship 
out, hoping to ease international 
tensions through finding habitable 
planets of other stars. 



THE AMNESIC MEN 



119 



"They vainly searched three other 
star systems; then turned to dimmer 
Sol. They were exploring inward 
world by world when they received 
ari urgent message that war was imminent here. 

"They returned too late. Their 
supreme weapon had been accidentally activated. Their only shielded 
city had been devoted to scientific 
research. Their women were never 
allowed to study science; they were 
all outside the shield. 

"My informant accused the nobles 
of their negligence. They could not 
face their guilt. Through self-hypnosis they rejected their accuser, 
their science and almost all their 
past. 

"Our coming introduced a catalyst. They hungrily embraced our 
language and science. They hoped 
to reach out through our achievements to another race than ours 
which would not inquire into their 
past as we have done, another race 
which would welcome them as superior, whose women would feel 
privileged to bear their children. 

"Later I found out why they 
grasped some things so quickly; they 
had known them before and rejected them. 

"When they brought me into 
their audience chamber after the 
Starship had gone, I accused them 
so bitterly of their planned theft 
that they promptly rejected both 
their plan and me ! 

"You can see them for what they 
are. Look at these two I forced to 
come with me, almost complete in


troverts with me an invisible demon 
goading them!" 

She had been lulled into an almost hypnotic trance by his resonanl 
voice. Now the full import of hi' 
words came to her, interwoven with 
Talix' disclosures. 

. . turned to dimmer Sol , . twenty years . . My informant accused the 
nobles . . they grasped some thing'; 
so quickly . . known before , . twenty — and a mourning Mona Lisa . . 

"Pat!" she screamed with sudden, 
joyful intuition, "do you mean — " 

Her wet eyes searched his smiling 
face. 

"Yes," he said gently. "Your 
father's hunch was right; your 
mother didn't die. They rescued he/ 
— sole survivor of the torchship 
she'd been on. They learned our lan 
guage from her only to reject both 
the language and her. 

"She's waiting in the city. I 
couldn't bring her until I'd investigated the ship. 

"Nearly twenty Earth years ago. 
she had tried through her small 
knowledge of psychiatry to cure 
these miserable men. She almos! 
succeeded with a sensitive artist who 
thought he envisioned her in a 
dream and so painted her. The portrait is in their principal audience 
chamber, the sole object of their 
worship. 

"Until the painting was made, 
they had been almost completely 
apathetic. It restored their libido 
prompted them to adopt our tongue 
and to steal our science — until I repressed them again. 



J 20 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"We must cure their repressions. 
We need them, their past, their submerged memories. Their science, recalled and coupled with ours, can 
take us much, much farther Out. 
They can certainly have a future 
now, Martha. They're handsome. 
They're human. And there are lonely women on many worlds. 

"They'll listen to you. You're the 
image of your mother twenty years 
ago; the living embodiment of the 
portrait, their only constant dream. 



"Be the goddess you truly are. 
Forgive them — but order them to 
restore the others. Do it now, 
Martha. I'm sure your mother is becoming rather impatient down 
there!" 

She turned from Patrick D'Agostino then, a goddess resolutely facing those who had forgotten. 

Certain she could teach all men 
remembrance. 

Certain they would not forget 
again. 



HAVE YOU A COMPLETE FILE OF 

FANTASTIC UNIVERSE? 

HERE'S your chance to purchase all 59 issues 
ptiblished to date. A few copies are still available and they are yours by filling in the coupon 
below. FANTASTIC universe is always starstudded by the best writers in the field. We are 
now offering these at BARGAIN PRICES — 
single copies at 354; three copies at $1.00; six 
copies at $1.75; and twelve copies at $3.25 




KING-SIZE PUBLICATIONS, Inc. ™93 

820 Fifth Avenue, New York 1, New York 

Kindly sent! me the copies of FANTASTIC-UNIVERSE which I have circled 
below. One copy at 35<, three copies at $1, six copies at $1.75, twelve copies at 
$3.2& 1 enclose $ in full payment ; postage prepaid. 

JUNE '53; AUG. '53; OCT. '53; JAN. '54; MAR. '64; MAY '54; JULY '54 
SEPT. '64 ; OCT. '54 : NOV. '54 ; DEC. '64 ; JAN. '55 ; FEE. '55 ; MAR. '55 
APE. '55; MAY '55; JUNE '55; JULY '55; AUG. '55; SEPT. '55; OCT. '65 
NOV. '65 1 DEC. *55; JAN. '56; FEB. '56; MAR. '56; APE. '56; MAY '66 
JUNE '56; JULY '56; AUG. '56; SEPT. '56; OCT. '56; NOV. '56; DEC. '56 
JAN. '67 ; FEB. '57 ; MAR. '57 ; APR. '67 ; MAY '57 ; JUNE '57 ; JULY '57 
AUG. '57 ; SEPT. '57 : OCT. '57 ; NOV. '67 ; DEC. '67 ; JAN. '68 : FEB. '58 
MAR. '58 ; APR. '68 ; MAY '58 ; JUNE '58 ; JULY '68 ; AUG. '58 ; SEPT. '68 
OCT. '58 ; NOV. '58 ; JAN. '59 ; MAR. '59. 

NAME 



ADDRESS


CITY, ZONE, STATE. 



letter 
from 
tomorrow 

by . . . Lee Coney 



Maybe the man was nutty as a 
fruitcake. Maybe he thought 
he was a little green man — 
and maybe he was very sane . . . 



Just as Matt Thayer was about 
to tackle the stability computations 
for the next Aphrodite sounding 
rocket, the yeoman arrived with the 
mail. Matt glanced at the letters 
which landed in his IN basket and, 
sighing as he looked at the dock, 
realized he wouldn't even get to 
first base computing C-sub-m-alpha 
before quitting time. So he reached 
out and pulled in a handful of letters. 

"Lots of fan mail today, Mr. 
Thayer," the sailor told him with 
a grin. 

Matt made a nasty noise. In a 
moment of weakness, he'd let himself be talked into helping answer 
— if he could — some of the "fan 
mail" which continually poured 
into White Sands — letters from 
kids with stars in their eyes, notes 
from people asking questions or 
wanting photos, and the inevitable 
letters from cranks, crackpots, and 
screwballs. Some of the worst of 
the latter went unanswered because 
there was no possible answer, and 
they ended up in the bulging screwball file. 

He took a look at the other mail 
before he got into his share of the 
fan mail. Product magazines, prod


Working with the planning staff at White Sands Proving Ground, rocket 
engineer Lee Correy participated in hundreds of rocket firings, including 
the record-breaking Aerobee-Hi research rockets. Well known in SF, he 
is also the author of considerable material on rocketry and astronautics. 



121 



122 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



uct pamphlets, poop sheets and 
propaganda from manufacturers, 
and a sexy calendar blotter which 
arrived monthly from an electronics distributor made up the bulk of 
it. He tossed the product dope into 
the HOLD basket, intending to look 
it over in a slack period. There was 
no doubt about it; rocketry and 
guided missiles were getting to be 
big business. Each month, information on thousands of new products, 
techniques, and processes poured 
into his office. The quantity of this 
mail plus the increasing variety of 
off-the-shelf hardware available 
never failed to amaze him. The 
United States was outdoing herself 
in developing and producing items. 
He hxd once had to chuckle over 
the brochure advertizing six different kinds of nuclear reactors for 
sale. 

The public in general had no 
conception of that. They weren't on 
the direct receiving end of it. But 
they did know that rockets were 
super-spectacular things and that 
space travel was coming as certainly 
as the sun was going to rise tomorrow morning. The interest was 
high and getting higher all the 
time. That was evidenced by the 
continuing piles of fan mail that 
stacked up at White Sands. 

Picking up the first letter, he 
noted the crudely-scrawled address, 
"White Sands rocket center, N. 
Mex." With his thumb, he tore it 
open. 

"Dear White Sand's: I am ten 
years old, and am going to be a 



spaceman. I have been standing on 
my head and practising eating 
crakers so I can get used to living 
in a spaceship out where there is 
no gravity. Pleas could you send me 
some pichures of rockets and anny 
information you can. Sincerly 
yours . . ." 

Matt grinned and made a note 
to get some prints from the photo 
lab and a copy of the proving 
ground brochure. Then he grabbed 
another letter. 

"To whom it may concern: We 
have a rocket club and have built 
and flown ten powder rockets, they 
weren't very good, but we think we 
can do better. The Chinese could 
do it in 1232 A.D., and we figure 
we can too. So we are building a 
small V-2 rocket using oxygen and 
asetiline. Could you please tell us 
what is the best material to make 
the motor out of} How do we keep 
it from melting? What is the best 
shape for the nozzle and how big 
should it be? What is the best 
shape for the fins? How should we 
turn the fins to steer it, and where 
can we buy a gyro to stabilise it 
with? Please send us all the information you can, and write soon . . ." 

Swallowing, Matt shoved it into 
his HOLD basket. Tomorrow he'd 
take it around to the propulsion 
group and see what they had to say 
about it ... if anything. Matt 
shuddered. Kids, doggone them! 
Oxygen and acetylene was not the 
most powerful propellant combination, but it was still a better explosive combination than TNT. 



LETTER FRC 

That bunch, he decided, should get 
together with a high school science 
teacher before they lost some of 
their members or suffered mangled 
hands or sightless eye:;. 

When he got to the third letter, 
the first thing he noticed was die 
florid and somewhat shaky handwriting on the envelope. From some 
old lady stumping on some quasireligious theme or claiming she'd 
been in communication with the 
flying saucers, Matt figured. He remembered the letter from an elderly lady, three pages of solid invective, damning their souls for 
building rockets that people might 
eventually ride in and claiming that 
people should "ride around in 
planes and trains as God had intended." At least, Matt had admitted at the time, she had enough 
imagination to foresee the use of 
the rocket as a powerplant for commercial airliners. 

Fearing the worst, he tore open 
the third letter. 

"Dear Mr. Thayer . . ." 

Well! He smoothed it out on his 
desk top and went on. 

"/ read with much interest the 
recent paper by you in the American Rocket Society magazine dealing with a possible time-table for 
flight into space. 1 was very much 
impressed with your open approach 
to this subject which is something 
not possessed by many men in your 
field. 

"Because of this, I ivant to tell 
you about several ideas which 1 
buve for the improvement of space 



TOMORROW 123 

rockets so that when they reach an 
altitude of 13,500,000 feet they 
will be able to travel to Mars and 
perhaps to the stars, too. I hare put 
a great deal of study into this, and 
if you would like to hear more 
about it please write to me. I also 
have several other ideasfgtcbicb may 
have escaped your attention and 
which will be of interest to you. 

Sincerely yours, 

L. Alcuin." 
Matt shoved his chair back until 
he was chock-a-block against the 
wall, then he gingerly picked up 
the letter as though it were saturated with the Black Plague. 

"Whew!" he whistled aloud. 
"They get whackier every day! I'll 
bet this guy has more screws loose 
than our launcher." But, strangely, 
he found himself spreading it out 
again for another reading as though 
he could not quite bring himself to 
believe what he had read the first 
time. 

The stationery was cheap, and 
the guy didn't handle English very 
well, Matt decided. As a matter of 
fact, he couldn't even write very 
legibly. As for the style of writing, 
Matt hadn't encountered it before. 
Everybody, no matter how bad their 
penmanship, unconsciously follows 
the nearly-universal method taught 
in the schools. Even foreign scripts 
had their standard style, and Matt 
could recognize these by now. 

But Matt could not recognize 
this style. It was a new one on him. 
The post-mark said it had been 
mailed from Childress, a medium


124 FANTASTIC 

sized city somewhere in the Midwest. Matt knew it from having 
passed through it aboard trains during his college days. 

Ah, well, he thought Answer 
him anyway. Matt tried to make it 
a practice of answering every letter, 
no matter how screwball it was. 
This one would get standard answer 2- A: the thank - you - for writing - and - we - will - forward to - higher - levels one. With 
twenty minutes left until quitting 
time, he walked out and dropped 
it on the secretary's desk. 

"Give it the usual treatment, 
Mae. Make it look and sound 
pretty, but don't commit us to a 
damned thing." An answer, no matter how it was written or how little 
it said, was good public relations. 
It was a somewhat mercenary attitude, Matt felt, but the people who 
wrote in were, after all, helping to 
pay for all this. 

Three weeks later, Matt was sitting at the same desk with a sour 
look on his face and an even sourer 
attitude ruling his mind. The 
Aphrodite rocket whose stability 
he'd computed from the contractor's original figures had gone head 
over teacup at about 50,000 feet on 
the way up as the propellants 
burned off and changed the rocket's center of gravity. He cursed the 
gods and the contractor mathematicians who'd done the original stability work from wind tunnel data. 

He looked over the results of the 
bad flight and stared distastefully 



UNIVERSE 

at the contractor's book with the 
stability graphs in it. Matt knew 
what had happened. Too much payload. Center of gravity had wandered aft of the center of pressure. 
Low stability. In fact, instability. 

He knew what he was going to 
have to do: make a trip back to the 
plant and fight it out with the pigheaded mongolian idiots the contractor must be using for mathematicians. Ten-to-one he would bet 
that not one of them had ever seen 
the rocket, much less had any idea 
of actual flight operations; they 
were probably text-book boys. He 
wanted to see the data they had 
used, and he was ready to prove to 
them that something was definitely 
awry in Denmark with their original figures. 

Troubles, troubles," he mumbled. " 'Vanity, vanity, all is vanity; man born of woman is born to 
trouble ... as the sparks fly upward . . It wasn't a good quote, 
and he was sure it wasn't even right. 
But he used it often when he felt 
disgusted. It comforted him. 

He was interrupted by the yeoman with the day's mail. "What we 
got today, Mose?" 

"More fan mail and a pile of 
junk from people trying to sell you 
things," the yeoman told him with 
a grin. "The usual." 

"Does it ever change?" Matt 
asked. 

The mail was a welcome break at 
the moment, so he went through his 
opening procedure, deriving great 
satisfaction from throwing expen


LETTER PRC 

sive and profusely illustrated ad 
literature in the wastebasket. He 
started to sigh before getting on 
with the fan mail, but he noticed 
a letter with the strange script on 
it again. The return address named 
"L. Alcuin." 

Should have let well enough 
alone, he thought. Skeptically, he 
opened it and looked it over. The 
writing and English had improved. 

"Dear Mr. Thayer: Thank you 
for answering my previous letter. 
Yon may be interested in passing 
on the mathematical analysis which 
I have worked out to show that 
rockets, with the proper propulsion 
system, may switch from a reaction 
drive to a system using electrogravity energy once they have progressed 
sufficiently beyond the disturbing 
influence of this planet with its 
strong electro gravity field and 
Stormer current . . 

Thereafter followed three solid 
pages of tensor calculus, matrix 
algebra, and electromagnetic field 
theory interspersed with a great deal 
of Unified Field Theory. Matt, who 
had minored in math in college, 
could follow it to some extent. But 
a great deal of it was far beyond 
his understanding. 

Matt took it down to Bill Andrews, the project mathematician 
and ballistician. Dropping it on the 
other's desk, he remarked, "Read it, 
Bill, and tell me if this guy is talking through his hat or not." 

Andrews did so. It rook him 
about thirty minutes, during which 
he made copious scrawls of his own 



TOMORROW 125 

on a pad and absent-mindedly 
punched a few numbers into his 
Friden calculator. Finally, he sat 
back and laughed. "Who does this 
guy think he is, and where did he 
learn his math ? It's a laugh, Matt ! 
Better frame this one for the screwball file. It's a real jim-dandy !" The 
mathematician was chuckling heartfly. 

"Balderdash, huh?" 

"Worse than that This guy 
doesn't know from straight np. You 
should sec the way he handles some 
of his tensors! Strictly out of this 
world! He probably saw some of 
this stuff somewhere once — maybe 
in a text — but he doesn't know how 
to handle it." 

"Ummm. Suppose you follow his 
line of reasoning the way I did 
without the benefit of too much 
math knowledge? Does it make any 
sort of sense? What I could follow 
seemed okay to me, although it was 
a little unorthodox." 

"Sure, his logic is unshatterable," 
Andrews told him. "But it leads you 
'way out on a limb. It all sounds 
pretty good, although it's screwey. 
He leaves out the essential things 
that are absolutely necessary in order for it to work. One thing really 
gave me a laugh, though, Matt . . ." 

"What's that?" Matt wanted to 
know. 

"He must know one hell of a lot 
more about geomagnetism and the 
Earth's gravity field than anyone 
else ... or at least he thinks he 
does ! Part of this whole deal of his 
is so unshakeable because there is 



126 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



absolutely no way to check some of 
the things he says!" The mathematician tossed the letter back. "Better forget it and file it. The guy has 
slipped his cams. The next thing, 
he'll be telling you he got all this 
information from the little green 
men in the flying saucers . . .just 
like a lot of other crackpots . . ." 

So the second letter from "L. Alcuin" went into the screwball file 
because Matt had other, more important things to do. But he 
couldn't forget it. He knew something about the history of science 
and technology — how sometimes a 
totally impossible thing becomes 
a reality overnight because the new 
theory conflicts with old theories — 
and nobody likes to give up old 
theories. 

Maybe Alcuin was nutty as a 
fruit cake. But the man s logic had 
impressed Matt somehow. He knew 
that some people possessed no tact 
and had not the slightest knowledge 
of elementary psychology; in spite 
of being brilliant, they were looked 
upon as crackpots when they brazenly, knowing no better, announced 
their theories and concepts to the 
rest of the world. Einstein had been 
tactful as well as brilliant. In his 
first papers where he considered the 
electrodynamics of a moving body, 
he mng in the first overtures of the 
theory of relativity by carefully 
utilizing some aspects of Maxwell's 
electromagnetic theory. Einstein had 
proceeded gently, stepping on no 
one's toes and being careful not to 



alienate the entrenched forces of 
authority. But not everyone had 
that facility. 

And Matt, knowing that the hue 
and cry was for basic research and 
new concepts these days, had the 
feeling that some seemingly-screwball concepts should be followed 
up. True, he realized that 99% of 
them might turn out to be the results of wild and undisciplined 
imaginations. 

But it was that remaining 1% 
that worried him — the 1% that 
would otherwise be lost. New concepts do not always fit with the 
established theory of the nature of 
things. More often, they are in violent disagreement which may be 
due to the blind alley into which 
orthodox thought may have strayed. 

On his own, he wrote Alcuin on 
his personal letterhead, telling him 
to sit tight. He intended to investigate on his own, and no one need 
know about it. 

When his travel request for his 
trip to the contractor's plant came 
through, he checked his annua! 
leave and decided to take a day off. 
This made Mae mad; she had to 
retype his travel orders to allow him 
to take the leave and depart from 
his intended itinerary. 

The small town of Childress was 
not over fifty miles from where the 
plant was located. 

Two days later, weary from riding airliners, getting too little sleep, 
living in the sterility of a hotel 
room, trying to make his expense* 



LETTER FRC 

balance with his per diem, and 
tangling heads with the stubborn 
and persistent mathematicians, he 
told the world in general to go to 
hell and hopped the bus to Childress. 

It was evening when he arrived, 
and he got a bite to eat in a little 
short-order cafe tucked in among 
the other buildings along the maddeningly-typical main street of 
Childress. As he was paying his bill, 
he dug out Alcuin's address and 
asked the cafe proprietor where he 
might find the street. 

The man told him, then scowled 
at him as he handed Matt his 
change. "Are you sure you want to 
go down there?" 

"Skid row?" Matt asked. 

"Mister, we're a clean and upstanding city. But keep your eyes 
open. A guy was rolled pretty bad 
down in that neck of the woods last 
night." 

It was the right street, and the 
old, two-story frame rooming 
house had the right number on the 
post supporting the veranda roof. 
Matt noticed the sign: "Rooms, 50 
cents per night." 

He fought off the temptation to 
turn and go back. This was the sort 
of a place where a person could 
come and go without attracting the 
slightest notice. But he had come 
this far. So he turned the old brass 
door bell and waited. 

A frowsy, fat old lady came to 
the door, a tattered shawl wrapped 
hastily around her shoulders. 



tomorrow 127 

"I'm looking for Mr. Alcuin," 
Matt told her. 

"He's in. He never goes no place 
nohow. Sometimes I think he don't 
eat . . . Say, he ain't in trouble, is 
he? You ain't a dick?" 

Matt assured her he wasn't. 

"I don't let to no rowdies, mister." 

"I'm sure you don't. I'm here to 
see him on business." 

It was evident that she was bursting with curiosity as to what the 
business might be, since it might 
provide some good gossip. But she 
let Matt in and directed him to the 
second floor. "End of the hall," she 
told him. 

Matt thanked her profusely, 
mounted the ancient stairway, and 
climbed to the second floor. Following instructions, he walked softly 
down the dimly-lit hall and came 
up to a door. 

"Come in," said a voice in unusual accents as he knocked. 

The room was lit by a single 60watt bulb hanging naked from the 
ceiling. Under this was a small table 
and a chair. Covering the table and 
strewn around the room were 
books. . . . Books, thousands of 
them. And paper. Paper everywhere. An old brass bed stood 
against the wall, and the single window had its torn shade pulled all 
the way down. 

But Matt was looking at the man 
who got up from the chair beside 
the little table. He saw a small man, 
well proportioned, with a bald 
head. The lighting was so poor that 



128 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



the man's complexion looked flat 
and faded. He was immediately 
caught and held by the man's eyes 
. . . strange eyes, deep and mysterious. 

"Yes, I am Alcuin. And you are 
Matt Thayer," the small man said. 
His voice was strangely accented. 
"Sit down. I have been waiting for 
you." 

Skeptically, Matt did so without 
saying a word. Alcuin looked at 
him and indicated the chaos of the 
room. "I've had a terrible time, you 
know. I don't speak too well yet, 
and my writing is even worse. The 
problem of communication is always a difficult one. I got nowhere 
for a long time. I didn't even know 
if I was getting through to you until you answered. Still, I'm not sure. 
You think I am a . . . crackpot, 
don't you?" 

"I'm not sure what to think of 
you at the moment, Mr. Alcuin," 
Matt admitted. "I am here because 
I was motivated by curiosity . . ." 

"I suspected as much. Men working in your field usually have a 
strong curiosity. You and others are 
working toward travel in space . . ." 

Matt didn't quite know what to 
think of this man. Crackpot? Perhaps, he decided. But he played 
along, stalling for time until more 
information presented itself. "Space 
travel is still a long way off . . ." 

"Perhaps not as far as you 
think." Alcuin sat down, still smiling. But it was a strange smile . . . 



as though it was an unnatural facial 
expression. "Not if I can get someone to listen. You'll never know 
how difficult it was for me to translate my knowledge into terms you'd 
understand. Too many people, I 
know, passed me off as insane. Your 
concepts and knowledge have not 
progressed far enough yet . . ." 

Matt leaned forward. "Who are 
you really, Alcuin?" he asked suddenly. 

"Let us say that I am a castaway. 
This is a nice place, but it doesn't 
agree with me. I want to make a 
deal . . ." 

"Eh?" 

Alcuin watched him with unblinking eyes. "You have imagination and an open mind, Thayer. I 
saw it in your article, and it was 
evident in your answers to me by 
mail. Let's just say that I want to 
go home. Give me a ticket, and I 
will give in exchange a method for 
doing so." Quietly, he got up and 
started taking off his shirt. 

Halfway through, he used his 
third and fourth hands to assist 
him with the unfamiliar buttons. 

Matt Thayer had made a strange 
pact. As he left the dingy rooming 
house, a place where a man could 
come and go without being noticed 
at all, he began to wonder what he 
was going to do now. How could 
he pull it off? 

How, and what, was he going tc 
tell other nien? 
