Mr. President By STEPHEN ARR 

GEORGE WONG stood 
pale and silent by the 
video screen, listening to 
the election returns, a long-stemmed glass of champagne clutched 
forgotten in his trembling right 
hand. 

The announcer. droned on: " — 
latest returns from Venus, with 
half of the election districts reporting, give three billion four 
hundred and ninety-six million 
votes for Wong, against one billion, four hundred million for 



Thompson, one billion One hundred million for Miccio, and nine 
hundred million for Kau. These 
results, added to the almost complete returns from Earth and the 
first fragmentary reports from 
Mars, clearly indicate a landslide 
vote for Wong as the next President of the Solar Union. The two 
billion votes from Ganymede and 
Callisto, which will be received 
early tomorrow morning, cannot 
appreciably affect the results. The 
battle for the twenty-five Vice


22 




 



Presidents is less clear. It is certain that Thompson, Miccio, 
Kau, Singh, and DuLavier will 
all be among those elected, but 
in what order is not yet . . 

Wong leaned over and snapped 
the video off. His shoulders sagged. He leaned against the console as though too tired to move, 
a slight, narrow-shouldered man 
with a very high forehead and 
thin receding black hair. His 
large, sad, almond-shaped eyes 
and yellow-tinted skin indicated 
that there was a good deal of 
Asiatic in the mixed blood that 
flowed through his veins. 

"I'm sorry, truly sorry," 
Michael Thompson said sympathetically, placing a friendly arm 
across the narrow shoulders of the 
successful candidate. They were 
alone in the living 'room of the 
hotel suite in New Geneva, which 
they had shared for the campaign. "The people chose well. 
After the wonderful job you did 
in organizing the colonization of 
Io and Europa, you were the logical man. And then you do have 
the fantastic Responsibility Quotient of 9.6 out of 10. Anyway," 
he added with a weary shrug, 
"don't feel too bad — it looks as 
though I'll be First Vice-President." 

A brief ghost of a smile crossed 
George Wong's face. "We who 
are about to die salute you," he 
said, lifting his glass in a bitter 



toast to the blank video screen. 

Thompson, the man who was 
to be First Vice-President, silently joined him. 

"At least," Wong sighed, putting his empty glass down on the 
video, "I don't have a family. 
Look at poor Kau. At Miccio. 
With wives and children, how 
they must have suffered when 
they learned they had been drafted by the conventions . . . Well, I 
guess there's nothing else to do 
but to go to bed and wait until 
they come for me in the morning. 
Good night, Michael." 

"Good night, George," Michael 
Thompson said. He turned toward his own room. "I am sorry," 
he said again. 

WONG had already eaten 
breakfast and was dressed 
in an inconspicuous tweed suit 
for the inauguration when the 
chimes sounded, telling him that 
they were at the door. Slowly, he 
walked to the door and opened 
it 

"Good morning, Mr. President," the man outside said 
cheerily, flashing his famous grin. 
George Wong immediately recognized Al Grimm, the man who 
had been personal secretary to 
sixty-three Presidents. He was 
one of the vast army of civil servants who kept the wheels of 
government turning smoothly until Presidents were able to make 



MR. PRESIDENT 



the decisions that would create 
policy. 

"Good morning, Al," George 
Wong said. "I am afraid I'll have 
to place myself completely in 
your hands for these first few 
days. Do we go to the Executive 
Mansion for the inauguration 
now?" 

"Yes, sir. Then, after your inauguration, to the office. Messages of condolence have been 
pouring in all night, but I don't 
think you want to bother with 
them. However, I am afraid we 
will have to bring up some of the 
problems that have arisen in the 
two weeks since President Reynolds left office." 

"How is he?" Wong asked. "I 
knew him, you know. He taught 
at Venus University at the same 
time I did. He was a fine man." 

"I'm afraid he's no better," Al 
said, shaking his head. "We're 
doing all we can for him, but he 
won't even speak to his wife. You 
know how difficult it is." 

"Yes, I know," Wong said. 

They rode downstairs in silence 
and walked to the Presidential 
Copter parked in the street in 
front of the house. A few guards 
loitered in the vicinity, but there 
were no crowds. They entered 
the plush copter, which rose 
smoothly Under its whirling 
blades and carried them over the 
city, landing finally on the lawn 
of the Executive Mansion. 



Chief Justice Herz met them, 
dressed in a blue business suit, 
and after they shook hands he 
administered the oath. 

"Do you, George "Wong," he 
asked, "swear to make every decision you are asked to make as 
President of the Solar Union for 
the benefit of the people of the 
Union and in accord with what 
you believe to be fair and just, 
fully cognizant of the fact that 
the welfare of seventy-five billion 
citizens of the Union is dependent 
on you?" 

"I do," George Wong said, 
through a painfully dry throat 
that would barely permit the 
words to come out. 

THEY all shook hands again. 
Then Al Grimm led the President across the grassy lawn, into 
the mansion, and up to the office 
that had served over a thousand 
Presidents. Wong entered it nervously. It was a large plain room, 
severely decorated. Tentatively, 
he slid into the chair behind the 
huge steel desk, and began opening the drawers. He found them 
fully stocked with tapes, a recorder, all the other necessities. 
The desk and everything else in 
the room was brand new. There 
was no trace anywhere of his 
predecessors, and he was relieved 
to find it so. The Psychology Department at work, he thought. 
"While we are moving your 



24 




 



effects into the living quarters, 
Mr. President," Al said from the 
doorway, "I wonder if we could 
start discussing the problem of 
the Gnii . . . their Ambassadors 
have presented an ultimatum, 
and they demand an answer today." 

CJO soon, President Wong 
^ thought. Couldn't he have 
just a few hours to get used to 
his office, to wander through the 
building, to explore the green 
garden that he could see from his 
barred window stretching out behind the mansion? 

For a second, he almost rebelled ; but even as he thought of answering no, he realized that he 
never would. The Psych Agents 
had measured his Responsibility 
Quotient at 9.6, and they didn't 
make mistakes. 

"Of course," he answered with 
forced enthusiasm. "Who do you 
suggest I discuss the matter 
with? For that matter, who are 
the Gnii?" 

"I have the Manager «f Defense, the Manager of Trade, and 
the Manager of Foreign Affairs 
waiting in the anteroom. With 
your permission, I'll call them in 
and they'll explain the problem. 
But first, if you would sign this 
order ... it has already been approved by President ReyHtds 
and by all of the Managers concerned." 



President Wong- took the paper. 
It was an order sending a space 
platoon, 5,000 warships and 500,000 men, to the system of Altair 
A, to place themselves under the 
command of the Grasvian fleet 
for an attack against the system 
of Altair D. 

The President frowned. "What's 
the story behind this?" 

"As you know," Al explained 
patiently, "there is an unwritten 
agreement throughout the Galaxy 
that if any system conquers too 
many other systems, an intersystem police force is formed to 
cut the conqueror down. Since 
for all practical purposes, there is 
an infinity of systems in the Galaxy, and as each conqueror borders on more and more of them 
as he grows larger in three-dimensional expansion, unlike the 
one-dimensional conquests that 
used to occur on the surface of 
planets, conquest of the Galaxy 
is an obvious impossibility. However, the inhabitants of Altair D 
seem to have embarked on a policy of reckless expansion that 
could reach us in time." 

"I see," President Wong said. 
"How far away are they?" 

"It will take the platoon sixteen years to get to the rendezvous. They will remain for ten 
years, then return. Because of 
the distance, we are not expected 
to send more than this token 
force." 



MR, PRESIDENT 



25 



PRESIDENT Wong looked at 
the order. It had already been 
signed by President Reynolds, by 
the Managers of Defense and of 
Foreign Affairs. After all, even 
though forty-two years was a 
long period of time to chop out 
of a man's life, only 500,000 men 
were involved, and it was the 
duty of every citizen to give his 
life for his planet if required. 

With an impatient motion, he 
rolled his thumbprint in the soft 
plastic signature space, and held 
it for a second as it hardened. 
Then he threw the order into a 
basket labeled outgoing correspondence. 

His first official duty completed, he should have felt exhilerated ; but instead, nagging 
thoughts of guilt tugged at his 
brain. 

Who were the inhabitants of 
Altair D, anyway? How did he 
know that the police action was 
just? Shouldn't he get out the 
whole file and go over it? 

But that would take days . . . 
and there was the matter of the 
Gnii, whoever they 'vere. 

The three managers entered. 
President Wong stood up and 
shook hands with them. They 
didn't waste time on other preliminaries, but rushed straight 
into business, 

"The Gnii," the Manager of 
Trade, a large, red-faced man 
said, "demand that we remove 



our trading planetoid from their 
system. They allege that the 
planetoid is a security risk, in 
that it could be used for remotecontrol bombing of any of their 
planets. They threaten that if we 
don't remove it voluntarily, they 
will attack it, and their Ambassadors are here in person to take 
our reply to their ultimatum." 

There was nothing unusual in 
that, President Wong knew. Since 
both spaceships and any other 
known means of communication 
traveled at the speed of light, it 
was now more common to send 
Ambassadors on important missions than to send messages. 

"What do you think we should 
do?" President Wong asked the 
Manager of Trade. 

"¥ THINK we should tell them 
■■■ to go to hell," the Manager 
of Trade replied, his heavy face 
turning redder. "After all, we 
have a million trading planetoids 
out in the Galaxy — if we retreat 
here, we set a dangerous precedent." 
"I see," Wong said, frowning. 
"I don't recall any alien trading 
planetoids in our system." 

"Of course not, Mr. President," 
sait' the Manager Of Foreign Affairs a tall, lean, distinguishedlooking gentleman with blue eyes 
and 'Hron-gray hair. "We don't 
permit them, for much the same 
reason that the Gnii want them 



26 




 



removed from their system. Trading planetoids are usually only 
tolerated in backward systems. 
Apparently the Gnii no longer 
desire to be considered backward. 
I, for one, think that we would be 
making a mistake not to accede 
to their request." 

"Oh, that's very fine, decent, 
sporting and all that," the Manager of Trade said irritatedly. 
"But I have to worry about feeding this overpopulated system of 
ours, which would starve if it 
weren't for intersystem trade — a 
significant part of which is carried on through the planetoids." 

"Can we protect the threatened 
planetoid?" President Wong asked the Manager of Defense, a 
short, slim black man with flaming red hair. 

The Manager of Defense considered his reply carefully. "Not 
if they are willing to pay a terrific price to destroy it," he said 
finally, "After all, it's thirtythree years away. While we can 
send out a fleet immediately that 
would get there at the same time 
as the Ambassadors, and before 
they could mount an attack, we 
hardly could send reinforcements 
and replacements once the battle 
is joined. But from the best information available, I think that 
a small force of twenty or twentyfive thousand troops should be 
able to frighten the Gnii out of 
doing anything foolish. They 



aren't very far advanced." 

"Thirty-three years," President Wong said frowning. "That 
means a mixed crew with facilities 
for children. I am told that 
things often go wrong on that 
type of mission." 

The Manager of Defense nodded. "They do," he agreed shortly. "However, I have analyzed 
that problem in detail in my report." 

President Wong sighed. "If you 
gentlemen will leave your reports 
with me, I will make my decision 
by tomorrow morning." 

Each of the Managers gave him 
several rolls of tape. Those of the 
Manager of Trade felt by far the 
heaviest. President Wong slipped 
them into the racks in his upper 
left-hand desk drawer. 

"Ask the Gnii to come in," he 
said to Al. 

A L pushed a button on the arm 
of his chair, and the door 
swung open. Four large spidery 
creatures entered the room, followed by a small bald man. 
Their round bodies were encased 
in plastic globes, in which a 
whitish translucent gas swirled. 
They walked over to the President's desk, and the leader extended a hairy leg. 

With an effort, President Wong 
forced himself to take the leg 
with his hand and pump it up 
and down. He noticed that the 



MR. 



PRESIDENT 



creature withdrew the leg as soon 
as it was decently possible, and 
smiled a bit as he concluded that 
their aversion was mutual. 

The Gnii stepped back and began waving his two front legs. 

"He is asking for your reply to 
his ultimatum," the small bald 
man interpreted. 

"Tell him I'll give him a defin


ite decision tomorrow," President 
Wong said. "Apologize for my not 
being able to reply today, and 
point out that since it will take 
him thirty-three years to get 
home, one day will not make 
much difference." 

The bald interpreter waved his 
hands. The four Gnii went into a 
small huddle, waving their spi



lt 




 



dery legs at each othef. Then the 
leader turned to the interpreter 
again and "spoke." 

"They say that they agree," 
the interpreter said. "But they 
want to emphasize that it is not 
because they fear the power of 
the Solar System." 

The Gnii leader hesitated a 
moment, then extended his leg 



again. President Wong pumped 
it once. The Gnii dropped his 
hand and turned and left the 
room, with the three others and 
the interpreter filing after him. 

"If you don't need me any 
more," the Manager of Trade 
said, glancing at his watch, "I'll 
go back to the Trade Bureau. I 
have a meeting with a number 




of the department heads." 

President Wong nodded tiredly. "I have the tapes. I'll study all 
your positions tonight" 

HpHE Manager of Trade and 
•■■ the Manager of Foreign Affairs rose and left the room. The 
Manager of Defense stayed in 
his seat. 

"If you feel up to it," Al said, 
"the Manager of Defense would 
appreciate it if you would present 
a Presidential citation to the remains of the Third Company. 
They were involved in a police 
action in the system of Veganea, 
and their morale is shattered. As 
you know, the award is traditional, as is the speech. Here's the 
text — all you need do is read it." 

"All right," President Wong 
said, taking the paper from Al's 
hand and scanning it. There was 
only one paragraph, 

The door opened and four old 
men entered, followed by an honor guard of eight husky privates. 
They approached the desk and 
stood at attention., President 
Wong looked up from the speech 
and felt a wave of sudden nausea. For a second, he was afraid 
that he actually was going to be 
sick. None of their old lined faces 
was complete. The worst wounded had less than half a face, and 
that discolored by purple blotches of radiation scar-tissue. He was 
blind, and the others maneuvered 



him into position before the desk. 

"For the heroic parts which 
you played in the Police Action 
against Veganea — " Wong stumbled over the name, then continued hastily — "I, the President of 
the Solar Union, hereby . , ." 

"Rot," said the blind one, 
through toothless gums in a voice 
that was only a hoarse whisper. 
"Tell me, do you know where 
Veganea is? Does anyone on 
Earth know where Veganea is, or 
care? How many men, Mr. President, how many men, young and 
healthy, left for that police action? Do you know?" His hoarse 
voice rose. "Four came back . . . 
but can any of you gentlemen 
tell me how many left?" 

"That's enough," the Manager 
of Defense said. At his signal, 
two of the honor guards gently 
took hold of the veteran's arms 
and walked him out of the room 
along with the others. 

"I order that he not be punished," Wong said sharply. 

"He won't be," the Manager of 
Defense said. "Do you take me 
for a barbarian? I had hoped, 
though, that your interest might 
change their attitude. As you can 
imagine, it's raising hell with the 
morale of the recruits." 

"By the way," the President 
asked, "where is Veganea, and 
how many men did we send 
there?" 

"It's about twenty-four years 



30 




 



iiway, near Vega. The action 
iturted before my time and I 
'lon't know how many men were 
involved — probably not more than 
h few million. The Police Action 
« nded successfully, but our ships 
wt-re in the first wave and were 
wiped out." 

THE President sat down wearily. His hand strayed over to 
the order he had signed that 
morning for a police action, then 
drifted aimlessly away. 

"What's next?" he asked Al. 
He slipped a few energy pills into 
his mouth as Al consulted his 
book. 

"There's the matter of the conversion bomb," Al said. "The 
Manager of Scientific Research 
and the Manager of Defense 
would like you to make a decision about it." 

"The conversion bomb?" President Wong said, puzzled. "I've 
never heard of it.' 

"It is highest level top secret," 
the Manager of Defense explained. "Instead of breaking down 
atoms and releasing some energy 
as in the standard fission weapons, it converts matter entirely 
into energy. Given the matterenergy equation, the energy released by a small amount of 
matter is fantastic." 

Al had risen and gone to the 
door. He returned with an old, 
gray-haired, stoop-shouldered 



man. The President recognized 
the famous Manager of Research. 

The Manager launched immediately into his argument without 
preliminaries. "Mr. President, 
while my department has finally 
found a way to convert matter 
directly into energy, I believe 
that any use of this process would 
be disastrous. First, there is absolutely no safeguard that could 
prevent a matter-conversion powered machine, used for peaceful 
purposes, from being changed 
into a lethal weapon by the simplest of alterations. And as a 
weapon, the conversion, bomb, unlike atomic bombs, could not 
only destroy planets but stars 
with their entire systems. We all 
know that the law of the Galaxy 
is to prevent its domination by 
any one system — and given the 
distances and populations involved, that domination is obviously impossible. But if we 
began to construct conversion 
bombs, and if word of it got out, 
the whole Galaxy would rise 
against us, all the way to the 
Edge." 

"But, Mr. President," the Manager of Defense said calmly. "We 
are not a unique people. If we 
do not produce the conversion 
bomb, you may rest assured that 
someone else will. Maybe even 
our friends, the Gnii. No system 
has ever saved itself by refusing 
to manufacture the best weapons 



MR. PRESIDENT 



31 



available to it. As for the Galaxy 
rising against us — if we have the 
conversion bomb, let them! We 
will be able to defend ourselves 
•gainst any or all of them and 
blast their suns into novae." 

"Until they have the bomb," 
the Manager of Scientific Research interrupted. "As you say, 
we are not a unique people." 

"Gentlemen," the President 
said, standing up suddenly. "I feel 
tired and dizzy. The idea of a 
bomb that can wipe out systems 
is new to me. If you will leave 
your tapes, I will study your 
arguments tonight, and we can 
resume this discussion tomorrow." 

^I^HE two Managers rose immediately, shook hands with 
the President, and left. They did 
not speak to each other as they 
went through the door. 

"Mr. President," Al said, "it's 
seven o'clock. Will you join me 
for dinner, sir?" 

President Wong slumped back 
into his seat and stared dully at 
Al, only half noticing his friendly 
grin. "What would you do about 
the Gnii, Al, if you were in my 
place?" he asked. 

"I'm sorry, sir," Al said, "but 
I really don't know. Better come 
along for some dinner. You've 
had a hard day, and you have 
a harder one ahead of you tomorrow. We saved a number of 



difficult problems that we didn't 
want to throw at you on your 
first day in office." 

A ghost of a smile crept over 
the President's face, then disappeared quickly. "It's all right, Al. 
Go ahead and eat. I think Til 
just stay here and go over these 
tapes." 

As Al left, President Wong saw 
the order for the police action on 
his desk. He picked it up to call 
Al to take it with him, but his 
eyes caught the words 500,000 
men . . . sixteen years, and a pic* 
ture of the terribly wounded veterans ' flashed before his eyes. 
Really, he would have to go 
through the files and find out if 
the expedition was necessary . . . 

He opened the left-hand desk 
drawer and stared at the Gnii 
tapes, but he didn't take any of 
them out. It seemed like too much 
of an effort. 

And then, the conversion bomb 
was so much more important. 

He closed the first drawer and 
opened the one with the conversion bomb tapes. 

But the Gnii had to be answered tomorrow — the bomb 
could wait. He slammed the 
drawer shut. 

"Gnii," he muttered to himself* 
and opened the other drawer. 

Then he noticed that he had 
put the police action order back 
into his outgoing basket. He 
slammed the drawer with the Gnii 



MR. 



PRESIDENT 



J3 



tapes shut again and opened the 
drawer below it and pushed the 
order inside, so that it wouldn't 
be picked up by mistake before 
he could check on it. 

"Five hundred thousand men 
in here," he said as he closed the 
drawer. "Going to — " 

Where were they supposed to 
go? He couldn't remember. He 
opened the drawer again and 
looked at the order. To Altair D. 
The name had no meaning for 
him. 

Now, let's see . . . oh, yes, the 
conversion bomb tape. 

He opened the drawer to take 
out the tapes, and remembered 
that the Gnii ultimatum had to 
be answered by tomorrow. 

"Gnii, Gnu, Gnuts," he said, 
opening a drawer. It was the 
wrong one, and the tapes weren't 
there. Which tapes? 

The door opened, and President Wong looked up to see Al's 
smiling face peering in. 

"I was passing by, sir," Al said, 
"and I wondered if I couldn't 
talk you into supper — " 

"Get oat!" the President shouted. 

The door closed softly. 

Now where was he? . . . Oh, yes, 



the conversion bomb. Conversion, 
conversion, conversation, bomb, 
bomb, boom, BOOM. But that 
wasn't it either — it was the Gnii, 
they had to be answered by tomorrow • - • „ Gnii, Gnii, Gnu, 
Gnuts, now in what drawer had 
he put the gnats? And why order 
a police action against Gnats? 
Just convert every one of them 
into spiders . . . 

A L walked slowly down the 
hall, his grin gone, his face 
looking washed out. He turned 
into his own little office and 
snapped on the communications 
video. 

"First Vice-President Michael 
Thompson," he said to the operator. 

In a moment Thompson appeared on the screen. 

"Mr. First Vice-President," Al 
said in a tired voice, "may I 
suggest that you remain in the 
Capital for the next few weeks?" 

Even though he knew that it 
was not polite, Al snapped off 
the set without waiting for a reply 
— but not before he caught the 
white and frightened look on 
Thompson's face. 
