6 



llllllllll^ 




AUTHOR 



W, 



ELL. let's try being factual. 

was born and raised in 
Pittsburgh, and have lived 
here most of my life, with occasional 
excursions to California, Arizona, 
and Mexico. I'm on the right side 
of forty but the wrong side of thirty, 
and that's near enough. Have held 
the usual variety of jobs in the palaeontological lab of a museum, a food 
plant, beer-refrigeration salesroom 
(smack! drool!), ad agency, dairy 
supply house, and a big war plant. 
Also have been a farm hand (once 
I had muscles) . . . T can explain 
the old query about why a writer 
always manages to do so many other 
things. He often gets hungry. 

I'm so used to "St. Reynard" that 
I sometimes feel my own name is a 
noni de plume: but under it (Krepps) 
I've had two novels published in this 
country and in Sweden (latest one, 
The Courts of the Lion, now avail


★ 



able in a 35c Bantam reprint — 
adv't.) besides yarns in Collier's, 
Argosy. Adventure, and other mags 
too few to mention. Enough of this 
insufferable bragging — let's get to 
the fantasy. 

Unknown Worlds bought my first 
story in '43, and folded a month 
later. So far as I know there wasn't 
any connection between the two 
events. Shortly thereafter I sold a 
couple of pieces to EA. which printed 
nearly all my fantasy between '44 
and '51. Naturally, when Bill Hamling left EA to publish Madge, 1 
came with him. We've always got on 
so well together, except when he 
made me rewrite half of the present 
yarn ! 

Maybe it'd be of infinitesimal interest to the readers to know how 1 
got started writing fantasy and stf. 
From constant reading, of course. The 
(Concluded on page 115) 



win 

STORIES OF SCIENCE AND FANTASY 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

NOVEMBER VOLUME 2 

1951 NUMBER 5 



t&rleS WILLIAM L. HAMLIN G 

Editor 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS ! 

tNovel — 35,000 words) by Geoff St. Reynard.. 

Look at your neighbor — are you sure he Isn't a monster In disguise? Don't laugh ! 



THEY REACHED FOR THE MOON 

(Short — 3,500 words) by William Oberfield 80 

Men had conquered space and reached the Moon. But why didn't any of them return'.' 

THE OWL AND THE APE 

(Short — 6,000 words) by L. Sprague de Camp 90 

Gezun aspired to be a sorcerer. But he found magic a dangerous thing to handle! 

PLAYMATE 

(Short — 4,000 words) by Leslie A. Croutch 106 

Dickie was a strange little boy— lor one thing, why did his wrists need oiling? 

THE GIFT 

(Short — 3,000 words) by Melvin Sturgis 116 

His miracles were not witchcraft— he was just a thousand years ahead of his time: 

THE OLD WAY 

(Novelette — 10,000 words) by Milton Lesser 124 

They faced death on the tiny asteroid — unless they could find an invisible weapon! 



INTRODUCING THE AUTHOR 2 SOUND AND FURY 89 

THE EDITORIAL 4 OCEANS OF SPACE 104 

FORECASTS 78 & 123 KOBALD CAPERS 105 

IN THE BEGINNING 79 FANDORA'S BOX 148 

AMERICA NEEDS JETS! 79 LETTERS FROM THE READERS 152 



MALCOLM SMITH, Art Editor 

Front cover photo-dved print bv Malcolm Smith, suggested by "Beware, The Usurpers.' 
Interiors by Malcolm Smith, H. W. McCauley, W. E. Terry, 
Ramon Raymond, and Joe W. Tillotson 



Editorial Office, We ilo nut an-opl rcB|!i.u.it)M ily for I lie return 
cilitale handling Hi* auilior should eiir:n,(- m?11'- aiHri 
are used In (Lories are firtltiuus. Subscription rates : 1^ iisueii p'l.tiO in I 
Copyright 1951, Greenleol Publishing Co. 



WE'RE going to devote a portion of the editorial this issue to what we think is a 
very important subject: science fiction. We stress the latter word because to an alarming degree it would 
seem as if the current emphasis in 
the field would be just the reverse. 

NO one can question the fact that 
today science fiction enjoys a 
peak of popularity unprecedented in 
its history. Then genre has branched into the hard cover book field 
with dozens of titles being issued annually. The big slicks such as The 
Saturday Evening Post, Collier's and 
many others, are featuring science 
fiction stories every two or three issues. And of course radio, television, 
and the movies see the field as the 
probable successor to the heretofore 
leaders of the media, western and 
detective stories. 

ALL of which is certainly to the 
good and we wouldn't want to 
change it an iota. But along with this 
growing popularity— which will increase as time goes on because of the 
very nature of our present world 
technology — a rather disturbing la-ck 
of proper direction has become apparent. 

AT no period in science fiction's 
history has there been a time 
when more magazines on the newsstands were devoted exclusively to 
the subject. One would think that 
with all the expanding channels for 



the field a definite idea of the need 
for science fiction would be recognized. Such, unhappily, is not the 
case. 

TO put it bluntly, science fiction 
is in a stage of growing pains. 
We hear the cry from various circles 
that science fiction must grow up! 
That what we need are thought-provoking ideas in the stories that may 
project man's current problems into 
the future and solve them, or at least, 
to show us the error of our ways. 
In a nutshell, it would appear that 
because of the awakened interest in 
science fiction, our one purpose is 
to educate the new mass audience 
whose interest has been captured. 

W'E maintain that this is a fundamental error in editorial thinking. There is only one purpose for 
science fiction, just as there has always been — and that is to entertain! 

THROUGHOUT the field today 
we can see the uncertain jockeying for pi'oper editorial slant to stories. The conventional science fiction story which has proven very 
popular — and which indeed was the 
very thing that captured the interest of the nation— is now frowned upon. The trend in some circles is 
away from the escapist adventure, 
suspense, and solid action story, to 
the so-called adult or intellectual 
type of story. Some publishers, editors and writers have viewed the 
new audience potential and cried in 



THE EDITORIAL 



5 



sudden uncertainty: "My Gawd, we've got to educate these people!" 

WE think this is a very important point to be mulled over by 
all concerned at this time. It is our 
opinion that nothing will be a surer 
means of retarding the popularity of 
science fiction than this growing 
tendency to educate readers rather 
than entertain them. 

TAKE a good look at the western 
field. The movies have made 
millions of dollars over the years 
with fast action westerns. They made 
millions because the majority of theater-goers wanted that type of entertainment! On occasion the movie 
industry would produce and release 
a truly adult type of western, such 
as "The Ox-bow Incident". We were 
were very much impressed with the 
film and certainly it achieved fine 
critical acclaim. And yet we were 
surprised to learn that the film was 
not a box-office hit. Plainly and 
simply, it was too high-brow. It made 
you stop and think, and perhaps 
shudder at some of the social implications it portrayed. 

THIS should teach us a good lesson. People do not want an education in their relaxed moments at 
the movies or at home with a copy of 
one of their favorite magazines. They 
want to be entertained. And entertainment in fiction is purely and simply escapist. For a brief while the 
reader wantes to experience vicariously the thrills of the hero who is his 
fictional-identity at the moment. He 
does not care to be treated to a 
scientific narration into technology 
or sociology. 

TIME magazine reported in its 
June 25th issue of this year on 
an article that had appeared in the 



current Harper's, written by Arthur 
L. Mayer, executive vice president of 
the Council of Motion Picture Organizations. It was the opinion of Mr. 
Mayer that for the most part the 
good films (i. e. those receiving critical acclaim) were flops at the boxoffice; similarly, the bad ones, which 
had been panned by the critics, made 
a pile of money. 

THIS of course brings us to the 
question, just what is a good story? The mere fact that a critic (in 
science fiction or otherwise) pans a 
story does not necessarily mean it 
is a bad story. The real critic is 
the man or woman who buys a ticket 
at the box-office or a copy of a 
magazine. If they like what they 
read or see a story's value can be 
determined. 

UNFORTUNATELY, it seems to 
us, some people in responsible 
positions in the science fiction field 
today have viewed the great new po- i 
tential audience and have been 
stricken by an editorial palsy. Fearful, perhaps, of losing the interest of 
this large mass of American public 
they have cast aside the fundamental 
purpose for any story — entertainment 
— and sincerely believe that what 
the reader wants is a two-hour education in the semantics of future 
trends. 

IT is true, perhaps, that a certain 
segment of any audience may desire educational reading. But experience wields a long yardstick and it 
shows in no uncertain measurements 
that the majority of people want to 
be entertained with a good story of 
action, adventure, and suspense. 

AVERY recent indication of this 
can be seen from Hollywood. 
{Continued on Page 146) 



Have you ever seen monsters stalking the 
streets? Only if you're drunk, you say? — Don't 
laugh— your best friend could be one of them! . . . 



6 




I STOPPED the black Jaguar beside the crumbling stone balustrade and swung my legs out, The 
drive was deep in rotted leaves and 
long-uncleared trash. Above me the 
ancient castle looked out across the 
groves of oak and elm and chestnut 
to the silent moors, like the veritable ghost of Old England itself: 
aloof, brooding, noble, withdrawn 
from this hectic modern age into its 
memories. Blind blank holes of 
windows stared over my head as I 
walked up the drive where in a more 



regal century the carriages of dukes 
and knighLs and princes of the blood 
must have rolled, the big horses of 
neighboring squires must have pawed impatient!)' before many a hunt, 
and lovers in satin and velvet and 
cascading lace must have strolled 
and dallied a thousand thousand 
times. 

As I was hauling open the heavy 
iron-banded door, my foot trod upon something that squashed unpleasantly. I bent, clown, and in the sick 
yellow moonlight saw a newly-dead 
rook, its eyes already pecked out. I 
shivered, uncontrollably. Then I 
went in and pulled the door shut. 

My electric torch stabbing the 
darkness before me. I crossed the 



7 



8 



IMAGINATION 



empty hall and mounted the broad 
curving stairs. At the top I turned 
and glanced downward; the great 
hall was patterned with moonlight, 
and although there was no furniture of any sort, the whole vast 
place seemed to crawl and pulse 
with shapes of menace, of dead-yetliving evil. I shook myself angrily. 
My nerves were rotten, my mind 
■was bursting with fear. That was 
the whole trouble — fear, fear and 
nerves. The only thing to do was 
act quickly. 

I strode down the dank passageway, opened the third door on the 
left, went into the room and shut the 
door behind me. 

Here the old stone walls were 
ashine with lights, the air was less 
musty and far less creepy. Six people were here, standing about or sitting on straightbacked chairs. They 
all turned to look at me. Nobody 
spoke. I nodded to each in turn. 

HpHERE was an old army officer, 
leathered and permanently tanned by decades of the dreadful Indian sun; he wore a short grizzled 
mustache and a stern, rather stuffy 
expression. There was a man of 
about fifty who could not have been 
anything but a physician, so scrubbed and competent he seemed. 
There was a youngish fellow with 
only one arm. and another whose 
dark glasses sheltered sightless scarpitted hollows. There was an antique of a man, poker-thin and poker-straight and poker-hard, with a 



pale face and keen, faded blue eyes. 
And there was a girl, who had sometimes been described as a summer 
sky, as a star, and as other things 
just as lovely and unbelievable. 

"What ho," I said, with empty 
cheerfulness. "Sorry to be late. 
Let's get at it." 

"Will," said the doctor abruptly, 
"I forbid it. It's madness, it's criminal lunacy." 

"Sorry you feel that way, John. 
We've gone too far to stop here — 
and we've been all through this a 
hundred times. 1 ' I went to the table 
and sat down briskly in the vacant 
chair beside it. Truth to tell, every muscle in my body was rebelling, was shrieking to me that John 
Baringer was right; only my mind 
still insisted that he was wrong, 
and I knew that if I dallied for an 
instant my body would conquer my 
brain . . . 

I fitted my head snugly against 
the curious apparatus we had attached to the back of the chair. It. 
was constructed along the lines of 
an old-fashioned photographer's 
head clamp. To the table were nailed 
a number of steel braces, which held 
a Tower musket, an obsolete firearm 
primed with black powder and aimed 
rigidly so that the load would pass 
within a hair's breadth of my eyes 
as I sat with my head pressed against 
the clamp. The musket was alreadycocked. "Let 'er go," I said, and felt 
glad that my voice had not cracked 
into falsetto. 

"No!" said John Baringer. "No!" 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



9 



None of them moved. 

"Have I got to do it myself?" I 
asked, rather angrily. 

The retired officer pushed the 
doctor aside, took two steps forward 
and laid his hand on the musket. 
" Ready?" he asked. 

"I am." 

"Hold hard," he said, and pulled 
the trigger. 

The world seemed to lift up into 
the air all at once, its foundations 
tearing apart with a noise like all 
hell bursting in half: then it slowly 
toppled down again, and everything 
was blackness and hot, searing 
death. 

The last thing I remember was 
the scream of the beautiful girl, 
she who was as lovely as a summer 
sky. 

CHAPTER II 

T LAY in the warm bed and for a 
long time I tried to think of 
something that I knew I should recall, and at last, after hours of waking and dozing and waking again, I 
had it; it was the fact that I was not 
dead. When I knew this for certain I was extremely surprised, in 
the weak fashion of the very ill. I 
slept once more, and when I woke 
again I was stronger and more in 
command of my mind. I was still 
a little astonished that I was alive. 
Then I began to wonder whether I 
was blind. The knowledge that I 
would not know about this for some 
days was intolerable. I yelled an


grily, and a cool hand was laid 
across my lips. 

"Gently. Will, gently." said the 
loveliest voice in England. 

Then I knew that T could bear the 
uncertainty till doomsday, if I must. 

' Hello. Marion." I said, brushing 
the hand with my dry lips. "What 
time is it?" 

"Middle of the afternoon, Will. 
You've been asleep a long while. 
It's Tuesday." 

•'Tuesday. Good Lord, nearly 
forty-eight hours!" 

"'Do your eyes hurt?" 

"Not much." 

"Thank John for that." 

"Where is he?" 

"Here," said the physician's voice. 
"We're all here but the Colonel." 

"He's in London." said Marion 
Black, "buying supplies." 

"Is Johnson here?" 

"Yes, sir," said the respectful 
voice of the pale-faced old man. 
"Very much at sea, if you'll allow 
me. Mister Chester." 

"They haven't told you, Johnson?" I asked incredulously. "You 
must think us all mad!" 

"No, sir," said he promptly, "I 
give you my word I don't, sir. Had 
it been one or two of you, why then 
I might fancy you'd gone off your 
respective rockers, as you might say, 
sir; but six of you — that's different." 

"What do you think, then, Johnson?" 

"I think there's something big going on. sir." said the old man. 
"Something fearfully big. With poor 



IMAGINATION 



young Mister Exeter blind, and you 
a-lying here like this — what is it, 
sir? They told me you were the 
proper one to explain." 

"Johnson," I said, grinning, 
"that's the first time I ever heard 
your voice express anything but 
well-bred deference." 

JOHNSON coughed and, I imagine, looked at the floor with 
embarrassment. "Very strange circumstances, sir," he said. 

"I shan't keep you in suspense, 
Johnson, although these callous people have. Are you prepared to hear 
a nightmare of a yarn?" 

"Are you prepared to tell it?" 
growled John Baringer. 

"Oh, yes. I seem to have had a 
good bit of rest lately." I drank from 
a glass that Marion put to my mouth, 
and said, "You remember Jerry 
Wolfe?" 

"Of course, sir." 

''You were there the day he came 
back to the Gloucester Club and 
was murdered, weren't you?" I knew 
he had been, but I was feeling my 
way into the story. 

"Yes, sir. I brought him and Mister Talbot here a bottle of Scotch. 
I saw him killed." 

"He told Alec—" Alec Talbot was 
the chap with one arm: he'd left the 
other in Europe somewhere, during 
the latter days of the war — "he told 
Alec a tale that day, Johnson. It's 
a wild, incredible, super- fantastic 
tale. No sane man would believe a 
word of it." 



"No, sir." 

"But we six believe it, Johnson." 

"Yes, sir. I gather it has something to do with this—" 

"This madness of ours. It does. 
You see, Jerry Wolfe was nearly 
blinded in India when a Tower musket was discharged athwart 'his eyes. 
The bandages were removed as he 
was coming home, and he found he 
could see . . . could see rather more 
than most of us can." 

"Yes, sir," said the dignified voice. 
"May I ask what he could see, sir?" 

"He could see into Hell," said 
Alec Talbot quietly. 

(CTTE could see that certain peo* *■ pie are not — people," I 
went on. "Let me try to explain 
that. He discovered that there are 
among us many aliens of another 
race, perhaps from another dimension, or from another planet, or — 
who knows? He thought they were 
out of a different dimension, because 
he could see silvery lines behind them 
which he believed to be that dimension's scenery, as it were. Each 
of these aliens, these usurpers, as he 
called them, had stolen a human 
body, and was using it as a focal 
point of entrance into our world. 
Do you follow me?" 

"With some difficulty, sir." 

"Drop the 'sir', Johnson. We're 
all plain human beings together in 
this." 

"Yes, sir." 

"Well, he could see these alien 
creatures, but within them, or behind 



BEWARE. THE USURPERS! 



1 1 



them, he could also see the human 
bodies they were occupying; the 
bodies which to everyone else appeared to be quite normal men and 
women. The bodies apparently didn't contain a human soul or mind or 
whatever you want to call it, but 
were only puppets for the interlopers. He sat in Charing Cross Station 
and made notes on them, at one stage 
of his adventures, and he decided 
that they were entering this world by 
usurping the bodies of newly-born 
children, children of unions between 
two of them or between one of them 
and a regular human. See?" 
"Vaguely, sir." 

"He figured out that after a few 
of them got into our dimension, 
through some fluke or other, they 
found that they could spawn puppethumans who would become vehicles 
for others of their breed. They come 
'in' by route of birth. Perhaps, 
Jerry thought, a freak accident generations ago let just one of them 
into our world, and he put his foot 
in the door. Now there are multitudes of them here. What was the 
ratio Jerry calculated. Alec?" 

"About seven to six in our favor," 
said Alec Talbot. "Of course, that 
was figured within an hour or so 
at Charing Cross Station. He didn't 
have a chance to make a real survey. They got him first." 

"Yes, they got him. He was so 
shocked by his discovery that he 
didn't cover up fast enough, and 
they found out he" could see them. 
They harried him all over half of 



England, and finally they tracked 
him down at the club and shot his 
guts out." 

"He died in my arms," said Alec 
wi t hou t expressi on . 

"But Mister Wolfe was shot by 
men from Scotland Yard and bobbies, sir," protested Johnson. 

"That's what they seemed to be, 
Johnson, to you. Jerry could see them 
truly. He knew they were the usurpers, using the husks of human beings 
as points of contact between our dimension and theirs." 

JOHNSON coughed politely. "And 
this is the story he told Mister 
Talbot?" 
"It is." 

"And you all believe it?" 

"We do. Partly because it tallies 
up with a lot of queer things, partly 
because it explains a lot of others. 
But mainly because we all knew 
Jerry Wolfe, and he was as sane and 
decent a fellow as ever breathed tobacco smoke." 

"Yes, sir." 

"He couldn't see all of their dimension, you understand. Tfc was 
only where one of them had taken 
over a human body that the veil was 
thin enough to be pierced by his 
blast-warped sight. There was a 
sort of field of force or something 
around them, and he could see the 
beasts and their nearby background 
of silver lines that ran at an angle 
of about forty-five degrees. That 
was all. He killed the human parts 
of three or four of them, and al


IMAGINATION 



though he couldn't touch the otherdimensional folk with his bullets, 
when their human puppets died they 
were relegated to their own world 
again. They faded out and vanished, he said. Their point of contact was obliterated." 

"I see, sir. I begin to get the 
picture. These foreigners — " I could 
not help smiling at the word — "'have 
been infiltrating our island by some 
means, using our bodies, you might 
say, as disguises. A dirty bit of 
business, sir, if I may say so." 

"Very dirty, Johnson. Because if 
nothing is done to stop them, eventually they'll have our whole world 
to themselves." 

Johnson evidently thought this 
over for a moment. I could hear 
everyone breathing heavily in the 
silence. Then, "What do they want 
with it, sir?" he asked. 

"Lord knows. Jerry never asked 
'em." 

"Ah. It gives one pause, sir." 

"It damned well does. It's given 
us so much pause— the six of us — 
that we've decided to devote our 
lives to fighting the usurpers. That's 
why we're doing this huggermugger 
business, Johnson. We're duplicating Jerry Wolfe's experience, trying 
to get our eyesight warped or marred 
or shifted, or whatever the phrase 
ought to be. as his was. So we can 
see 'em, and combat 'em, and send 
'em home to their silver-lined wastelands." 

"And that's what happened — " 
"To Geoff' Exeter. Yes. We did 



the same thing with him that you 
saw two nights ago with me in the 
chair. Unfortunately — there's a 
feeble word! — we bungled somehow. And Geoff is blind." 

ll^\TO\J get used to it," said Geoff 
* Exeter cheerfully. "It's in a 
good cause. Better cause than we 
fought the Nazis for if Jerry Wolfe 
was right." 

"We're banking that he was. We're 
betting our eyes or our lives, Johnson, that he was right." 

"If you'll forgive me, sir, it seems 
a terribly long chance to take. He 
might have been addled in the head, 
or drunk; or if he was right, you may 
all lose your eyes and never acquire 
his strange vision." 

"We're relying on old Jerry," said 
Alec Talbot. "You see, at least 
three of us were at loose ends, with 
nothing to make of our lives, and 
our hearts full of bitterness and 
frustration. It's given us an aim in 
life. It's given us life itself, by 
heaven ! We drew lots, Geoff and 
Will and I; Geoff got first try, Will 
the second, and I lost. I'm to be 
the third one. Before he was murdered, Jerry told me who was all 
right and who wasn't. He'd seen 
a few chaps he knew — Will and 
Geoff and the doctor here, Marion 
and Colonel Bedford. He bequeathed me their names. I rounded them 
up and beat them wth Jerry's yarn 
until they began to feel a horrid 
truth in it. Then just a few days ago 
I remembered that you'd been our 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



13 



waiter at the Club that night, and 
he'd sat easy and safe in your presence; so we knew you were human 
too." 

"I'm sure I'm very gratified, sir. 
But what can I dp?" 

■'We don't know. We don't know 
what any of us can do. But we 
were only six. Johnson — six against 
half a world. We grasped at you 
like a drowning man at a — " 

"Straw," said Marion. "Really, 
Alec, your similes stun me!" 

" I was going to say 1 bottle of 
whisky'/' growled Alec. 

"Do you get the whole picture 
now. Johnson?" I asked. 

"I think so, sir. Just one 
thing ..." 

"What's that?" 

"Well, sir, what do these aliens 
look like? I mean, if you can see 
them?" 

"Like obscene nightmares." I said. 
"Like demons down under the sea. 
Like anything and everything you 
can conjure up that's evil and strange 
and full of hellishness." 

"Oh. Quite so, sir," said Johnson 
woodenly. 

"Jerry talked of toads, of sharks 
and dragons, weird tree-shapes and 
amoebae, but he made it clear that 
those were only far-fetched similes." 
Alec's voice was low; he was remembering his friend, haggard and 
gray in the face, a ghastly ghost of 
the man he had once been. I broke 
in. 

"Yes, Johnson, they're a fearful 
horde. If Jerry was right, they're 



overrunning us in a manner far 
more subtle and deadly than any 
invader ever did before. Which is 
why we must take these desperate 
measures. Are you with us?" 

"Of course, sir," said the old waiter. 

"Why?" asked the skeptical Doctor Baringer. "Why so quick to 
leap at this fantastic story, Johnson? 
I've got into the affair over my head, 
but I'm still not sure I believe in 
it." 

"Well, sir, you might say I'm in 
just about the same position as Mister Exeter and Mister Talbot and 
Mister Chester. I'm an old soldier, 
much too old to be of any use in 
a regular war any longer; and I still 
fret for the days of bivouac and 
battle. If you'll pardon the liberty, 
sir, I must agree with you that it's 
a rum go, a very rum go. But if 
it's true, then I may be of some 
slight use in the world after all." 

"You were a soldier, Johnson?" 
I asked. 

"Sergeant, Boer War. sir. I fought 
at the siege of Ladysmith and a 
dozen other engagements." 

"I thought the Boer War was a 
million years ago," said Marion 
Black. 

"Very nearly, miss," said Johnson 
with a dry chuckle. 

"Welcome to the ranks. Sergeant 
Johnson," said Alec Talbot. 

I started to say something, but 
suddenly was very weary ; so instead I went to sleep. 



IMAGINATION 



CHAPTER III 

npEN days later they took off the 
*■ bandages. The doctor had 
changed them and examined my 
eyes a number of times, but always 
in what was to me total darkness; 
I believe he used some sort of queer 
light, infra-red or black or whathave-you. I'm not up on these medical and scientific gadgets. 

The last layer of gauze came off. 
Nothing happened. The world to me 
was all a pinkish-red blurring, 

"I can't see," I said. "John! I 
can't see! " 

"Neither can I when my eyes are 
closed," said Marion, with a nervous choked laugh. 

So I opened my eyes. 

I saw a tall straight old man, a 
one-armed chap, a young fellow in 
dark glasses, a rather stuffy-looking 
retired colonel, a middle-aged physician with a worried face, and a girl 
as radiant as a spring morning. 

"Greetings," I said unsteadily. 
"Greetings, little army. Don't look 
so scared." 

Alec Talbot grinned and Marion 
gulped with relief, Colonel Bedford 
clapped me hard on the shoulder, 
muttering something that was probably "Stout fella!" Geoff Exeter 
said, ''You can see, Will? Your 
eyes are all right?" 

"I think so. Yes, there isn't 
anything but a little fuzziness 
around the edges." 

"That may be the result of the 
long spell of darkness." said John 



Baringer, fussing about professionally. 

"Well, let's get out and test the 
old orbs," said I, throwing off the 
covers. John pushed me back into 
the pillow. 

"Not for a day or two. You've 
got to regain your strength. Been 
in bed a long time." 

I raged, but it did no good. It 
was three mornings later when at! 
last I was allowed to leave the old 
castle — it belonged to Geoff Exeter's family, by the way, Geoff's 
father being old Lord Joseph Exeter 
—and go into town, with Colonel 
Bedford at the wheel of my Jaguar. 

We averaged a wild and impetuous thirty-two miles per hour all 
the way there. The Colonel was a 
driver of the old, the very old, 
school, and obviously wished that 
the sleek little sports car were a 
two-wheeled tonga. As for me, I 
fidgeted and mumbled and longed 
to get behind the wheel myself; I 
had once clocked the two-seater at 
a hundred and fourteen m.p.h., and 
when she was forced to creep along 
like this, both she and I were unhappy. However, my job was to 
observe, and so I contained my impatience perforce. 

E circled the village and came 
in from the opposite end. 
No one knew we were staying at 
the long-deserted Exeter Castle, and 
we meant to keep it that way. It 
was a priceless hideaway, an excellent G.H.Q. for our planned insur


W 



BEWARE. THE USURPERS! 



gence. 

The village of Exeter Parva contained some three hundred souls, 
if one included eighteen large placidfaced farm horses and ninety-seven 
dogs more or less. It was market 
day. The countryside had boiled into town for a hectic time. You might 
have scraped more citizens out of the 
pubs of one short London lane, and 
heard more noise in Westminster Abbey; but for Exeter Parva it was a 
gala morning. ' 

We drove down the main street 
— I believe it was the only street, but 
this may be prejudice on my part — 
and stopped to let a couple of deeply 
suspicious cows pass by on either 
side. "Well?" asked the Colonel. 

I had nearly forgotten the purpose 
of the jaunt. I narrowed my eyes 
and stared keenly about me. I saw 
farmers in dull blue and faded gray, 
women in carefully mended finery, 
children in everything from Sunday 
bests to Saturday rags. I saw what 
one might see in any small village 
on market day. I saw no monsters 
whatever. I sighed and gave a weak 
grin. "Just people," I told him. 
"Just Englishmen." 

He attempted to gnaw his short 
m ustache. "Which means either 
that they don't foregather in small 
towns, or that they existed only in 
Captain Wolfe's brain," said he 
meditatively. "Which, mind you, 
young fella, I don't believe for a 
minute. If there was ever a sane 
un, Wolfe was he. Besides, he'd 
served in my old stations in India." 



He pronounced it "Injuh." He edged the Jaguar forward through what 
Exeter Parva doubtless considered 
its heavy traffic. "Or else the experiment didn't work. W 7 hen you 
think about it, that's the logical 
explanation. Whatever happened to 
the Captain's eyes must have been 
almighty complicated. Don't understand a tenth of it myself, these 
dimensions and whatnot, but there 
it is. Frightfully complex changes 
must ha' been wrought." 

T was too dispirited to answer that. 

"Let's have a drink," I said. 
"There's a tavern. At least we can 
have a mug of ale before we go 
back." 

"Right." He parked the Jaguar 
expertly if rather slowly. We went 
into the tavern, which was called 
The Leathern Funnel. 

"Well, gents, what'll it be?" inquired the barmaid affably. ' 

"Two ales, miss, if you please," 
said the Colonel. It was lucky for 
me that he ordered. I could not 
have produced anything but a squeak 
or a howl. The mugs bumped down 
before us and I picked mine up with 
both hands and drank it off like a 
thirst-mad sot after a month of 
bread-and-water. Then I aimed myself carefully at the door and put 
on the greatest piece of acting of 
my career; I walked casually and 
without a single stumble all the 
way to the street. The Colonel 
came after me. 

"What the deuce, Chester! You 



ID 



IMAGINATION 



don't allow a chap much time to 
enjoy his bit of ale," he grumbled. 

I got in at the off side of the 
Jaguar without speaking and put 
my hands on the wheel. "Ready?" 
I managed to ask. 

"Here, I'm to drive." 

"You are like hell. Get in." He 
did. "Hang on. ,! I nudged the old 
girl out of the village and when we 
were hidden by the first hill I trod 
on her pedals with all my weight and 
terror behind my feet. We crashed 
off into a beautiful eighty m.p.h., 
which I held or surpassed all the way 
home. Three or four times he tried 
to bellow something at me. I ignored him. 

When we had flown up the long 
winding drive I put her into the 
stables, part of which we had fitted 
up as a garage. Then I sat there 
in the gloom and shook with what 
felt like fever. 

"Here, what is it, laddie?" he 
barked. "What's wrong?" 

"Describe the barmaid," I said. 

•What?" 

"Describe the barmaid." 

"Fortyish, plain, thickset, red 
hands, red face, couple of warts. 
Pleasant expression. Right?" 

"Not exactly. You left out a few 
things." 

"What on earth?" 

"The green horns, six of 'em, 
growing out of her face in the middle 
where the nose should have been. 
The shifting outlines that looked 
now like a tree stump and now like 
an octopus. The pulsing heart of 



scarlet fire in the belly. The duskypink tentacles that pushed the mugs 
across the bar. The pure hatred that 
throbbed visibly and seemed to feel 
cold when it got near you. The eyes 
like bursting orchids full of slimy 
white worms." 

He put his hand on my arm and 
tightened his grip until his knuckles 
grew pale. "Merciful God!" he said 
quietly. "Merciful God!" 

CHAPTER IV 

VXTE went into the deserted hall 
of Exeter Castle. "Look, 
Colonel," I said, "will you tell them 
about this? They'll be upstairs. 
Tell 'em that it works, that I can 
see as Jerry Wolfe saw, and everything he told Alec was true. I'll be 
all right after a while, but now I 
want to be alone. I don't want to 
be hedged in by close walls, or have 
to talk. I'll just roam around down.! 
here for a bit. You tell 'em it's] 
okay, that I'll speak to them later." 

"Absolutely." The Colonel was 
the best stuff there is. "Come up 
when you feel like it, son." He 
was gone. 

I strolled over to one of the great 
mullioned windows and touched its 
dusty glass lightly. That glass was 
older, probably, than all our little 
band put together. I thought: when 
it was placed here, were the usurping devils abroad in England? How 
long have they been filtering through 
into our world — a hundred years, a 
thousand? If you start wj^h one. 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



i7 



and he lets in others, then figuring 
by the birth rate and the multiplying 
branches of his horrid clan, how 
long would it take to let in a million 
of them? How many figures of our 
glorious history were just that — 
figures, puppets, marionettes pulled 
by fourth-dimensional strings, fleshand-bone shadows fronting for demons . . . 

We are no other than a moving 
row of magic shadow-shapes that 
come and go . . . 

Jerry had asserted that when the 
human body died, the alien was relegated to his own world again. Then 
it had to come back, I presumed, 
via another birth. It must be centuries, then, at the very least a 
couple of centuries, since the first 
one came through. It takes time to 
corrupt the blood of six-thirteenths 
of all England. 

But was it six -thirteenths? Jerry 
had taken his census in Charing 
Cross Station. At Exeter Parva I 
had seen exactly one usurper. Were 
they then centered in London? Were 
there perhaps no more than fifteen 
or twenty thousand of them altogether? That brought down the 
odds! 

T laughed loudly, and the age-old 
* echoes waked in the oak rafters 
and laughed after me. Oh, the 
odds were in my favor, all right. 

Opposing me, say (conservatively) 
twenty thousand foemen: great livid 
beasts like nothing a sane mind 
could conceive, that had a system of 



communication outside my dimension which could gather a score or a 
thousand of them to down me if I 
showed fight. 

On my side, a regular Colonel 
Blimp of a retired officer, a Boer 
War veteran, a skeptical middle-aged 
physician, a blind man, another chap 
with no left arm, and a girl. 

And I: Will Chester, thirty-three 
years old, five feet ten, moderately 
strong, normally intelligent; having 
all my teeth save two, a thick crop 
of black hair, brown eyes, a complexion more ruddy than otherwise, 
and a face that, if it would not halt 
a charging bull in his tracks, still 
would not win a beauty competition 
either . . . Seven years of Army behind me, an income of eight hundred 
pounds a year from a legacy, and 
nothing much in view as a future, 
until this morning — when I had 
suddenly been elected the savior of 
mankind. 

I walked across to the tremendous 
blackened fireplace, empty now of 
everything but a lonely-looking single bronze firedog. Above the keystone of the arch were the arms 
and motto of the Exeters, done in 
ancient stonework. I could not read 
the motto, having forgotten what 
Latin I once knew. The arms were 
a jumble of crossed lances, fleursde-lis, and hounds couchant. I wished I had a hound to fondle and pat, 
to be a companion in these moments 
when I felt I could not bear a human 
being near me. 



1 8 



IMAGINATION 



T?OR half an hour or so I stood 
A there gazing blindly into the 
depths of the hearth and pitying 
myself shamelessly. Then a touch on 
my arm made me leap like a deer. 
It was Marion ; Marion, carrying 
with her her own special radiance 
even in the shadowed hall. 

"What cheer, old . stager?" she 
said. 

"Not much cheer, lady." 

"Obviously. What is it, got the 
wind up? Scared sky-blue-pink?" 

"Yes. I've just realized that this 
whole affair is fact, is true; that it's 
not a crazy adventure in fancy, but 
a dreadfully real matter of saving 
the sane world from destruction — 
and I'm scared!" 

"We all are." She said it quietly, 
and with her simple words I knew 
for the first time that I was not 
alone in my terror of the unknown. 
We were all afraid. I put my arm 
around her shoulders. Her long light 
hair tingled on the back of my hand. 
T loved her very much, and so I 
tormented myself. 

"I've been thinking of Jerry Wolfe, 
and of how alone he must have felt. 
He didn't have six pals behind him 
when the first alien fouled his view." 

"Poor old Jerry," she said. 

"You were engaged to him, weren't you?" 

"Yes. back in prehistoric times, before Jennifer Tregennis caught him. 
Jennifer was one of them, you 
know." 

"Yes, I know. D'you still love 
Jerry?" 



"How do you mean? Of course 
I do." 

I didn't say anything. She went 
on after a moment. "But I'm not 
in love with him, if that's what 
you're driving at. Good heavens, 
Will, do you see me as a moony 
widow-in-name-only? I've got more 
sense than that." 

My heart lifted. I patted her on 
the back. "Come along young Marion. Let's go plan strategy with 
the troops." 

We went up the stairs to our sitting room, and 1 stood before the! 
six of them and took the reins into 
my hands. 1 had a job to do. 

CHAPTER V 

£ C T T comes to this, then," said 
A Alec. "You mean to go and 
mingle with the enemy, and try to 
discover weak spots in 'em, eh?" 

"I don't see any other way to begin. We've been scratching for a 
plan ever since we first heard of the 
usurpers; and nobody's come up with 
one. for the good reason that we 
have nothing to go on. Oh, granted 
we know we can kill their worldly 
bodies and send them home. But 
I hardly think we're going to do 
nothing but roam the countryside 
killing off puppets for the next thirty 
years." 

"Remember what Jerry told me — • 
that once one of them was sent back 
to his own dimension, he could evidently still communicate with those 
who were left here? That the aliens 



BEWARE. THE USURPERS! 



J9 



who're attached to human bodies 
exist in both dimensions equally?" 

"Yes, Alec, I was thinking of that 
a few minutes ago. It means that 
under no circumstances can I let 
any one of them discover I can see 
them; for even if I killed him here, 
he could go around his silver-lined 
dimension telling all his pals about 
me. It means working in the dark, 
from behind, anonymously. It means 
I've got to be circumspect as Satan. 
We all have to be circumspect." 

"Beg pardon, sir," put in Johnson, 
"but when do the rest of us have a 
try at warping our eyeballs?" 

"You don't, Sergeant," I said flatly. 

"What d'you mean, we don't?" 
cried Alec. "Of course we do." 

"No, son, not for a while, anyhow. It's a hundred to one. or a 
million, more likely, to one. that we 
couldn't duplicate the exact injuries 
again. We can't blind anyone else 
now. One of us seeing them mav be 
enough — or if he isn't, then half a 
dozen might not be any better." 

"I think Will's right," said Marion 
suddenly. She lit a cigarette while 
we waited. "I think we mustn't press 
our luck too far. At least we should 
wait until we have a plan. I think 
— I really think one will be enough." 

"Why?" 

"Those million to one odds. Why 
did the experiment succeed the second time? I think God's with us. 
I think God's on our side, and means 
us to win." 

We were all very quiet for a while. 



T went over to a wall mirror and 
* examined my face. I took out 
my little tin of pancake makeup, 
Marion's clever idea, and spread 
some thinly on the scars of the blast : 
the little pink almost-healed scars 
that ran across the bridge of my nose 
and scattered out fan wise toward my 
ears. We were dealing with cleverness beyond thought, and every tiny 
giveaway must be taken care of. 

"Jerry Wolfe died," I said, still 
peering in the mirror, "because he 
was taken unawares, because he hadn't prepared himself to stay incognito 
among them. I have. I've had my 
first sight of them, and been terribly shocked, yes; but now I think 
I'll be all right. I'm ready to go." 

"Up to London?" 

"Yes." 

"We'll all go." 

"In a bunch? I don't think." 

"No, in pairs and trios. But 
there's no sense in any of us frettin' here without news from you." 
The Colonel was firm. "The motors 
are below. Ready, you chaps?" 

"Packed and primed." said Geoff. 

"Let's be off." 

And almost before I knew it we 
were in the old stables, putting our 
gear in the back of Alec's great red 
Rolls. 

"Who'll ride with me?" I asked. 

"Not I," barked the Colonel 
promptly. "I've had some of your 
idea of driving." 

"I'll go with you. Will." said 
Geoff Exeter. "Just put my fist on 
the car, will you?" I did so, and he 



2C 



IMAGINATION 



climbed in. "I like speed," he said. 

I had been hoping for Marion's 
company, but Geoff — well, he rated 
a front-row stall in the game. He'd 
lost his eyes for us. I said, "Geoff 
will stick with me for the first days. 
The rest of you put up at the Albany, where Colonel Bedford has a 
suite, and at that inn in Baker 
Street, The Gray Gander. Geoff and 
I will be at the Gloucester Club." 

"I shall be there too, sir," said 
Johnson. "I've been on l sick leave' 
quite long enough." 

"Roger. Geoff, the Sergeant and 
I at the Gloucester. The Colonel 
and John at the Albany. Marion 
and Alec at The Gray Gander. Don't 
get in touch with me, unless you give 
birth to some really ripping idea. 
I'll find you when there's news." 

I touched Marion's hand in farewell, and slid into the Jaguar. We 
backed out and shot away into the 
blue. 

CHAPTER VI 

"IT/'E stood at the bar of a dmgf 
* * little pub on the outskirts of 
the dingy little district of Seven 
Dials. Geoff, who was learning to 
orient himself by sounds, heard the 
clunk of his mug on the bar, and 
unerringly put his fingers around it. 
"Pretty good, eh?" he asked me, sipping the half-and-half. 

"You'll be a wizard at it in a few 
months." 

"I meant the ruddy ale, idiot. 
I'm not bragging about my accom


plishments yet. Seen any of our 
chums lately?" he asked. 

"Oh, dozens. Run into 'em everywhere." It was a kind of simple code; 
I was telling him that the pub was 
full of the aliens. 

"Fine. Any of 'em give you any 
news? Anything startling been happening?" 

"Not much. Same old stuff." 

Same old stuff? 

Same old fiends from Abaddon! 
Same old hosts of Hell! Same old 
ogres and ghouls, harpies and bugaboos, hobgoblins and hellhags! 

The barman, when I squinted, was 
a big jovial red-nosed Cockney. The 
barman, when I opened my eyes normally, was a writhing monster, a 
shapeless blob of intangible protoplasm in whose depths moved turgid 
lights of orange and mauve; from 
whose devilish form the waves of 
malevolence came and went like the 
roiled swell made by the sluggish 
moving of some hideous primeval 
entity beneath the surface of a grisly tarn . . . 

I grinned at htm. "Cool weather 
for June, mate," said I affably. 

"Ar, yus," he agreed. 

I was pleased with myself. Like 
a spy plunked down in a strange 
land, I had been feeling my way to 
confidence these last days, growing 
used to the shapes about me, learning to show an expression of bland 
normality when confronted with unnameable horrors. I believed I was 
perfectly ready now to begin our 
war. 



BEWARE, TH 

The only trouble was that I hadn't the faintest idea of how to begin 
it! 

ONE could move among these 
usurpers for a lifetime, I 
thought, and learn nothing about 
them except that they were more 
hideous than leprous two-headed baboons, more incomprehensible than 
might be the dwellers of Mars. I 
watched them talking among themselves where they sat at the little 
oak tables. While their earthly 
husks chatted of prosaic things, the 
forms around the husks spoke — 
inaudibly to me — - with twisting tentacles, gesturing pseudopods, flowers 
of rotten-looking "flesh" that grew 
upon their bodies and swelled and 
burst and subsided to nothingness 
again. I knew they were speaking 
of terrible things . . . 

"Let's go," I said to Geoff. "Time 
we were thinking of bed." 
"Righto." 

I gave the barman good-night in 
a pleasant voice, and we emerged 
from that ninth circle of Hell into 
the cool and lovely air. Seven Dials 
lay about us, all a-murmur with 
the homely human sounds of earth's 
evening. I could not stand it. 

"Geoff," I whispered. "I'm going 
to start the ball rollin'. I'm going 
to find out something." 

"How, old son?" 

"I'm going to do a murder." 

"Think it's wise?" he asked. 

"I want to ascertain something. 
Just come along a bit." 



USURPERS! 21 

We went up a dingy street and 
turned down a lane or two, until at 
last we were alone on a length of 
grubby pavement, shadowed by the 
rickety houses on either side. "Stand 
here," I said to Geoff Exeter. "It's 
black in this corner and you won't 
be noticed. Ell come for you in 
half a tick." 

He saluted carelessly. What nerve 
he had! To stand alone, blind and 
helpless, ignorant of what I meant 
to do — I think Geoff was the 
bravest of all our little band. 

T slunk up the street to a place 
some forty yards off, and hid 
myself in a time-battered doorway. 
The street lay empty and deserted 
in the early moonlight. I drew the 
great keen knife that lived on the 
side of my belt these days, and I 
waited. 

A man came down the road, staggering drunkenly. He was a man. 
I let him pass. 

Another came toward me. I heard 
his footsteps in the dark, echoing 
valley of brick, and shortly thereafter saw him pass beneath a fading 
street lamp. / 

Do vou remember the passage in 
Doyle's Lost World, where the hero 
is pursued along a jungle trail by a 
prehistoric carnivore? 

"This beast had a broad, squat, 
toad-like face . . . the moonlight 
shone upon his huge projecting eyes, 
the row of enormous teeth in his 
open mouth, and the gleaming fringe 
of claws upon his short, powerful 



21 



IMAGINATION 



forearms. With a scream of terror 
I turned and rushed wildly down 
the path." 

Well, I did not turn and rush 
wildly down the street, but if I had 
not been hardened by much contact 
with the aliens, I think I must have 
done so. This was the worst I had 
seen: toad-like, yes, but squat and 
loathsome as no toad ever hoped 
to be; and indeed some of the projections of its form did look like 
claws and fangs. Yet no prehistoric 
reptile could ever have exuded the 
repulsive effluvium of evil which 
radiated from this hideous usurper. 

As it passed me I felt my stomach 
draw in as if from a sharp blow, and 
it is a wonder to me to this day that 
I did not scream or become violently 
ill. The gods were with me, however, and I kept strict silence. 

XTTHEN it had gone on a dozen 
paces, I slipped out and followed it noiselessly. Moving as I 
had moved on many a commando 
raid in the old days, I eased up behind it. It did not turn — neither 
of its bodies turned. Narrowing my 
eyes, I lifted the great knife and 
struck, with all the hatred in my 
soul concentrated in the blow. The 
blade sank into the pseudo-human 
neck, severing the spinal cord instantly, and before my horrified eyes 
the great toad-creature swelled, 
turned vivid crimson, and went out 
like the flame of a trodden candle. 
It had left our dimension in the 



very instant that its human husk 
had died. 

Sheathing the knife under my coat, 
I flew down to where Geoff stood 
patiently waiting. I took his arm. 

"Come on, boy, let's make tracks." 

"Home?" 

"No, to another pub." We hurried 
down an alley, turned up a street and 
down another, until I had put a 
maze of lanes behind us. Then we 
slowed abruptly and ambled into a 
smoky little room full of liquor 
fumes. 

"Two beers, old toff," I said to 
the fright behind the bar. 

We guzzled them slowly, while I 
watched the aliens around the tables 
and at the bar. Shortly there was a 
flurry of excitement among them, 
the tentacles writhing quickly and 
the ghastly brutes enlarging and 
deflating as though pumped 'by a 
bellows. All the time the human 
portions drank and chatted and played darts. But the usurpers were 
excited over something. Shortly half 
a dozen of them moved toward the 
door, the people in no evident hurry, but their marionette-masters 
wriggling like mad, as though eaten 
with impatience. 

I knew they were going to discuss 
something important. I had what 
I had come for. 

"Bedtime," I said to Geoff Exeter. 
We went out of the pub and caught 
a tram for the vicinity of the Gloucester Club. 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



23 



CHAPTER VII 

SAFE in our rooms, with Johnson 
sitting, very unlike a waiter, 
behind a bottle of brandy and a tray 
of sandwiches, and Geoff lying on 
the Chesterfield smoking a pipe he 
could not taste, I told them what I 
had done. 

"It's taught me a couple of things I 
didn't know, and affirmed some others I wasn't sure of. First, I'm certain the faculties of these brutes are 
the same in this dimension as their 
human parts'. That toad didn't 
hear me coming, I know. He didn't 
have time to turn and get a look at 
me before he went pop and left us. 
He was bound to the body till I released him, I think, and if he'd left 
it he couldn't have got back into it, 
or rather around it. His ears weren't 
keener than a man's, or he'd have 
turned to see me when I crept up 
behind him. 

"But their communication system 
is terrific. That's where they have 
it all over us. When he was shut 
out of our world, the toad must have 
gone around their region telling his 
pals about it; and before long the 
ones who were in that pub heard of 
it, too. Xow they weren't told by 
a newcomer, for I watched the door; 
so they were told on their side of 
the veil, by an alien who wasn't occupying a human frame. Got it thus 
far?" 

"I admit to a little uncertainty 
here and there, sir." 

"Well, put it like this. There's 



a long tall screen set up across a 
stage. -On one side of the screen 
— -our side — are a lot of human beings. This side is our world as we 
know it. On the other side, the fourth 
dimension or whatever it may be, are 
a lot of these horrid-lookin' beasts 
of usurpers. 

"Xow here and there in the screen 
are holes, and through them some of 
the aliens are holding fake human 
beings, just as in our well-worn simile of the puppet show. I can see 
those who are leaning through the 
holes, but you can't. 

"When they're leaning through, 
they haven't any powers except those 
of normal people. They can't hear 
any better than a man. They can't 
walk through bricks or see through 
stones. They can't look behind them 
without turning the human puppet 
around. I've been watching them 
and I feel pretty certain of that. In 
some curious way they're limited by 
their puppets' limitations here. That 
makes it easier to assassinate 'em, 
by the way — I just have to make 
sure that the human form doesn't 
get a chance to turn its head and 
spot me before it dies." 

T drank a little brandy and went 
on intently. "The only way they 
really have me beat six ways from 
the jack is in their system of tidings, 
of spreading 'em, I mean. That's a 
marvel. For as soon as I shoot or 
stab or throttle a puppet, the beast 
that's been twiddlin' his strings 
leaves him and goes along behind 



IMAGINATION 



24 

that hypothetical screen between the 
worlds, telling all his playmates 
about it; and if he's had a chance 
to see me, and can describe me, 
then about a thousand of the others 
will be watching through their holes 
in the screen for a blighter of my 
specifications, and my name is Lord 
Jonathan Mud." 

"I see," nodded Johnson. 

"So my problem is to remain utterly anonymous. And I needn't tell 
you that if I try to embark on a 
career of murder-by-night, I won't 
last very long." 

"No, you won't." Geoff was grave. 
"What else is there to do, though?" 

"I don't know. And I think I 
could watch them for a lifetime and 
not learn another thing about 'em. 
I'm a tremendously handicapped spy 
because I can't disguise myself as 
one of them, and I can't understand 
what they say to each other. It's 
like a man going into a colony of 
bears and trying to pass himself off 
as a bear, except that I can't even 
begin to look like a usurper, while 
1 could put on a grizzly skin." 

"What are we to do, sir?" asked 
Johnson. His pale face was deadly 
serious. "We must do something, 
sir — but only you can decide what 
it's to be." 

Two weeks before, I might have 
groaned aloud at such a responsibility. Now I took it in stride. Anyone who had been observing the 
demons of Hell at their work for 
fourteen days and nights had either 
to take things as they came along 



or to go stark staring loony. 

"I'll tell you what we'll do first. 
I'll take Geoff over to the Albany. 
Then I'll strike out alone for a bit. 
Maybe for a week, maybe a month. 
Travel light, fast, and inquisitive. 
Give myself a chance to cook up 
plots. And if nothing's come of it 
by then, why, I suppose we'll just 
have to set up an assassination bureau and hope I live a hundred 
years ..." 

CHAPTER VIII 




ND so for a time I dwelt alone 
• among the beast-folk. 



Packing a few shirts and such in 
a Gladstone bag, I left London in 
the black Jaguar, ostensibly on a 
casual motoring jaunt. I headed up 
through the East Anglian Heights, 
stopping the first night in the lovelytown of Bury St. Edmunds. Strolling through the streets next morning, I was astonished and heartened 
beyond measure to find not a single 
usurper abroad. I went into a pub — ■ 
I had begun, to^think that the aliens 
were concentrated in pubs, so many 
horrendous bartenders had I seen — • 
and bought a pint from a perfectlv 
normal girl. Lingering about the 
town, I passed the time of day with 
gardeners and workmen and loafers, 
and was tempted to throw up the 
game and stay here in this oasis of 
normality forever; but after lunch 
forced myself to get into the Jaguar 
and roar off into the Lincoln Heights, 
where I spent a jolly evening in Old 



BEWARE, THE L'Sl'RPERS! 



25 



Bolingbroke talking politics with a 
spidery yellow creature who amused 
himself by flicking my face now and 
again with his hairy-looking, tenuous, 
unfelt members. When at last I 
went to bed I felt that I had served 
my apprenticeship and was a fullfledged spy who could thenceforth 
bear anything the enemy could show 
or do . . . 

I worked westward and put up for 
a week at Manchester, in which great 
inland port I found an awful concentration of them. I left the twoseater at a garage and walked the 
streets from dawn till midnight, observing, thinking furiously, trying 
to construct impossible plans of attack. 

The third night, making sure that 
my knife was safely sheathed under 
my coat, I went into the slums to do 
murder. 

Deliberately I chose my victim: a 
strapping brute of a navvy whose 
mortal form was surrounded by a 
cloudy gray beast of indescribable 
grossness. I shadowed him from 
tavern to tavern, finally catching 
him alone in a narrow gut of an alley where the light fell dismally on 
scummed pools of stagnant water 
and heaps of filth. I crept up behind him and circling his neck with 
my left arm I held him motionless 
for dragging seconds, my knee in 
the small of his back. He struggled 
madly, but could not turn his head; 
and although the gray fiend puffed 
up and hurled out its streamers of 
ugly mist-like stuff. 1 knew it was 



helpless to see me without twisting 
the human neck around. That was 
what I had wanted to know for certain, what I had staked the continuance of my crusade on. I tipped up 
the navvy's chin and sliced across 
his throat with the clean steel. He 
died, gurgling, and the monster 
dwindled away into gray ribbons and 
vanished. 

XTOW I felt I had verified my 
*~ ~ earlier theory of the limitation 
of their senses on this plane. Not 
only did the outsider have to rely 
for hearing on the ears of his manikin, for tactile sensations on the 
nerves of the were-human, for 
strength on its muscles and (for all 
I knew) for taste and scent on the 
poor dumb thing's tongue and nose 
— -but most important of all, I believed that the beast must see into 
this world through the puppet's eyes, 
and through them alone! The recent gray devil had been able to 
twist and turn itself to some degree 
independently of its fleshly body; 
what I took to be its eyes, a cluster 
of violet-tinted globules high in its 
upper torso, had flashed all round as 
it moved, even seeming to flit over 
me once or twice; yet it obviously 
could not detect me with them, or 
surely it would have concentrated 
their baleful focus on my face. 

Xo. I was certain that I could 
only be seen by the eyes in the 
heads of the puppets. I may as 
well say now that I never had cause 
to change this conception of mine. 



2 6 



IMAGINATION 



and still strongly believe it to be 
true. 

This may be as good a place as 
any to make it plain that my descriptions of the beast-folk are of 
necessity limited and analogical; _but 
that the beings themselves had no 
analogy in anything existing on this 
prosaic three-dimensional globe. This 
is true in part because of their utterly undefinable proportions and lineations, which had to be seen to be 
fathomed, and in part because the 
creatures did, after ail, exist in at 
least one more dimension than our 
acknowledged three, so that, despite 
my own mutant vision, I saw them 
in a state of flux, continuously moving, warping, and seeming to bend at 
impossible angles and to flow off 
just beyond the range of my sight 
into a sphere which was to me forever invisible. 

It must be understood, too, that 
when I identify portions of them 
as beaks, mouths, orifices, eyes on 
stalks, and other natural parts of 
animal life, I am only grasping at 
the nearest comparison. For all I 
know, their senses may reside in 
quite different organs than eyes, 
mouths, noses and so on. For all I 
know, indeed, they may have no actual five senses in our meaning of 
the term. They seemed to communicate, it's true, by a kind of writhing 
and wriggling motion, which may 
have been accompanied by sounds 
which I could not hear; but this 
may have been akin to a nervous reaction, while their actual talk might 



well have been telepathic. 

TOURING the next two nights I 
gave rein to my intense abhorrence of these invaders from another 
world, and stalked through the city 
slaying indiscriminately in a passion 
of hatred. This makes me sound as 
bloodthirsty as a weasel. Well, I 
was. A tiny human David opposing 
a hideous throng of Goliaths, I gave 
no quarter even as they had given 
none to my friend Jerry Wolfe. 

Of course the police, the newspapers, the citizens of Manchester were 
shaken by the wave of inexplicable 
violence. Headlines shrieked that a 
new Ripper was abroad. And at 
that I began to wonder: what if an 
accident had -happened to somebody's eyes back in the 1880s, and 
he, seeing the aliens all about him, 
had begun on a wild career of assassination like my own? What if 
he had prowled the slums as I was 
doing, killing and mutilating in a 
frenzy of detestation? Was that 
the true explanation of the neveridentified Jack The Ripper? Was 
he, perhaps, a much-maligned champion of mankind? It was at least 
a fascinating possibility! 

For those few score of hours I 
felt no remorse, no distaste for my 
butcher's job, no sorrow except a 
fleeting one for the human relatives 
and friends of these poor brainless 
husks I was destroying. And their 
grief, I was persuaded, was as nothing in the balance against the good I 
was actually doing them by ridding 



BEWARE. THE USURPERS! 



27 



our plane of the invading beast-folk. 

Then reaction set in, and I lay in 
my hotel room and shook as though 
I had blackwater. 

I couldn't keep this up, week after 
week, month after month, for 
years — even if I were not discovered, either by our police or by them, 
I knew I could not go on. Give me 
what resounding titles you wish: 
savior of mankind, champion of humanity, valiant worker for the survival of the race — I was still only 
a kind of butcher. I knew I was 
glutted with killing. The papers 
put my total score at nineteen corpses. They were husks, puppets, yes; 
but even though what I killed had 
no life save that imparted by the 
guiding usurper, it still had the 
flesh and the blood of my own 
breed. When the alien was dispatched to his own place, what remained 
had the look and feel and smell of 
someone who might have been my 
brother. I had once quite callously 
shot a number of tigers in India; but 
when a tiger dies, he does not turn 
into the slashed corpse of a man. 
He remains a tiger. If only the 
usurpers had continued in their own 
true shapes after the slayings. I 
think I might have gone on killing 
them forever. 

So again I moved harmlessly 
among my foemen. and watched 
them colloque together in their silent, 
loathsome fashion, and did nothing. 

And a great melancholy took me; 
and I felt as helpless as a child 



surrounded by the dismal wraiths 
of all ghost-haunted England, as 
hopeless as a man alone in a jungle 
full of teeming ghouls. 

I would have given a year of my 
life for one hour with Marion Black, 
but I would not write or telephone 
her to come to me. I didn't want 
them to be able to connect me with 
any of my band, in case they ever 
discovered my identity. 

Then, on the last night I spent 
in Manchester, I got a little drunk 
(out of frustration and despondency, 
and my inarticulate, stupidly silent 
love for Marion) and I decided to 
put just one more of the enemy out 
of the fight, before I went on my 
way. 

CHAPTER IX 

TT was a mean street, one of the 
meanest in the whole city. The 
moon was vivid, and straight overhead, so that my shadow lay in a 
black little pool around my feet. I 
sought a dark doorway and waited, 
knife in hand, my brain full of 
liquor and loathing. 

A man, and a man, and then a 
beast . . . 

I slid along in his tracks, glancing 
quickly behind me to make sure 
we were unobserved, and swiftly performed the now-familiar operation of 
driving the impalpable demon back 
to its own dimension by hacking the 
throat of the man-shape. Standing 
above the dead thing, I knew for a 
second or two the feeling that must 



28 



IMAGINATION 



have held Jack The Ripper as he 
stood over his victims: I wanted to 
stab and slash and mutilate, I wanted to let out some of the terrible 
hatred that boiled in my heart. 

Civilization won, however, and I 
sheathed the knife after wiping it 
clean on the man's leather jacket. 

At that moment one of them came 
round the corner and stood staring 
at me, not twenty feet off! 

It was a gorgon of a brute, with 
several repulsive "heads" ori lean 
stalks of necks ; the biggest one 
looked rather like a hippopotamus 
whose mother had been frightened by 
a Ubangi, and I was so used to the 
weird beings by now that, had I 
seen this one on a daylit street, I 
think I would have chuckled. In 
that deserted lane, though, with the 
shell of its brother's puppet at my 
feet, I didn't chuckle. I turned and 
ran like hell. 

A whistle split the air; I turned 
my head as I pelted away, and 
squinted my eyes. By all the gods! 
The hippo gorgon was a bobbiel A 
ruddy P.C.! 

The ga rage where my Jaguar 
champed at her inactive gears was 
only a couple of blocks from the lane. 
I made for it. taking an extra turning or two in order to lose my pursuer. Coming to the big double 
doors, I slowed to a business-like 
stride, went in and demanded my 
car with a brisk tone, and bestowed 
a couple of notes on- the attendant 
who brought her to me. 

"Be coming back again?" he ask


ed me cheerily. 

"Oh, very likely," I lied, and because he was a blessedly human little 
man, I tipped him an extra pound, 
which made him goggle and stutter 
as he thanked me. 

T shot the black car out into the 
street, turned left and lost myself 
in the maze of Manchester. The 
distant whistling of the searchers 
died out behind me. 

Now, I thought, I was in the 
bloody soup. My description would 
be circulated in the other world , 
first of all. Well, I look like the 
common man, and that wouldn't 
help them much. Second, however, 
they'd be sure to discover that a 
fellow came into a garage in the 
vicinity and took his two-seater at 
the very time the bobbies were 
hunting the Manchester Slasher (as 
the papers called me) thereabouts. 
That's elementary police work. So 
up to there all I really had to fret 
over was the ordinary human bloodhound business. 

I'd given the garage a false name, 
naturally, when I took the old girl 
in to leave her. A purely automatic 
precaution. Lucky I have a turn 
for the criminal life, said I to myself smugly. Nothing to identify 
her with me. Will Chester of London. 

Then there was my gear in the 
hotel. 

Whoa! I slapped the wheel with 
one palm. I'd given the hotel the 
same fake name — Robert Hood — 
but in my Gladstone were half a 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



29 



dozen items with my own label on 
them. I'd intended a quick baggageless dash out of the city, before they 
traced me to the garage and sent 
out a call for a black Jaguar; but 
to leave without that damning luggage would be to present my true 
identity to the police in a matter of 
a few days, or even less. I headed 
for the hotel. Minutes counted, but 
so did that accursed Gladstone bag. 

Then I bethought myself of the 
garage again. Of course they knew 
where I had been staying! That 
meant that within two minutes of 
the police — they — arriving at 
Che garage and discovering that I had 
come in and hared out. the hotel 
would be receiving a call about me. 

I groaned aloud. The Jaguar, 
sensitive to my thought waves or 
perhaps to the unconscious pressure 
of my foot, pounced forward at a 
law - s h a 1 1 e r i n g speed. Minutes 
counted? Seconds! 

The hotel was no fly-by-night, 
tuppenny-ha 'penny wee place, for 
T had seen no reason on earth why 
1 should not be comfortable while on 
my crusade; I put the Jaguar alongside the curb within a dozen paces 
of the entrance, walked nonchalantly in and demanded my key. The 
desk clerk was listening to the telephone. "One moment." he said, and 
then to me, holding his hand over 
the mouthpiece, "I think this is for 
you, sir." 

\TY mind speeded up and raced 
like a mad thing. No one 



would be calling me, so it must be 
about me; therefore the police had 
already found the garage; and the 
clerk must only have heard them 
say my name (my false name) within the instant. I imagined that 
they had said, ''Have you a Mister 
Robert Hood staying there ? " or 
something of the sort. Now I had 
two choices: I could bolt at once, 
leave my luggage to be inspected . 
and subsequently have my face plastered on every newspaper in England 
as the Manchester Slasher ; or I 
could brazen it out. Instinctively I 
chose the right course, the only 
course. I bluffed to the top of my 
bent. 

"Give me my key first," I said. 
He did so. "Now just tell 'em 
I'm not in. and hang up. It's a 
bloke I don't care to talk to." 

"Ah," said he. smirking, "I see." 
To the instrument he murmured. 
"I'm sorry. Mister Hood is out at 
present," and — my eternal gratitude to that sleek-haired, smug-faced 
desk clerk! — rang off without asking if there was any message. He 
had given me a good half minute 
of free time. I went to the lift and 
said, "Four please." If it had not 
been there I should have had to 
take the steps. Surely my luck was 
running that night! 

I judged that, just about the time 
I struck the fourth floor, that phone 
at the desk would be sounding impatiently again. I opened my door, 
bolted it behind me, and began to 
throw things into my Gladstone. 



IMAGINATION 



My phone started to ring. 

I emptied the drawers of the highboy, the devilish jangle in my ears; 
leaped into the bathroom and brushed my shaving kit and toilet articles 
into a little leather bag I used for 
them. I would be certain I was 
leaving nothing behind on which 
there might be a monogram, an engraved name . . . 

Fingerprints! Great merciful God! 

I was packed. Everything I had 
brought with me was in the Gladstone. 

The phone stopped ringing. 

They would be on their way. A 
hotel detective or a couple of policemen, called in after that urgent message from the garage. Perhaps the 
usurpers - — 

T whipped out my handkerchief, 
wrapped it round my right hand, 
and started in to dust that room 
as no chambermaid had ever dusted 
it in all its memory. Each piece of 
wood which I might have touched 
in the past week received a quick 
vigorous swipe. Each glass and porcelain surface in the bathroom. 
Everything. The door knob. The 
glasses. Is that all? The window, 
which I'd raised a few times. Is 
that all? It that all? 

I believed it was. I snatched up 
the Gladstone and with the cloth 
still around my hand I opened the 
door and slipped into the corridor. 

Close the door, son. That'll halt 
them for a precious two seconds. 

Down the corridor, around the 



first turn . . . 

Safe, for the moment, safe! 

And now what? Here was a 
flight of stairs. And in the distance 
I heard a lift door open. 

Down the stairs I rushed, and was 
on the third floor. 

Running for another flight, a different one, with a vague thought of 
confusing my trail, I stumbled and 
almost fell. Recovering. I fled down 
these, on down, down, down. 

I was on the ground floor at last. 
The men's bar lay before me. The! 
lobby was far away in the front of : 
the building. 

I straightened my tie, tried to appear like an eccentric who always 
carried a large brown bag with him, 
and paced into the bar. 

As I put my hand — still swathed 
in the linen — to the outer door, 
the barman cried out, "'Ere, sir!" 1 
but I was gone. They would think 
I was an absconding guest. They 
would pursue me. But I shouldn't 
run, didn't dare run, along this 
street where humans and aliens 
strolled singly and in couples. I 
walked as fast as I thought I could: 
without attracting attention. The hue 
and cry arose behind me. I came 
to the corner, rounded it without . 
halting, and saw my dear old Jaguar 
twenty yards off. 

I ran then, for there was no help, 
indeed there was deadly peril, in; 
walking any longer. I went with 
great bounds, brushing aside people 
and them indiscriminately. Hurling: 
the bag onto the seat, I hurdled it 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



3i 



with a last burst of energy, crashed 
in behind the wheel, and in a flash 
inv motor and I had leaped forward 
and were on our merry way. 

We had gone a dozen blocks before 
T took my right hand off the wheel 
and unwrapped the handkerchief 
from it, stowing it away in the side 
pocket that also contained my hotel 
key. Mentally I checked over every 
clue to my true identity; so far as 
f could think, I had wiped them all 
out. Now all that remained was to 
get out of Manchester safely. 

^HOOSING the darkest streets 
^ almost without volition, I had 
put a couple of miles between me 
and that by-now -surely-tumultuous 
deathtrap of a hostelry. I thought 
of road blocks. One is always reading in American mystery stories of 
road blocks set up to catch thieves 
and murderers, but I had no notion 
;is to whether they were used in 
England. Relying on the thought 
that at any rate I had never heard 
of one here, I tore for the outskirts 
of the city. 

They would be on my trail. I 
kept seeing mental pictures of the 
alien beasts, sniffing me out like so 
many obscene bloodhounds. My 
hands grew slippery on the wheel 
with the sweat of fear. Then I put 
my panic behind me: they, after all 
would be working in the usual human 
channels, for surely they had at 
worst no more than a hazy suspicion 
that I could see them. True, I had 
relegated quite a few of them. But 



it must seem more likely to them 
that I was a maniac with luck on 
his side, rather than a seer. I doubted strongly that they would make 
such a concentrated effort at finding 
me as they had done last year with 
poor Jerry Wolfe. So I had only the 
laws and power of Old England to 
worry about. 

Going over the past hour again 
and again, while driving, now at 
breakneck speed through deserted 
streets and now at a snail's pace in 
traffic, I decided that once I had 
left the city I had a very good chance 
of escaping entirely. Therefore I 
set myself to leave it as soon as possible. Beneath me the Jaguar purred 
contentedly as my foot caressed her 
accelerator. 

And so the notorious Manchester 
Slasher went into the fastnesses of 
the Peak District, and laid his course 
south for Birmingham. 

CHAPTER X 

T did not take the Jaguar into Bir*■ mingham proper; I put her into a 
half-smashed, bombed-out old building I found quite by chance some 
few miles out of the city, and prayed 
that she would wait there for me 
till my business was done. It was 
then about four-thirty in the morning. 

At a little tea-and-biscuit place in 
the suburbs I had a hearty breakfast, and read in an early edition 
the terrifying tale of the Manchester 
Horrors. It seemed that the in


.52 



IMAGINATION 



famous Slasher had been tentatively 
identified when he was tracked by 
the police to his lair in a well-known 
hotel; he was thought to be either a 
certain Irish communist agitator, or 
else a celebrated American gangster 
who I happened to know had been 
killed in 1037 . . . 

I walked on down to Birmingham 
and took a room in an obscure house 
in a slum district, run by a blowzy 
slattern who answered to "Old Mag." 
The parlor was equipped with a 
weary wireless set and an assortment 
of highly-flavored gentlemen in the 
last stages of disrepair. One of them 
looked like a racetrack tout fallen 
on evil days, another I could have 
sworn was a professional mugger. 
A fitting den for the Manchester 
Slasher! 

I was careful not to touch anything at all until I had gone out 
and bought a pair of thin silk gloves, 
which I wore at all times thereafter. 
The proprietor of the pawnship gave 
me a knowing wink as he handed 
them to me. I'm sure he thought I 
was a cat-burglar or a safe-cracker. 
No one in my new home deigned to 
notice them. I must mention that, 
quite by accident and not through 
any searching on my part, I had 
happened to strike a place where 
none of the other-world brutes lived; 
1 had been prepared to see a number 
of them here, but only found the 
lowly humans I have spoken of. 

I spent my first evening in going 
over my clothing and other possessions, ripping out name tags, obliter


ating initials, and cleaning off fingerprints. I would not be trapped again 
as I had nearly been in Manchester. 

npHE second day and the early 
A evening thereof I walked through 
the streets, thinking furiously. And 
the only conclusions I could come to 
anent my problems were bitter and 1 
lonely and hopeless. 

Going "home" about eight o'clock, | 
I wandered into the parlor and was 
accosted diffidently by a very lowlooking form of life, which begged 
the pleasure of my company in a 
nearby hooch hut. I agreed. I 
would have stood drinks to a wolverine if the creature would have 
listened to me. I was starved for 
speech. 

When I had bought him a few 
rounds, his taste running to that 
noble old British concoction, a four- 1 
o'-gin-hot, we began to talk freely: 
of anything, the weather, the latest 
race results, the difficulty of getting 
"real prime raw gin" . . . 

He was a curious fellow. The 
name he gave me was Arold Smiff. 
which I imagine had once been Harold Smith; he was small and stringy 
and of a tobacco-brown hue, with 
eyes in which liquor-broken veins 
had long since stained the irises and 
the white to an all-over muddy 
crimson. He stank like a shebeen, his 
breath would have shriveled a brass 
monkey, but I soon noticed something really odd about him — he did 
not seem to be at all intoxicated. I 
made bold to comment on this. 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



33 



"Why, General," he said, grinning 
wryly, "fak is, I been lushed for so 
long, I can't get lushed any more 
hardly at all. You ever had the 
snykes?" 

r shook my head. He nodded wisely. "Ar, I thought not. You're clarss. 
Me, I got a permanent case of 'em, 
bloody snykes and 'orrors all the 
tyme. You wouldn't know what it's 
lyke, General, seeing such 'orrors all 
the bloody damn tyme." 

Would I not, J said to myself, oh, 
would I not! 

"No, you're clarss, any bloody fool 
could see that." He leaned over confidentially, and I could fairly feel my 
eyebrows curl under that breath . 
Between pals, now, wot's your lay?" 

"Lay?" I repeated idiotically. 

"Gyme, General, gyme! I knew 
you was hot stuff the mo' I seen yer 
at Old Mag's. Wot's your specialty 
-jools?" 

Good Lord! The man took me for 
a jewel-thief! 

"Not exactly," I said. 

1T7E were sitting in a booth. He 
craned his neck around to see 
that no one could overhear us. "Aye, 
but it's something fust-rate. You're 
no bloomin' snaveler nor kntickler." 

"Ah, no," I agreed, presuming 
that, whatever they were, I couldn't 
be one of them. 

"You're clarss," he repeated obstinately. "Me, I may not look so 
likely now, but once I was Manny 
Jarman's right'and lad." 

I tried to look impressed, and 



wondered who Manny Jarman had 
been. A great deal of ale had flowed 
down my gullet at a good clip, and 
I was feeling reckless and friendly. 
"I'll tell you one thing," I said, "the 
police want me rather badly. I wouldn't tell you that if I didn't trust 
you." 

"Ar! You trust Arold Smiff, General. 'E won't letcher down. I knowed 
you was on the lam when you come 
into Old Mag's. You're okay there. 
And you're okay so long as I'm your 
chum, too, see? I got connections." 
,He brooded darkly over his connections. "Mugs, but they respecks old 
Arold Smiff, knowing wot 'e was 
once. Before the gin got 'im," he 
added significantly, peering into the 
depths of his glass. I snapped my 
fingers for another four-o'-gin-hot. 

He chattered on, in his strange 
drunk-sober style, for a few minutes - , 
and then, someone pushing by me, 
I moved my elbow to make more 
room in the aisle. In doing so I 
glanced up. It was one of them. A 
truly fearsome beast, this one: purplish, slimy and grotesque. 

Arold bent closer, again singeing 
my eyebrows. "I'll give yer an example," he hissed. "Example o' wot 
I go through nowadyes. You seen 
that bloke leave?" 

"Yes?" 

" 'E were a bloke to you, huh' J 
Regular normal bloke?" 

"Mmmm," I said noncommittally. 

"Welp, me, I didn't see no bloke 
at all, d'yer get me? I seen i great 
big glob o : goop! A great big purple 



34 

wet-looking barstid of a garstly 
freak! You think a joker's bad oft" 
when 'e's got snykes, huh? Wot 
about me, wot sees Frank and Stein's 
monsters all about?" He sat back 
triumphantly. 

I suppose I gaped. I suppose my 
jaw dropped, my hands shook, my 
face grew pale. I don't know. For 
the moment the gin palace was a 
blur and my faculties were frozen, 
as Arold Smiff's words rang in my 
head. 

Frankenstein monsters! Purple 
freak! 

Fate had given me an ally worth 
more than all six of my band combined. A souse of an ally, a lowbred 
criminal of an ally, a gin-soaked 
worthless-appearing ally ; but one 
who could see the aliens, evidently as 
plainly as I could myself! 

Our gallant pioneer, Jerry Wolfe, 
had speculated that perhaps some 
people could see them when having 
a fit of what we call the d.l.s — 
when they were saturated with alcohol, their vision was warped into 
the uncanny dimension-piercing angles which the musket blast had given me. Here was living proof of the 
theory. And here likewise was a fel-; 
low so permanently full of liquor (I 
swear the stuff ran in his veins) that 
ne could see them all the time! 



CHAPTER XI 



tt"\X7 HERE can we 

Y * asked him quietly, when 
I had got control of myself. 



IMAGINATION 

"Why, 'ere. General." 
"No, no. A good safe place where 
we can talk privately and without 
interruption. '* 

"Ow! Old Mag's, o' course. None 
better. Your room or mine." 

"Mine," I said. "Let's go, old 
horse." 

We went, taking along a bottle of 
gin for medicinal purposes. I sat him 
down in the dilapidated rocking chair, 
in my bedroom and, staring into his 
brown face intently, said, "I've got 
a proposition for you, Arold. It's a 
whopper, too." 

"Big job?" he said. "You want me 
on a big job?" 

"Yes, you. You'll be my partner 
in it." 

"Me?" he repeated incredulously. 
"You're the one chap who can 
help me." 

The muddy eyes actually filled 
with tears; it was not a maudlin 
drunk's easy weeping, though, but 
the honest emotion of a humble 
workman who finds himself asked to 
assist a master. "You want me, Arold 
Smiff, to link up wiff you, a gent, a 
real gent, clarss, wot I mean a toff 
as ever was? Cor! I knowed I wasn't through yet," said he. "Just you 
lead on, General." 

"I was only a Captain," said I. 
"Then you didn't 'ave your deserts, 
I'll say. Wot's the gyme?" 
"The biggest." 

"Bank o' England?" he asked 
without much astonishment. 

"No, not theft. We don't have to 
steal anything in this game." 



talk?" I 



BEWARE, Tt 

He frowned. " 'Old on, now, you 
mean I gotta knock somebody orf? 
Scrag 'em?" 

"Not you personally, Arold. 
You'll be too high in the game for 
that." 

"Ow, not that I objecks, mindjer," he hastened to assure me. "It 
just took me off guard, as you might 
say, you not lookin' ]yke a basher." 
He grinned. " 'Twouldn't be the first 
mug I've did in, General." 

"I'll wager on that," said I under 
my breath, and aloud, "I told you: 
you'll be too important in this affair 
to do any murdering yourself, Arold." I prodded him in the chest with 
a finger. "You'll give the orders," 
said I. 

He was deeply impressed by that. 
"Cripes!" he said. "Me?" 

"Yes. Now listen closely, and I'll 
explain the whole business. Think 
back. Remember that purple monster you saw leaving the pub?" 

"Not 'arf. Holy hell, not 'arfl" 

CCTT was something like a lizard 
* in shape," I said slowly. "It 
had a long trailing tail, and two big 
hind legs it walked on; it had two 
sets of little forearms, only* they 
weren't like arms, but more like big 
snakes: no fingers, no hands, just 
oozy rounded arms. It looked as if 
it had just crawled out of the sea, 
and around it there were a lot of 
thin silvery-blue lines, running at a 
tangent like this — " I chopped 
liy hands through the air at a fortyfive degree angle — "that seemed like 



2 USURPERS! 35. 

a background to the creature. There 
were glowing eyes in its chest, and 
for a head it had what looked like 
a dead fish. Right?" 

"Right." He gave me a long blank 
stare. Then he batted his lids up and 
down. " : Ow did you know? I never 
told you all that!" 

"I saw it too." 

"Garn!" he said scornfully. "Wotcher givin' us?" 

"If I didn't see it, then how did 
I know just what it looked like?" 

He thought that over, sucking his 
yellow teeth. Then he gasped. "My 
Gawd! You got 'em too?" 

"Do I look drunk?" 

"No, but — " 

"And if I were, would I have seen 
exactly what you saw, unless it were 
really there?" 

Arold Smjff sank back in the rocker 
and let out a wheeze that began in 
the tips of his toes. "My old mother! 
I'm off it for good. The snykes are 
catchin'. Ow! '0 are you, mister/" 

I threw my whole hand into the 
center of the table, staking everything on it. 

"I'm the Manchester Slasher," I 
said. 

He recoiled. His brown face, incapable of turning pale, nonetheless 
gave the effect of blanching in some 
mysterious manner of its own. The 
common little thief and garden-variety mugger quailed before the celebrated Mad Ghoul of Manchester. 
He drew out a large clasp knife and 
snapped open the blade, his hand 
shaking. " 'Ere, now, you keep back 



IMAGINATION 



from me, you 'ear? I'm not to be 
trifled wiff, see? You touch me and 
you're a deader, that's wot." 

"Oh, put it away," I said fiercely. 
When he refused, I grabbed his 
wrist with my left hand and struck 
it a stinging judo blow with my 
right: the knife fell. 

"Ow-er!" he yelled. "You keep 
back!" Cowering, he gazed at me 
with those muddy crimson eyes wide, 
his mouth stretched in a nervous, 
sickly grimace of fear. "Twenty you 
done in, all in a couple of dyes," he 
whispered. "And I been and gone 
and drunk wiff you lyke you was 
my brother. You're mad-dorg crazy, 
you are." 

i4T'M as sane as you are," I said, 
"or saner. For heaven's sake, 
man, get hold, of yourself. Do you 
think I stood you a bucket of gin 
and wasted two hours on you just to 
murder you in my own room?" 

"Welp, no," he said grudgingly. 

"Up north I killed four in the 
time I've taken to talk to you," I 
said, to impress him further. "Now 
listen closely, because I don't want 
to go over this more than a couple 
of times. In the first place, those 
people I killed weren't people." 

"Garn! " 

"They were beasts like the purple lizard. Some of 'em were worse. 
I killed one that was like a giant 
hoptoad with fangs." 

"I've seen 'em like that . . . 'Ere. 
wotcher giving us? / know them 'orrors is all in my mind. / ain't no 



common lushington. / knows it's the 
gin. / know they're folks like everyone." 

"Oh, you know, do you? Open up 
that walnut you call your mind, 
chum. Why do we both see the 
identical brutes, if they're in your 
mind?" 

"I dunno," he growled sullenly. 

"Then just sit quiet — there's the 
gin beside you — and I'll explain it 
all in words of one syllable." 

And this I did. I went over the 
whole frightful business, with a side 
dissertation on the theory of a fourth 
dimension. Then I went over it again. 
Somewhere in the distance a clock 
struck two. I summarized it again. 
I could see it beginning to penetrate 
to his submerged intellect. I went 
through it all a fourth time, and his 
murky gaze began to glow. The faraway clock struck three. 

" 'Ere," he said at last. "You ain't 
loony at all, are yer? Tell me agayn 
about them as is in it wiff yer." 

"There's an old Colonel, a real big 
gun in his day, with pots of money. 
There's two veterans, gentlemen 
both, and one the son of a lord. 
There's a doctor with plenty of 
brain?* and an old chap with more 
dignity than you ever saw in your 
misspent life. There's even a girl, a 
real lady. And there's me. Do you 
think we'd all be chucking our lives 
into this mess if we didn't know it 
was desperately real?" 

T TE scratched his nose with a black 
' *■ nail. "No." he said, "no, you 



1 



BEWARE, TE 

wouldn't. I can see as you're real 
clarss, ripper or no. What d'yer 
want of me, though? I'm plain dirt 
compared wiff you." 

"Why. you were Manny Jarman's 
right-hand man." I said. "You 
haven't forgotten what itVlike to be 
top dog?" 

He was immensely flattered at 
that. "Thank you kindly, General. 
You sees deeper into a bloke than 
most. Go on." 

"I've only a hazy idea of what I 
want you to do, Arold, when the 
time comes. But here's an important 
part of it. Could you find me a whole 
raft of fellows who'd be willing to 
commit murder for money, no questions asked?" 

"Hell," he grinned, "could a cat 
find garbage cans?" 

"They'd have to be given definite 
instructions, and be the kind of men 
who would carry them out to the 
letter. And no copper's narks, see? 
Nobody who'd take our cash and 
ihen squeal." 

"I could do it," he said, thinking. 
T could get bullies 'ere in Brummagem who'd cut their mothers' 
necks for three quid. And they 
could get others. Ow, trust Arold 
Smiff to find the right 'uns!" 

"We might need a hundred." 

"There's that many and more." 

I was giving slow birth to a real 
plan now. "It might be that they'd 
have^to go all over England, and do 
th$se murders in a hundred different 
places. And they'd have to do them 
in a certain manner you'd tell 'em 



C USURPERS! £ 7 

about, see? Xo slipshod hatchet 
work, but well-planned assassinations." 

"Might be harder to find them as 
would work precise to orders, but I 
could do it. I know every rogue in 
these parts, don'tcher doubt it, General." 

"That's why you're so valuable, 
Arold; that's why you'll be my righthand man. And only you and I must 
know that the men we'll be killing 
aren't truly men, but- — " 

" But oosluppers," agreed Arold , 
proud of the new word. "Oosluppers 
from the fourth demented, yus. Why, 
General, it's lyke a crusade, a bloody 
noble crusade, ain't it?" 

"That's what we think, pal. But 
that part's a deep secret." 

"Hot knives won't drag it outen 
me," be bragged. "Gawd, to think 
I been seein' these 'ere Frank and 
Stein's monsters for eight years more 
or less, and thought all the time it 
was the gin!" He made his apologies to the liquor by taking an enormous gulp of it. 

"Now I've got to go away for a 
while, Arold," I told him. "I've got 
to travel all over this island, and collect some names. When I've done 
that I'll let you know. Meanwhile 
you can be lining up your lieutenants. 
With care, old horse, with the greatest care." Then it occurred to me 
that he had never asked what his 
reward would be. "You'll find yourself a rich man when this is over, 
Arold." 

"Garn. what'd I do wiff a lot o' 



IMAGINATION 



mi ney? I don't need much but gin 
air J a few comforts now and agayn, 
an 1 maybe a bit o' cash to swank it 
wi '7, around town." 

'You'll be able to build a swimming pool and fdl it with Gordon's 
if you do your job right." 

"Trust old Arold, General." 

"I do," I said. "I do." 

■'That's damn near thanks 
enough," said he in a choked voice. 
There was a stratum of pretty fine 
stuff in Arold Smiff. besides the 
streak of sentimentality you'll usually find in your lower-class Briton. 

"Now." I went on. "here's the 
plan. I'll go over it until we both 
know it word for word." 

I sketched it out as it had come 
to me in this strange night of lengthy 
explanation. Then T repeated it, 
and re-repeated it, until I thought 
it would bubble out of our ears. 

And when the clock rang five, we 
were nearly ready to begin. But 
first we laid ourselves down to sleep 
for a few hours, till the pubs had 
opened again; when we arose, and 
put on our coats, and sallied out 
together to commit a murder ... a 
most unpleasant but most necessarymurder. 

CHAPTER XII 

T walked out of Birmingham alone. 

just before noon, heading for the 
bombed-out old building in which 
T had left the Jaguar, with my Gladstone bag locked in her dickey, or 
rumble seat. I had not carried any 



baggage with me into the city except my razor, toothbrush, knife and 
automatic, and my pipe. 

It occurs to me that, since she 
played nearly as useful a part in my 
adventures as did my human colleagues. I should perhaps devote a 
moment to describing my black Jaguar. I had bought her late in 1937 
for a matter of some four hundred 
pounds, and except for the war years, 
which she waited out in a barn near 
my home in Coventry, we had been 
inseparable ever since. She was one 
of the mighty Standard Swallow ioos, 
with a wonderfully reliable threeand-a-half-Hter engine, and as I've 
said. I once clocked her at a hundred 
and fourteen m.p.h. and believed she 
could do more. She would go from 
a standstill to eighty m.p.h. in a 
matter of twenty-seconds, for her acceleration was ferocious. Yet she 
was the smoothest-riding jade I ever 
owned . Her brown leather upholstery had faded through the years to 
a rich old tan, but her heart was as 
young as ever. I had lavished oil 
her the affection that might more 
properly have gone to a wife or a 
kennel of hounds; in my lonely careering about the countryside in these 
last days she had amply repaid me. 
She had been companion and steed 
and confidante to a very homesick 
man. 

It was a clear day, with a promise 
of sultry heat to come that prickled 
my body with sweat under the -old 
tweed suit. I tramped briskly along, 
thinking of Marion — I thought of 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



39 



her whenever I could, for her sweet 
face shut out the menacing usurpers 
from my mind — until I came in 
sight of the wrecked building. As 
I swung down the hill toward it, I 
heard voices'raised in argument. 

pAUTIOUSLY I slowed a little^ 
^ looking nonchalant and disinterested. I walked past the riiin 
and from the corner of my eye saw 
a number of men (and monsters) 
clustered around the Jaguar looking 
at her curiously. "Aye," said one 
of them, "that's his, right enough. 
Black Jaggiar, it says here on the 
prints." Two of them were constables. I ambled over. 

Now this was a particularly idiotic 
thing to do, but I must plead extenuating circumstances. In the first 
place, I had just been a partner 
in the commission of a messy homicide, and was strung up as high as 
a barrage balloon. Secondly, I had 
been hardheaded and coldly practical 
for many hours — indeed, since the 
night of my last murder in Manchester I had not done an impetuous 
act, nor played the swaggering gambler with death for any stakes except 
the highest. It suddenly came to 
me that I must do a doughty deed, 
act the bold Quixote for once, to 
liven up my interest and tone up my 
reflexes. I was never born to be 
an ice-brained plotter, although I 
had been forced by fate into that uncongenial role. Rather for me the 
Swirling cape and impetuous rapier, 
the big-plumed hat and gallant ges


ture, the fiery and slightly ridiculous 
beau geste. So I ambled into the 
wrecked building. 

The men (and monsters) turned 
to stare at me. I could see the 
great brutes cf aliens turning orange 
and green with interest. I had learned that they often swelled and changed color when intrigued or alarmed. 
"Cheero," I said vacuously. "What's 
up?" 

One of the group, a portly constable wth a red face, eyed me dourly 
and said, "Stranger 'ereabouts, sir?" 

"I'm on a walking tour," said I. 
"Just spent a night in Birming'm. 
Saw you chaps in a rum sweat over 
something, thought I'd have a dekko. Dashed sleek-lookin' car, what?" 

"At" said the constable, observing my boots. They were stout and 
old, the very thing for a walking 
tour. "You know anything about 
motors, sir?" 

"Me? Lord, no," said I. I then 
giggled, which pained him visibly. 
"I wouldn 't touch one. Cousin 
owned one, name of Algy; cousin, 
you know, not the car. Turned over 
in a treacherous manner and simply 
squashed him like a bloomin' bug. 
What's up with this one?" 

npHE menMers were scrutinizing 
me intently. I told myself 
that I needn't be afraid of their inspection: in addition to my quite 
ordinary features, which could scarcely have been described in much detail by their compatriot who had seen 
me, I was at the moment wearing the 



1 



IMAGINATION 



40 

shell -rimmed spectacles which I ordinarily used only for reading, being far-sighted as an eagle. I had 
put them on a few moments before, 
just in case. 

An alien said, leaning his human 
form toward me, "We think it may 
be the Manchester Slasher's." 

If he thought to startle me into 
betraying myself, he was disappointed. I fluttered my hands and bleated. "Gad! Not that murderer 
chappie? The one who killed about 
ninety people up north?" 

"Twenty, sir." The alien appeared 
to relax. "Yes, it fits the description, 
all right." He turned to another. 
"Tom, you'd best go and telegraph 
Manchester. Sam, you go with him 
and bring back another couple 0' 
boys. We'll just lay us a trap." 

I walked all about the Jaguar, 
prodding her bonnet and peering at 
the dashboard gingerly. "Deuced 
mysterious affairs, motors," I said. 
"Don't see how anyone can tell what 
gadget to push next." 

"We're a-going to lay an ambush 
for this 'ere Slasher, sir, if you don't 
mind," said one of them. 

"Hear hear." I said. "Chop the 
blighter, what? Pip him in the early 
counties, right?" 

"There's liable to be trouble, sir," 
insinuated another. 

"Rather," I yammered. "Oh, 
rather." 

"We'd like to get ready now, If 
you please, sir." 

"Oh. absolutely. Carry on. Lay 
a snare for the wretched person, 



• lads," said I heartily. 

"You'd better leave now, sir," said 
the constable firmly. "Before there's 
trouble, you know. Wouldn't want 
to get hurt." 

"Heavens, no," said* I. "I say, 
officer, could I just sit in that seat 
a mo'? Give one something to 
boast of, what?" 

"No, sir. There may be fingerprints in the thing." 

<tT WON'T touch a bally thing." 

I assured him, and as there 
was no one within six feet of me, I 
hopped in behind the wheel. At once 
they all shouted angrily; but there 
was no suspicion of me yet. It is the 
firm belief of the lower-middle 
classes that anyone who bleats and 
says "bally" and "dashed" is a regular Bertie Wooster character and 
as harmless as a sheep, although 
somewhat less attractive. "Come out 
o' that, sir!" yelled the constable. 

"Just want to get the feel of it, 
you know," said I reassuringly. 
"Want to tell old Algy I sat in 
what's-his-name's seat." 

"I thought you said Algy was 
killed in a wreck." 

"That was Algy Witherspoon, my 
cousin," I told him reproachfully, 
secretly extracting the ignition key 
from my pocket. "This is young Algy 
Pope, my other cousin. Regular ripping chappv on murders and all that,. 
Algy is. Tell you all about Crippen, 
and whoozis that did in his maiden 
aunt over at that little place in Sussex, and all such bloody — pardon the 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! ' 



expression — goin's-on. Likes birds. 
kid. Sits about in swamps watchin' 
them. Deuced rum feller." 

Suspicion must have dawned just 
about then. They moved toward me, 
while the humans still hesitated. I 
slid the key in under cover of my 
bent body, chortling something inline about the mythical Algy, and 
stepped on the clutch. A hand was 
laid heavily on my shoulder. The 
Jaguar leaped backwards at the same 
instant, hit someone who reeled awav 
with a scream, rocked crazily over 
the rubble and struck the road. I 
twisted her madly around, waved 
my hand in an appropriately cavalier-like manner, and sped off southeastward on the great road that leads 
lo London. Shouts of rage followed 
me. I patted the Jaguar's wheel. "Everything's all right, babv," I said. 
-Old Will is back. It'll all be all 
right now." 

I devoutly hoped that it would be. 

CHAPTER XIII 

TT is a hundred and fifteen or twen* ty miles from Birmingham to 
London. Having gambled the fate of 
the world on a silly trick, and won 
back my two-seater from the very 
hands of the law and of the usurpers, 
1 was wonderfully bouyed up; and 
decided to go down to my gang's 
headquarters and tell them all the 
new developments. I was aching to 
talk to someone . .preferably Marion. 

In half an hour I had left Birmingham and then Coventry far be


41 

hind me, and was feeling prettv safe, 
as there had been no signs of pursuit. Then, just as I roared into some 
cursed little hamlet along the route 
— I don't even know its name — a 
great black motor dashed out of a 
lane ahead of me and blocked the 
way. I saw it was crammed to the 
roof with them; knew that this was 
no accidental barrier, but a contingent of the enemy, either lawful or 
of the misbegotten underground of 
the beasts: and without pausing ran 
the Jaguar up over the curb, squeezed 
through between their car and the 
wall of a shop, rocketed on two 
wheels back into the road and trod 
the accelerator down to the floor. 
The black job was after me in a 
flash. We howled through that hamlet like a pair of greased lightning 
bolts. 

They gave me only a few bad 
minutes; when we hit the open road 
I drew away as though — -to coin a 
stunning simile — they had been 
standing still. But even when their 
dust was no more than a puff on 
the horizon. I gnawed my lips and 
worried. My course was known, and 
the telegraphs and telephones would 
be crackling far in advance of me. 
Yet doggedly, and perhaps rather 
stupidly, I held to this main road 
until I had come nearly to St. Albans, for I could eat up the miles so 
swiftly on decent paving that it 
gave me the illusion of outrunning 
my enemies. At last, just before the 
old cathedral town. I turned off and 
lost myself in the network of coun


4 2 



IMAGINATION 



try byways. 

Y? VENING was closing in when at 
last I rolled the black lass to 
a halt at a garage in the south of 
London. The owner was an old mate 
of mine with whom I'd seen a lot 
of action in the war. What lies I told 
him don't matter: suffice it that in 
three minutes the Jaguar was stowed 
in a dark corner of his big shed, 
and he had contracted to paint her 
a deep red hue by next afternoon . . . 
and to keep quiet about her. Gladstone in hand, I then set out for 
The Gray Gander. I told myself that 
(a) I would be less conspicuous there 
than at the toney Gloucester Club or 
the exclusive Albany, (b) although 
three of my men were billeted at the 
latter place, Alec Talbot was the 
most able of the whole band, despite 
his single arm, and he was at the 
inn, (c) I did not want to be seen 
by any of the aliens who knew me 
—I hardly realized why, but I had 
the creepy feeling that they would 
somehow penetrate my secret — and 
on the single occasion when I had 
visited the Gander, I had seen none 
of the beast-folk. Finally I admitted 
to myself that these reasons were so 
much rot, and actually (d) Marion 
Black was drawing me like an irresistible whirlpool draws a chip of 
flotsam. 

I went up to Alec's room, closed 
the door behind me, and fell on his 
bosom. He beat me on the back and 
gurgled wordlessly. I beat him on 
the back and sputtered idiotically. It 



was a grand reunion. 

"Where's Marion?" I asked. 

"I'll get her." He dashed out and 
brought her back. When she came 
into the room, lighting it up like a 
sunburst in a cavern, I took her in 
my arms and kissed her long and 
well. 

"Marion, will you marry a poor 
devil who loves you in a humble but 
most passionate manner?" 

"After one kiss?" asked Alec blankly. "Just one kiss?" 

"Certainly," she said. "That can 
be remedied." 

"Oh, Lord, not immediately," 
groaned Alec, as we began to do so. 
"Let him tell us where in hell he's 
been for seventeen years. Let him 
relieve my mind." 

I ended the second kiss with a 
splutter. "Good God! I can't ask 
you to marry me, dearest. I — come 
and sit down — I'm a murderer." 

"You can't call it murder, son, to 
chop an inhuman monster," said 
Alec. 

"But I'm wanted by every policeman in the Kingdom. You see, I'm 
the Manchester Slasher." 

T DON'T know what reaction I 
expected of Marion ... the pale 
cheek, the indrawn gasp, the expression of loathing and fear ... as a 
matter of fact, she clapped her hands 
and laughed. 

"You owe Geoff ten bob, Alec!" 
she cried. 

"Huh?" said I. 
• "Geoff bet Alec ten shillings that 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



43 



you were the Mad Ghoul. He said 
-" she became serious — '%e said 
that one just couldn't give a man 
i he power to see such nightmares as 
you've been seeing, and expect him 
to keep a cool head and not strike 
at them. He said he had wild bursts 
of fury himself when he thought of 
them, and knew if he could see them, 
he'd start a reign of terror." 

"I thought you'd draw back with 
abhorrence," I said. 

She threw her arms around me. 
'Oh, Will, poor old Will! My Uncle 
tieordie was a big game hunter, and 
I think he was a much more reprehensible character than you. After 
all, darling, the beasts you're stalking 
are far worse than any innocent old 
family-man of a lion." 

"Say," put in Alec, "'something's 
been puzzling me. Why haven't the 
coppers spotted the license of your 
Jaguar? It's famous, you know— on 
the wireless every hour these days." 

"Oh, my dear chap! I stole a set 
of plates off a big Daimler before I 
ever left London. You're dealin' with 
a hardened crook." I told them how 
I had rescued her from the hands of 
the enemy in Birmingham. "It was 
the serial numbers on her innards 
that worried me. Except for them, 
though, she couldn't be traced to 
me." I kissed my girl again. Her lips 
were like a drug, that drew me back 
again and again for larger doses. 

Alec clucked his tongue. "Most unEnglish!" 

"See here, chum: you trot put and 
collect the lads. Have 'em come here 



unobtrusively by ones and twos, and 
we'll have a council of war." 

"Oh, all right, if you don't want 
an appreciative audience to make 
funny remarks at appropriate places." He slapped on his hat and went 
out, while I returned to Marion's 
embrace. For a little while I could 
forget the whole abominable race of 
beast-people, the dire venture before 
me, and everything else except the 
incredible fact that she returned 
what I had always considered my 
hopeless love. 

CHAPTER XIV 

TT was grand to see my half-dozen 
*■ sub rosa crusaders gathered together again, sitting expectantly on 
sofas and chairs in Alec's room, 
watching me with friendship and love. 
What a tonic those comradely faces 
were! I drank a silent, sentimental 
toast to them, and began my yarn. 

First I told them of Arold Smiff, 
the cheap, crooked, gin-soaked little 
man. who had taken his last bath in 
1922: the man who could see the 
usurpers as well as I could. That 
roused them to gleeful vociferance, 
which I squashed with a bark. 
"Quiet, will you! I'm half starved 
— haven't had a bite since breakfast. 
I want to get this done, so I can go 
and eat a good dinner. 

"You know that when I left you 
I could see just one dismal possibility — a long campaign of slaughter, 
slaughter, slaughter. But when 1 met 
Arold. a plan grew up in my mind — " 



44 



IMAGINATION 



"Like a lovely flower in a swamp," 
murmured Geoff. "Sorry. Pray continue." 

"The whole plan," I growled, "is 
about nine-tenths sheer bluff; but I 
think it may work. Here it is: first, 
I travel around the country and collect a hundred names; the names of 
usurpers whose human shells have 
had more or less spectacular careers. 
Not those born to the purple,- but 
those who've come up like rockets, 
self-made men who've climbed to 
posts of importance in politics, the 
law, and elsewhere. I've seen a number of big shots of that sort who 
are nothing raally but robots moved 
by slimy misshapen blobs . . . and 
I've deduced (pardon the Holmesian 
expression) that the important members of their loathsome breed are 
probably those who rise to take over 
important positions in this world. 
That allows 'em to protect and to 
advance their secret cause." 

"How?" 

"By passing certain laws, and — 
well, here's an example. One of them 
commits some crime, perhaps inadvertently. They don't want him to 
get chucked into prison, where he'd 
be no use to them in furthering the 
birth-rate. So a were-policeman. to 
coin a name, will let him escape; or 
a were-judge will set him free. Get 
the poisonous subtlety of it? They 
work themselves into posts where 
they can help each other to the top 
of their bent. Even on the lower 
levels, they're often bartenders and 
hotel-keepers, who can pass quick 



word of developments, and so forth. 
It's as if a lot of Nazis had become 
lawyers and judges and M.P.s here 
during the late fracas, and from 
their exalted seats had protected 
whole battalions of lesser spies when 
they ran afoul of the cops." 

"I see," said the Colonel. "That's 
logic." 

i tOO it stands to reason that, if I 
want to put a great big crimp 
in their plans, I have to chop a slice 
off the top of their organization, 
rather than out of the bottom. T slew 
a score of 'em while I was the Manchester Slasher, but those were common low folk whom T can't see as 
especially important to the general 
plan of the usurpers. They got very 
peeved about me, but it was nothing 
to the way they'd have acted had I 
murdered twenty judicial were-people, or twenty husks of Members of 
Parliament. My score of twenty lower-case aliens might have been accidental, but twenty upper-crusters 
wouldn't be. And a hundred will 
make them sit up and scream like 
hell. 

"You can't hire decent men to 
commit pointless assassinations, so 
of course I was handicapped until I 
met Arold Smiff. In fact, I never even thought of hiring killers, until that 
night when I found that he could 
see 'em too. Then the dawn flashed 
up. You can pay professional rogues 
to commit murders, and no questions 
asked. So I deputized Arold to go 
out and collect a hundred scoundrels 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



45 



for me: the most reliable riffraff 
available, men who would, as he 
says, do in their old mothers for a 
chew of tobacco. He's to pay them 
ten pounds apiece in advance, with 
a promise of ten more when the business is done. Then, on a certain 
night, and within a period of a few 
hours, they're to strike all over England — and slay these usurpers I'll 
have collected in my little black 
book. I understand that the underworld looks with disfavor on a gentleman who collects a fee from a 
brother crook and then doesn't deliver the goods, so I believe that most of 
these cutthroats will keep faith and 
comply with his instructions." 

"How do you know this Smith 
won't do a bunk with your money?" 
asked Doctor Baringer cynically. 
"After all, a common thief — " 

"Not common," said I loyally. 
"He was Manny Jarman's right-hand 
man." 

"Who in blazes is, or was, Manny 
Jarman?" 

"Haven't the foggiest. John . . . 
anyhow. Arold's been promised a lot 
of cash if he comes through; he's 
enthralled with the scheme, for after 
all he's been seeing these pink and 
crimson cacodemons since the early 
40s: lastly, and maybe most important, he knows I'm the Manchester Slasher, and in his heart of hearts 
he's scared white of me. I felt no 
qualms at all about giving him eleven 
hundred quid." 

Alec whistled. "What a wad!" 

"Xearly all I had with me. It's 



a lucky thing some of us are loaded 
with the ready, for this affair will 
cost like sin. 

"Then,- after our pogrom, I call 
one of their bigwigs and tell him to 
meet me somewhere, with as many 
of his pals as he wants to bring. I 
say to 'em, 'Gents, you've just seen 
a sample of my power. I've reached 
out and obliterated a hundred of 
you, and they weren't any small potatoes either, but some o' your finest. 
You realize I didn't snag 'em all by 
myself; you're no village idiots. 
Those killings were done by a hundred chaps who can see you. We 
struck at you all over England. In a 
few days, another hundred of you 
get it — and some of you here now 
are on that list. Coupje days later, 
a hundred and fifty. Then two hundred. And we'll go on knocking you 
over regularly, working from the top 
down, till there aren't any of your 
breed left here, and damned good 
riddance to filthy bad rubbish, too.' 

CinpHEX I make my point. 'The 
nub of the thing is this: we 
want you to go home. Pick up your 
kilts and vamoose. Beat it. This 
world isn't your world, and by heavens you'd better leave it while the 
leaving is good. Otherwise you're 
sunk. You can murder me now,' I 
tell 'em generously, 'but there's plenty more where I came from. We've 
perfected a system of warping our 
vision, and every day there are more 
of us who can see you in all your 
ugliness. You can't beat us, because 



4 6 



IMAGINATION 



we're the best underground organization that ever existed ; and last 
night's massacre proves it. Till now 
you had no idea we even existed. 
Did you?' And they have to admit 
they didn't, because we don't." 

"How's that again, Will?" 

"Never mind. Anyway, then they 
think it over, and if we're in luck, 
they decide the hell with it, and go 
home." 

"Leaving thousands of suddenly 
dead bodies, and incredible misery 
and sorrow among the friends of their 
puppets," said Geoff. "Oh, I'm with 
you. That's our whole objective, to 
rid ourselves of them. But it just hit 
me: what a lot of tears will be shed 
because we stepped into this matter." 

"Shall we turn back now?" 

"Don't drivel. Only . . . great 
merciful powers!" He drank from 
his glass, his hand shaking. "What 
will we wreak! " 

"Do you think it'll work, Will?" 
asked Marion quietly. 

"It's the biggest bluff of all time, 
darling. But it must work! " I paused. 
"There's one big factor. I've hinted 
at it — here it is. We've always taken 
it for granted that when the human 
body dies, the usurper simply goes 
back to his own world and begins 
again by getting himself born into a 
new husk here. Jerry Wolfe figured 
that out originally, and we've accepted his theory as gospel. But I 
submit that it needn't be true. I 
don't know why I ever thought it 
was. How do we know what hap


pens to the monster when its hull of 
human flesh dies? How do we know 
that it's only the puppet which perishes? Echo answers: we don't know. 
Maybe the aliens are so bound to 
their false humans in this dimension 
that when the bodies die, the aliens 
must die too. What's so impossible 
about that? After all, I've told you 
that they haven't any powers here 
except those of the bodies they inhabit. God knows what they can do 
in their own never-never land — -but 
here, they're little better than t so 
many natural-born people. And if 
they're that restricted, that much 
identified with these puppets, maybe even their death is mutual." 

T CLEARED my throat and took a 
drink of Scotch. "What happened 
when I killed my first ogre? I went 
to a pub with Geoff and watched. 
Pretty soon all . the beasts sittin' 
there started to flap their arms at 
one another and turn different colors, and then a lot of them got up 
and left. Aha, yes, I said to myself, 
the gorgon who got his has gone 
around behind the dimension-screen 
telling his chums about it. But I was 
arguing from a false premise. I was 
basing my ideas on what I believed 
to be a fact — yet that fact hadn't 
been proven at all, and probably 
couldn't be proven this side of the 
silver land!" 

"Nor disproven," put in Alec. 

"But I can show you more to disprove it than you can dig up to 
prove it! What happens when I as


BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



47 



syssinate an alien? His human vehicle croaks, while he himself swells 
up, turns a vivid horrid hue, and goes 
hop. I submit that that looks more 
like the death of the alien itself than 
a simple relegation to another region. 

"But I think they can leave this 
world voluntarily, in which case they 
!»o on living in their own. Lord 
knows how long a life expectancy 
they've got, over there. Maybe their 
time is different from ours, so that 
the life of a man occupies no more 
than a fraction of a day in the silver 
kind; the theft of a body and the 
puppeteering of it from womb to 
tomb may be no more than an hour's 
vicious pastime for an alien." 

"I've been thinking of that," said 
Geoff slowly. "I see this whole business as a kind of fierce joke on their 
part, the slow and sly winning of a 
world from its unseeing inhabitants. 
So perhaps they'll leave us if their 
lives are endangered — perhaps the 
joke may not be worth dying for." 

''All this," interrupted John Baringer testily, "is off the track, and 
really no more than so much anthropomorphism. How can a man finally 
and definitely state what are the purposes of a pack of inhuman beings? 
Go on, Will." 

"Well, to prove my new theory, 
Arold and I went out to a pub this 
morning. We chose a frightful creature that was doing some solitary 
drinking, and Arold, who's a whizzer 
of a lad at such matters, slipped some 
slow poison into his liquor. 

"We watched him die, in the 



throes of agony, which was taken by 
all the other denizens of the pub for 
simple indigestion or appendicitis. It 
took him twelve minutes to die on 
the floor. I timed him, 

fct'-pHE first three minutes he just 
*~ writhed and changed colors 
and shot off angry sparks. He didn't 
know he was dying. I refer to the 
real entity, not the human part. Obviously he could feel the pain — they 
must be able to, otherwise they'd 
give themselves away by not making 
the human body jump when it's stuck 
with a pin, or sits on a hot stove, or 
whatnot — you can see that. Well, after those three minutes, he seemed to 
wake up to the fact that this was it. 
Immediately he started to leave this 
dimension. It was the damndest sight 
I ever laid eye on. It was like a man 
trying to haul himself out of quicksand or heavy muck. The beast 
wrenched upward, and jerked back, 
and did what in any normal being 
would be called shrugging his shoulders, for all the world as if he was 
mired in something and wanted to 
get out. He had an awful time of it. 
Took him seven minutes and fifteen 
seconds. But at last he made it. 

"He oozed back and away from 
that twisting body on the floor. He 
stood there, weaving and trembling, 
and I'll bet he was sweating, too, if 
they do any such prosaic thing as 
sweat. He was entirely divorced from 
the husk — which lived, mind you, for 
more than a minute after he'd left 
it. But as soon as he'd stepped away, 



4 s 



IMAGINATION' 



he began to fade; and within three or 
four seconds he had vanished. At 
any rate, from my sight, and Arott's," 

I signaled to Alec to fill my glass. 
'•That's why I think they die when 
1 murder them: because of the lime 
it took, that critter to get loose from 
his puppet. He was scared. I could 
feel it. just as I can feel their or-, 
dinary waves of hatred and abominable passions. I could sense the 
terror that filled that usurping bastard when he knew his husk was 
dying. He was purely scared to 
hell! Why? Why, unless he knew 
he'd die in both worlds if he couldn't 
rid himself of the shell before it 
perished i 1 " 

T sighed. I w£s tired of this whole 
rotten business, and light-headed 
from the liquor on my empty stomach. I said, "It was what I'd 
wanted to discover, why we poisoned 
the thing. I'd recalled that every 
alien death I'd seen, every one JerryWolfe saw, had been sudden and 
quick. I'd realized that there were 
no data on slow deaths. I had to 
have some. I got it. And I say, 
it's two to one they die when the 
human part dies, unless they have 
plenty of time to get away from it. 
That's the reason I think they'll 
leave us voluntarily, in a terrific 
hurry, when they think there's a 
whole crew of seers after 'em. They 
don't like death any more than we 
do. Death's a queer, an uncanny 
thing. Nothing that I know in nature likes to die." 



"But how did the aliens in those 
pubs of yours learn so quickly about 
the killings, if the one who was 
killed — I mean the one --" Marion 
frowned angrily — "if the one who'd 
been relegated didn't go around behind the scenes and tell them?" 

"Oh, dear girl!" shouted Geoff. 
"Messengers! Errand boys! The 
pony express of the silver land ! " 

"That's it." said I. "That's what 
we never thought of. There must 
be plenty of them who don't have 
human bodies at all, and move freely in their own dimension. What's to 
keep them from spreading the word 
to their comrades when one dies?" 

"Will, you've hit it," the Colonel 
said. "They die here. It's probable, 
it's the best news yet, and if it's 
true, the bluff will work." 

"And now that I've lectured you 
for an hour," I said, reaching for 
Marion's hand, "let's go out to the 
best restaurant within walking distance, and have us a monstrous dinner. I could eat the proverbial 
horse." 

"There's a place within two blocks 
where they give you a delightful 
Percheron steak," said Alec. "Let's 
travel." 

CHAPTER XV 

WE ate a noble meal, sat long 
over the port, and came 
out into a deep July night canopied 
with a velvet turquoise sky in which 
the full moon was riding high. We 
began to stroll along, talking of in


BEWARE. THE USURPERS! 



49 



consequential things; at the corner 
of Baker Street we split up, the 
others heading for their own digs, 
while Alec and Marion and I went 
toward the inn. As we passed beneath a lamp, I happened to glance 
over my shoulder. I do not know to 
[his day whether I heard the footsteps, or sensed the hate-aura of the 
beast, or perhaps was warned by the 
primitive instincts that I had been 
developing through the past weeks 
of terror; whatever caused it, I 
peered back down the street, and saw 
one of the aliens following us. In 
the moonlight his human body was 
a dark form within an envelope of 
gray-blue mist. ' 

Coincidence, I told myself, angry 
to feel the sweat leap out on my face 
':ind palms. Nonetheless, I had a 
second look in a moment, just as the 
thing was walking under the lamp. 
I was rewarded by a strange sight: 
in the flood of brilliant light I saw 
the puppet-body of the man all stark 
and clear and black, with the distorted form of the usurper about it 
flaming like a gaudy, transparent 
rainbow. It was an awesome spectacle, and sent the cauld grue racing 
up my backbone. 

"Alec," I hissed from the corner 
<>l" my mouth. "I'm going to stop in 
a minute. Take a good look at the 
bloke that's following us." 

Then we halted, and to give us an 
excuse, I took out a cigarette and 
lit it. The monster passed us. I 
thought the moon-grayed protoplasm 
had a tinge of orange, which mfght 



indicate deep interest on the being's 
part, but I could not be sure. When 
it was out of hearing I said, "Anyone we know?" 

"It's .a man from the restaurant," 
said Marion. "I noticed him looking 
at us as we ate. I thought he was 
flirting with me" 

"He gave you a damn hard stare, 
Will," said Alec. 

"Jerusalem!" I growled. "May be 
a coincidence, but — he's one of 
them . . . and I let him have a ruddy 
good look at me with that match!" 

"Could he have chased you from 
up north?" 

"No, no. Nobody followed me on 
the roads I took, son. But he and 
his gang have my description." I 
threw away the cigarette angrily. 
" 'Course, I look like anybody else, 
but — " 

"You do not!" protested Marion. 
"You're very handsome, for one 
thing." 

Alec laughed briefly. "Well, maybe not that, Will, but you are individual enough to be spotted from a 
good description." 

I was astonished. I had never 
thought so. I said, "We've got to 
be careful, then. Can't let him see 
us go into The Gray Gander." 

WE walked past our inn. The 
creature had disappeared. We 
went on a short distance, and then I 
felt from the prickling of the hair 
on my neck that he was behind us 
again. 

So began a game of cat and mice; 



5° 



IMAGINATION 



which took us around corners and 
fleeing through alleys until at last 
I felt we had lost our silent pursuer, 
and with a sigh we entered our tavern. 

I was awakened next morning, as 
I slept uneasily on Alec's couch, by 
Doctor John Baringer. He was puffing a pipe and grinning, but his eyes 
were shadowed. "What's up?" I 
asked. 

"Everybody but you . . . Will, 
there's a lashing of people about in 
Baker Street. I don't know why I 
noticed 'em, especially, but they're 
there — just standing or sauntering, 
watching folk pass. It struck me 
queerly, and Alec tells me you were 
followed last night." 

I started to dress hurriedly. "Do 
they look like policemen?" 

"I wouldn't say so," John mused. 
"They're just ordinary people, men 
and women both, standing in the 
sun. I can't say I like it." 

"Nor I. Are they concentrated 
near the inn?" 

"No. Within a block or two, 
though; I didn't begin to notice them 
till I'd passed that restaurant where 
we ate last night." 

Alec came in. "You were right," 
he said to John. "By God, you were 
right! Forty or more, loitering . . . 
Will's got to get out." 

"Will's got to lie low," snapped the 
physician. "They obviously dcovt 
know just which building he's hiding 
in. He'll have to stop here until 
the fiends give up." 

"Or at least until I can slip out 



at night," I said. "I sayl Does it 
occur to you that the blighters now 
have all our descriptions? We were 
under observation last night for an 
hour or two! Call — " 

Alec was already pouncing on the 
phone. He rang through to the Albany, spoke ten words, and hung up 
with a long face. "The Colonel and 
Geoff are out. That means they're 
headed here. Too late! By the 
powers, we're dished ! " 

"Maybe not," I said hopefully. 
"It could be coincidence." 

"And I could be the Lost Dauphin 
of France," said Alec gloomily. He 
put in a call to the Gloucester Club, 
got hold of Johnson, and told him 
to stay there till he heard from us. 
Then we waited, fretting, for Geoff 
and the Colonel: who came in blithely at ten. 

1TTE sat there, staring at one an^* other morbidly, and argued 
and plotted futilely through a dragging, hot hour or two. It was dreadfully hard to decide on a plan, for 
now it was not a question of getting 
me out of London, but of finding a 
haven for all of us. 

"You've got to collect a hundred 
names, if you hope to put that affair 
of yours through," said Geoff, chewing his pipestem. "You can't do that 
sittin' here on your well-cushioned 
behind. Your chum Arold will be 
gathering his ragtag army in Brummagem, and you've got to be readyto use 'em. Look here! Why not 
we form a flying wedge and bust yeu 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



5* 



out o' here right now? If they're 
not coppers — and they didn't smell 
like the law to me when we passed 
'em — they won't stop six of us in 
broad daylight. Wouldn't dare. 
We'll take Alec's Rolls and ditch 
them. Then we'll split up out of 
London, and you can put on a false 
beard and go it alone, if you like, 
or with one of us as sidekick. How's 
that sound?" 

"I don't want to leap into it with 
both feet," I said. "Let's wait it 
out a bit. Maybe there's nothing 
in it. Maybe those people simply 
like to loiter in Baker Street. Maybe 
they're tourists, watching for Watson 
and Holmes." Dismal worries about 
the safety of Marion and my friends 
were crowding my mind, preventing 
rumination. 

So we argued until luncheon, which 
we ordered sent up to the room; 
after which John went out to reconnoiter. He was soon back. 

"Still there! There's no mistake, 
they're watching for you, Will. I 
couldn't be sure, but they may have 
noticed me, too." • He scowled. "I 
hope not . . but they're clever as sin." 

So, mainly because I was too unsure of myself to risk a bold move 
such as Geoff had suggested, we 
waited out the first half of the 
afternoon in the rooms of The Gray 
Gander. And nothing happened at all. 

CHAPTER XVI 

\ T three o'clock or thereabouts, 
there was a knock at the door. 



We all "'stared at each other with 
a wild surmise," and then Colonel 
Bedford resolutely flung it open. I 
was sitting on a footstool beside Marion's chair, in such a position that 
I could not see the stranger; who 
said in an oily, semi-cultured tone, 
"Good day, sir! I'm making a survey — " 

"Step in," said our old soldier. 
"Step right in, sir." 

"Oh, no, I shan't bother you now, 
as I ^ee you're having a bit of a 
gathering," said the unctuous voice. 
"I'll call round la — " 
* At this point the Colonel took him 
firmly by the lapels of his coat. 
Alec said afterwards that he never 
saw astonishment spread over a face 
so quickly. The man's mouth remained open in the middle of the 
word. The Colonel, a man of action 
who had been bottled up too long, 
now picked up our caller and genially 
hurled him halfway across the room. 
He slammed the door and turned the 
key. took it out of the lock and 
pocketed it with a sinister grin. 
Then he. as well as most of the 
other lads, gave me a brief inquiring 
glance. I nodded. It was one of 
the beast-folk. 

" ! Ere!" said that one, losing his 
pseudo-cultured accents. "Wot's the 
idear. sloshing a chap about!" 

"Stow it." said the Colonel. "We 
can see you, you know. No use 
keeping up a pretense, old troll!" 

Good for the Colonel! 

"That's right," said I. "For the 
record, you're a lumpy-looking piece 



52 *4JAVUJ 

of dough, greenish-orange, with a 
tinge of maroon at the moment because you're mad. Madder'n usual, 
I mean. You blighters live in a 
constant state of ire, don't you?" 
Then I bellowed. "Stop him!" for 
the brute was edging toward the 
window. Alec picked up a small 
chair and tossed it at his legs, and 
as he tripped and went to his knees, 
John tapped him lightly but sternly 
on the head with a big glass ashtray. 
The alien sat cross-legged m the 
floor and glared wickedly at us, its 
true body quaking and shivering with 
wrath. "Well?" it said, through its 
robot's mouth. "Well?" ■ 

"First off," said I, strolling over 
to it and keeping a careless attitude 
tight-drawn about a wildly beating 
heart, "you'll answer us a few questions. Then . . . we'll see." 

"I don't think," said the other. 

It was brutal, but entirely excusable. I picked him off the floor — 
he was a slight, insignificant fellow — 
and hit him squarely on the nose. 
He catapulted backwards with a 
howl. Alec thoughtfully kicked him 
in the stomach. 

"The idea, you see," I told him, 
"is to hurt you badly, but to keep 
you alive. For a while, anyway. 
And if you try that again," I roared, 
for the beast had given a kind of 
preliminary shrug of its real form in 
preparation for leaving this dimension, "if you make one more move 
like that, I'll murder you instanter — 
and you'll die, both you and that 
poor shell of yours. Won't you?" 



It nodded sullenly. Its great 
amorphous being settled down into 
itself quietly, as the human massaged 
his stomach. 

"Whereas," I went on, "if you're 
good, and answer a few queries, 
maybe I'll let you go back into the 
silver land of your own free will, 
before I slay that husk you've appropriated." 

IT watched me for a while, speculating. Then it said hoarsely, 
"Which of you is Robert Hood of 
Manchester? You?" pointing at me. 
"That's right, chum." 
"How did you find him?" asked 
Geoff. "How'd you follow him?" 

The brute turned its marionette's 
head toward our blind companion, 
sneered, and said nothing. I would 
not have this draff, this other-world 
swine, sneering at Geoff; I lashed 
out and knocked him galley- west. 
Sniveling, he crawled up onto a 
straight-backed chair and sat there, 
peering round at us until his eyes 
lit on Marion. 

"'Ere, miss," .he whined, "you 
won't see 'em beat a poor chap to 1 
death, will you? I've done you no 
harm . . ." 

I was proud of my girl then. I had 
been afraid our battering of the beast 
would set her teeth on edge; but she 
leaned forward and spat invective 
into its face. "You foul, filthy spawn 
of a Gadarene hog! I'd see you 
sliced to fringes, and laugh for joy!" I 
It sank, back and regarded the 
carpet bleakly. 



BEWARE. THE USURPERS! 



53 



"How'd you follow the Slasher?" 
asked Geoff again. 

"We all had his description. It was 
known he was in or near London. 
Then he was seen in a restaurant 
nearby. Our comrade lost him in 
Baker Street. We've been searching 
ever since." The voice was now too 
expressionless even to be called cold. 
"The others will find you. It doesn't 
matter what you do to me." 

"Aha." I snapped, "except to 
you! We can feel your fear, you 
know." It was true; he was loathsomely afraid. It gave me a. good 
feeling, one of renewed confidence, 
to realize afresh that the usurpers 
were not omnipotent godlings, but 
beings who, like any others, could 
know fear. Again I thought I saw 
the thing pull himself up surreptitiously, like a man caught in the 
mire; and again I slapped his head 
sideways till his jaws grated. He 
stopped it. 

"Next," said the Colonel, "what 
are you doing here? Your race, I 
mean. What d'you want with this 
earth? It isn't yours, damnit." 

The beast looked at him. Then it 
laughed. Somehow it managed to get 
a shade of the horror of its own being into the vocal chords of the puppet, and the laugh was icy. It did 
not answer. \ 

So the Colonel and Alec and I 
worked it over. We formed a triangle, like bullies persecuting a small 
boy, and threw it from one to the 
other, not really injuring it, but slapping its face and pirmmeling it until 



it shrieked hysterically. Then we let 
it sink to the floor, and we tried 
again. 

''What are you doing here?" 

T HAD been afraid that we would 
never find this out, or that, if 
one of them told us, we would not 
be able to understand; perhaps the 
concept, the point of view, would 
seem as wild and bizarre and incredible as they themselves. But as it 
began to speak now, I found that its 
motives, those of all its uncanny 
race, were as plain and nearly human as could be. 

"We found your land by accident," it said, nursing its head in 
its hands and speaking without inflection or accent. "I rjo not know 
how long ago it was by your standards. I think a long time. One 
of our people by a mischance of a 
kind I cannot describe in the words 
of your language was born into your 
dimension in conjunction with an 
infant of your race. When you are 
all dead, and we are the sole owners 
of both our dimensions and yours, 
and write history books here for our 
-amusement even as you have done 
for your own, that chance birth will 
be hailed as joyfully and reverently as you hail the - — discovery of 
America." 

"Dashed if I hail that reverently." 
murmured the Colonel. "Bloomin' 
colonials ... go on." 

"I wonder if you can imagine 
with what delight our people greeted 
the discovery? How far can you 



54 



IMAGINATION 



' see into our plane?" 

T SAW no harm in answering that. 

"Not far. Just a background of 
silverblue lines at an ansle." 

"That is it. A silver land." Evidently they had the same color perception as we; a surprising but not 
wholly unthinkable fact. "Nowhere 
is there color or change of form or 
beauty, save in our own bodies. Your 
earth burst on our ken with such a 
wealth of beauty and such opportunities for pleasure as we had never 
dreamt of. At once we began to infiltrate, in the guise of normal humans; at first only by the route of 
births stemming from that original 
accident, then afterwards by births 
regulated and controlled from our 
plane, by methods you could not 
comprehend, which once discovered 
freed us from the necessity of waiting endlessly to be born into a body 
that had descended from that original fortuitous 'sport.' I believe that 
in terms of your space-time continuum, this discovery of ours has been 
quite recent." 

I grew pale and cold at his words. 

For — if true — this meant that 
the beast-folk could make a wholesale invasion of our dimension at any 
time'The brute saw me, and laughed again. 

"Exactly. You are beaten. Indeed, 
you never had a chance, but now you 
have less than none. We are an advance guard, who have prepared the 
way for all the others of our race 
who will one day inhabit bodies on 



your plane. We have felt you out, 
tested your power to resist— which 
has been practically nil, my friend, 
with the exception of your own feeble 
and haphazard efforts — and spread 
out over this island until we are 
more numerous than you can imagine. But with the new method of 
coming in, there is no longer a need 
for infiltrating into high offices and 
key government positions, as we have 
so laboriously done before; for, my 
friend, D-Day is at hand." 

TIE folded his arms and chuckled 
* ■"■ once more, icily, hideously. 
"Quite soon now, we will come into 
this dimension in one great wave 
that will obliterate your race as 
though the stars had never shone 
upon it at all! Every birth in the 
world shall be one of our robots — 
and then, no matter how you struggle 
and fume and plot, your people are 
doomed! Then, no matter how hard 
you fight, you will lose, for your 
species will ultimately die of old 
age!" 

In the silence that followed this 
burst of ghoulish amusement, I heard 
someone who was going by in Baker 
Street whistling the Bronze Horse 
Overture, one of my favorites . . . 
oddly, irrelevantly, I considered it 
a good omen, and was cheered. Then 
Geoff spoke. 

"Just put my hands on his throat, 
somebody, will you?" 

"Not yet, son. Go on, ogre. Why 
will you murder a whole race? Just 
for amusement? Just so you can 



BEWARE, TP 

see colors and pretty forms?" 

"Yes. That simple a reason. And 
because we hate you, for that you 
have inherited a world of such perfections and do not appreciate it. 
To see colors, to revel in- sounds and 
scents and tastes we had never imagined; to feel the vicarious ecstasy of 
these robots in acts you take for 
granted — acts of feeding, of drinking, of viewing and touching, of sex, 
which we do not have in our proper 
forms in any fashion whatever. We 
envy you, and hate you. We want 
your world, even if we must take its 
tactile delights vicariously — which 
is not so second-best as it sounds, 
for these robots are in a sense ourselves as much as our own bodies 
are. You who are born to this wondrousness — can you claim you properly appreciate it? Or will you admit that you have held it lightly and 
unthinkingly for as many generations 
as you can count?" 

"Well, I'll be a devaluated pound," 
gasped Alec. "Will you listen to the 
conceited son-of-a-bitch!" 

"Another question," I said to the 
beast. "How do —" 

It was done almost before I could 
blink. He made a sudden break for 
the windows, one arm raised to smash 
the glass so that he could shout down 
to the street. Two feet short of his 
goal he ran into Alec's good right 
hnnd, swung round like the head of 
a short-hafted axe. He dropped with 
a crash. 

"Mo use inspecting the body," I 
said. "His real shape blew up like 



; USURPERS! 55 

a paper bag and went blam. I guess 
you broke his neck. He's dead." 

Geoff stood up and said matter-offactly, "Well, we'd best be going, 
what? If someone will just find my 
pipe for me, I'm ready." 

"Wait till I toss a few things into 
my purse," said Marion. "Can't 
expect a gal to flee without a lipstick, 
can you?" 

I stared at Alec, who nodded. It 
was time for us to be on the wing. 

CHAPTER XVII 

\ FTER three or four minutes of 
stuffing useful things into our 
pockets and a couple of overnight 
bags, we went downstairs to the 
ground floor; turning toward the 
back door, we ran smack into a sentinel of the usurpers. He wavered, 
then stepped aside as we strode toward him. I did not want to make 
a scene in The Gander, so waited 
until we stood in the lane behind the 
inn before I told them we had been 
seen. 

"Never thought we wouldn't be," 
said the Colonel. "Where's the garage, Alec?" 

It was directly opposite the rear 
of the inn. We went in and, unmolested, packed ourselves into the great 
red Rolls. "Whither?" said I, taking over the wheel. 

"The Albany. I've guns there 
we'll need before we're much older." 

"Then to the Gloucester," said 
Alec, "for Johnson." 

I swung out into the lane and 



5 6 I MAG IN 

nearly ran down an alien, who leaped 
squeaking out of the way. Now 
they knew what our car looked like. 
I didn't care. We seemed to be in 
over our heads already. 

"Do you know that in an hour 
or two we'll be much-wanted fugitives from the horrid vengeance of 
Scotland Yard?" I asked as we reared downtown. "We left a conpse on 
the floor of Alec's sitting room, with 
enough of our gear lying around to 
identify us all. My God! We're 
acting like a pack of heedless cretins. We should have stayed and 
made a plan." 

''Hark to the Manchester Slasher! " 
shouted Geoff. "Why, my dear old 
cloth-head, the late lamented's buddies would have been on us in force 
in less than two ticks. Have you forgotten that somewhere in their dimension, at a spot approximating the 
location of Alec's flat, there's a dead 
beast-critter? Their pony express 
would ha' found him first thing. We 
had to run. And I didn't hear you 
objectin', when we snatched up Marion's intimate garments and Alec's 
dirty socks, to doing a bunk." 

"My mind seems to be running ten 
minutes behind time," I said, skirting a corner and just missing a little 
old lady. 

"Also there's this," put in the doctor. "We could never have gotten 
rid of the body, but they could, and 
I believe they will. They know now 
there's at least half a dozen- of us in 
this business. Do you think they'll 
want us brought to trial? Granted 



AT ION 

that our story would sound like half 
a ton of wet fish . . . would they want 
it spread on the front pages? After 
all, they can tell by our looks we're 
solid citizens. We might get some 
credence from the police ■ — the last 
thing they would want. I think 
they'll quietly haul away that body, 
and set out on our trail by themselves. The time for worrying about 
the law is over, as I see it. There's 
too many of us. It wouldn't be like 
hauling up just one ripper with a 
mad story; it would mean publicity 
in every paper in Christendom — 
will they risk that?" 

"Good for you, John," I said. 
"You're right. It's them and us 
now." 

\X7"E drew up at the Albany. Leav" * ing Geoff and Marion in the 
car, the four of us hurried to the 
Colonel's rooms and began a systematic collection of weapons, even 
including a set of ancient K-hattar 
daggers and a couple of pig-sticking 
spears which were part of a collection 
Bedford had made in India. Into 
a Gladstone we stuffed bottles of 
brandy and whisky, a first aid kit, 
such items of clothing as we'd need 
in our flight, and what looked like 
seven years' supply of ammunition. 
Down again and through the lobby 
we went, trying to look like eccentrics who habitually carried sporting 
rifles, elephant guns and pig-sticking 
lances under our arms when we ambled through the city; piled the stuff 
onto the floor of the tonneau, wedged 



BEWARE. THE USURPERS! 



57 



in once more, ran down to the Gloucester to get Sergeant Johnson, and 
took the road out of London to the 
east. As the sun was setting we left 
the last suburb behind, and came to 
the quiet open countryside. 

"Where now?" I asked. 

"The castle?" suggested Geoff. 
Tt's as good a hideout as any." 

So. after a vote, we struck out 
for Exeter Castle. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

TT was dark when we passed through 
* Exeter Parva. So far as we 
could tell, there had been no pursuit; 
nevertheless I felt nervous and on 
edge, remembering what titanic forces were arrayed against us. 

The elms and oaks and chestnuts 
whispered among themselves as we 
unloaded our gear and hauled it 
through the great iron-banded door 
to stack it in the empty hall. I was 
standing in the doorway looking at 
I he dark groves and the moors beyond, when Marion touched my arm. 

"Don't jump like that, boy! I 
only wanted to ask what you're gazing at so fiercely." 

"The trees. They're like so many 
ghosts . . . darling, I feel as though 
we'd walked into the dim and haunted past. This might be Glamis 
('astle itself." 

She seized my hand and for the 
first time in the whole adventure 
' knew she was afraid. "I think it's 
a trap," she said. "Oh, Will. I 



can't say anything to the others — 
after all, there's nowhere else to go 
— but I don't like this place!" 

"It's not what you'd call cheerful." 

"It's a great box propped up with 
bait under it, and now that we've 
walked under it, it's going to drop 
over us. Don't listen. I'm only 
scared. That awful man, this afternoon, telling us their damnable plan 
in that cool way — I feel like Peter 
Rabbit, nibbling on a cabbage leaf 
while the farmer cocks his shotgun." 

"Pass me one of those cabbage 
leaves, Pete," I said. "I'm hungry!" 
Which set her giggling, and broke the 
evil spell. 

Lugging our weapons and bags, we 
followed the Colonel up the big 
curved staircase and down the dank 
passage to our old quarters. We lit 
a lamp or two; the familiar furniture 
sprang out of darkness, and my gaze 
fell first on the table to which the 
Tower musket had once beep clamped. That seemed half a century 
ago. I dropped my pig-stickers and 
rifles on the table. "Let's hustle up 
some food." 

"It's stacked in the next room." 
said the Colonel, who had been in 
charge of our stores during the first 
residence here. "There's enough for 
about three weeks." 

"I'll get dinner," said Marion. 

"I'll go down to the wine bins and 
bring up a few bottles," said Johnson. Luckily, Geoff's ancestors had 
laid down a noble cellar full of the 
finest potables. 



5S 



IMAGINATION 



WE all began bustling around, 
Alec dusting, Marion clinking 
dishes in our makeshift kitchen, the 
doctor arranging chairs about the 
table, the Colonel and T stacking 
weapons against the walls, and Geoff 
lounging in an armchair whistling 
a militant tune. We grew quite gay, 
laughing and chattering, until old 
Johnson came in with bis pale face 
grown chalky. The Cotonel saw him 
first. 

"For God's sake, man, what is it?" 

Johnson sat down heavily, by 
which sign I knew he was terribly 
upset, for he would never sit when 
the rest of us were standing. He 
passed a hand over his eyes. "I was 
going through the hall - downstairs, 
that is — and suddenly I felt as 
though someone were observing me. 
You know the sensation, sir?" 

"Yes. yes." 

"Well, I looked, about, and saw 
nothing, at first, so thinking it was 
my nerves, I went on to the cellars, 
f chose two bottles of wine and a 
good brandy — " he held them out 
and automatically I took them — 
•'and came up again. Just as I 
stepped through the entrance to the 
cellars, I happened to glance toward 
the front door. There, looking in at 
me through the dirty glass of the 
window beside it, was a face. I — I 
can't tell you what a turn it gave 
me. The eyes seemed almost to glow, 
you know, sir. It was horrible." 

Into the silence that followed Geoff 
said, "We've had a ghost here for ten 
generations, Johnson. The Stalking 



Man, they call him. I used to see 
him frequently when I was a nipper. 
He's supposed to walk on the south 
terrace between sundown and cockcrow." 

Johnson stared wildly at him as 
though Geoff had sprouted two heads. 
"No, no sir," he said. "This wasn't 
-a man. It was a woman." 

"What happened next?" barked 
the Colonel. 

"Well, sir, I'm afraid I was so 
startled that I stepped back into the 
entrance-way; and when I had conquered my aversion and returned, 
she was gone. I didn't go and look 
out the window as I should. I fear 
I was badly rattled. I came straight 
upstairs." 

You might have sliced the appre- , 
hension in that room with a blunt 
knife. Nobody moved, except to turn 
their heads to one another with widened eyes. [ wet my lips then. 

"The barmaid from Exeter Parva," 
I said. "They've identified Geoff 
from something he left behind, and 
sent the word down here to check 
on the castle. It would occur to 
them at once, when they knew about 
Geoff, that we might make for such 
a sanctuary. They've sent the word 
to that fearful green-horned octopus, 
and it's hared out here to investigate. 
We're pinpointed now, lads, like a 
covey of quail on an open marsh." 

Colonel Bedford was holding a 
Mannlicher. He opened the bolt 
with a snap. "Load up, my boys," 
he said. "Load 'em all up, and then 
let's have some food. The con


BEWARE, TH 

demned may as well eat a hearty 
meal.' 

CHAPTER XIX 

Ol'RPRISINGLY, we all slept very 
^ well that night. Each of us 
(save Geoff and Marion) took an 
hour and a half at sentry-go, roaming through the monstrous old place 
peering out of windows and jumping 
at every creak; but before and after 
my own tour of duty I slept dreamlessly and comfortably, and found 
in the morning that the others had 
done likewise. We foregathered at 
the breakfast table, which was placed 
in the center of a broad cheerful 
lieam of sunlight that lanced down 
ih rough age-old panes of glass, and 
we ate tinned meat and biscuits with 
honey and mugs of well-creamed 
coffee, with as excellent appetites as 
<>ne could wish for. 

When the meal was done, Johnson 
picked up one of the long pig-sticking 
spears and hefted it, trying the balance. 

'Going to stab us a shoat, Serjeant?" asked Alec. 

*'Xo sir. It's that T can't abide 
lirearms, while fifty years ago I was 
rather good with one of these, if I 
may say so without boasting. A 
"umber of us used to go out on the 
veld and try our luck at riding down 
small antelope, on days when the 
Boers left us alone, you know, sir. 
* think I could still wield one with 
the best of you young 'uns — begging 
your pardon, I'm sure, sir." 



I USURPERS! 59 

The Colonel bounced out of his 
chair. "Line up for weapons issue," 
he cried. "Who's tough enough to 
handle my elephant gun?" 

"Will Chester," said Marion, with 
a grim nod. 

I was then presented with the 
heaviest piece of Bedford's artillery 
and two pocketfuls of shells. Doctor 
John drew the Mannlicher and the 
Colonel himself took a murderous 
old 450-400 with which he'd once 
hunted big game. Marion had a 
light sporting rifle. Geoff and Alec, 
who styled themselves the Hamstrung 
Brigade, could obviously not handle 
rifles; but Alec thrust two Colt .45s 
through his belt, and Geoff was allowed to wear a long hunting knife — 
"just in case." The Colonel outfitted 
each of us others with one or two 
revolvers apiece, and we parceled out 
plenty of ammunition. Even Johnson had to add a .22 target pistol to 
his brace of spears. 

"M 0W then '" said Colonel Bedford, "here's how I see it. 
We're in as good a place as any for 
hanging on: the place is unburnable, 
and we can hold it against successive 
waves — first fighting on the ground 
floor, then retreating to this one, hall 
by hall and room by room, and finally when things really grow hot we 
can get onto the roof and make a 
fight there. We're far enough away 
from any settlement that the noise 
of a battle won't carry except by 
a freak of the wind. We can have a 
nice private war." 



■1 



IMAGINATION 



60 

"But," interrupted Marion, "do 
we want a nice private war? I think 
we should want publicity for it. because they don't. D'yoti see? I'm 
for dragging the whole mess into the 
open." 

"And end in a loony bin," said 
Alec. "No, the Colonel's right as 
far as he goes: this, is the place to 
make a stand, and since we know we 
can't escape to anywhere in this island that'll be safe, we may as well 
stop here to make our fight. They 
aren't going to bring down a blooming brigade to eliminate us, mind 
you; they'll think, "Ha, there's only 
seven, we'll just send round a score 
or so to pip 'em.' They don't know 
we've an arsenal here." 

"And meanwhile," said Geoff excitedly, waving his pipe, "Arold 
Smiff in Birmingham will be gathering his crew. If we give him — how 
long would you say, Will?" 

"Another couple of days, maybe. 
He's got to treat each of those thugs 
to a drink or two and sound him out 
before he hires him. It will take a 
few days. Besides, he thinks he's 
got a week at least. I'm supposed 
to be meandering over England getting names. And I'm afraid that 
scheme's out. too." 

"P'raps, p raps . . . well, say we 
give Arold a couple of days, and then 
phone him — from Exeter Parva, 
let's say - — to bring his outlaws down 
here a-whoopin' and a-cussin' in a 
bunch. How's that? They roar in, 
mop up practically all the usurpers 
in sight, then we catch a few of the 



aliens and tell 'em. "This is a sample. 
We can see you. so there'.- no use 
your sticking. Scram!' How's that?" 

"Dandy, dandy. Except tor the 
little matter of getting out of here 
to phone Arold. What if we're surrounded?" 

"Oh, hell's tinkling bells! Where's 
your red Injun blood? But if you 
like, one of us can leave now. before 
they arrive. He can contact Arold, 
have him hurry it up. and in a day 
or two catch the besiegers in the 
rear." Geoff was jubilant, and some 
of his fervor rubbed off on me. I 
said. "Right! We'll draw straws.'" 

"You're the logical choice. Will." 
said Alec. "You know this Smith, 
after all. -The plan is your pigeon. 
You go." 

The Colonel was standing by the 
window, glancing out now and again 
as we talked. He said, "One minute chaps. Come here." 

We crowded to the window. He 
pointed down to the drive. Shortly 
we saw a man run stooping across 
an open space in the old stone balustrade. The substance of the alien 
body seemed to float about him like 
a flimsy cloak of many colors. 

"They're all along the front." said 
Bedford. "If they've covered the 
back, lads — it's a bit late for our 
emissary to think of leaving." 

We spread out over the house, 
peering cautiously out of windows at 
front and back and sides. Then we 
gathered in the upper hall, as disconsolate a band of crusaders as ever.j 
eyed each other with ..grim scowls. J 



BEWARE. THE USURPERS! 



We were entirely surrounded. The 
siege was on. 

CHAPTER XX 

ATARION and the doctor roamed 
* the upper floor, watching developments from the windows; when 
the first rush came, they were to fire 
down on the enemies' heads. Geoff 
was ensconced behind an overturned 
table at the head of the great staircase, so he could at least hear everything that occurred. Alec, Johnson, 
the Colonel and I were the ground 
floor garrison; we bolted off the east 
and west wings entirely, barricading 
the doors thereto with piles of lumber from the cellars so that if the 
aliens broke into those sections of 
the castle, it would avail them little. 
We had already carried a dozen armloads of bottles up to our quarters 
from the bins below us, and there 
seemed little we could do now but 
wait, there in that echoing empty 
hall, until our foe took the initiative. 
This happened about eleven o'clock 
that morning. 

We heard Marion's warning cry, 
and instantly sprang to our feet (we 
had each been sitting below a window, trying to relax) and looked out. 
f was at the front of the house with 
Alec. I saw some fifteen or eighteen 
of the monstrous beast-folk come 
lumbering across the open spaces between the house and the drive. I 
smashed a pane of glass in the mullioned window with my elephant 
gun and let fly at the foremost sur


per. He caught the charge right in 
the belly, and went heels-over-head 
backward to lie in a tangle of dark 
limbs and body, above which the 
mortally wounded alien grew pale 
and flickered and went out with a 
sputter. I let off the second barrel at 
another and reloaded hastily, thanking the powers that I'd taken this 
great shoulder-punishing gun rather 
than one of the lighter and less effective rifles; its load would stop a 
man even if the wound was not mortal, and I with my double vision was 
handicapped above my friends. It 
was often difficult for me to locate 
the vital points in a running puppet, 
when the body about him was distending and wavering through halfa-dozen horrible shapes. 

I stopped another pair of them in 
as many tf seconds, then drew my two 
revolvers and began to fire first one 
and then the other, ambidextrously, 
like Wild Bill Hickock in the films. 
I don't know how many shots I 
wasted, but it was a bloody barrage. 

npHAT first charge lasted no more 
■*■ than three minutes. I should 
judge. They were taken quite by 
surprise, and comparing notes after, 
we discovered that they had not 
even bothered to have their own 
guns drawn when they began their 
attack. They must have pictured 
us crouching in terror, with bottles 
and chair legs for* weapons. 

Marion came to the head of the 
stairs and called to us. We assured 
her of our safety; Geoff was growl


62 



IMAGINATION 



ing to himself over not being able 
t# take a hand in the sport. Then 
the second wave came at us. 

This time they were more cautious, and had automatics and target 
pistols in their hands. We took toll 
of them with our rifles and then 
with our handguns; when they withdrew again, they left at least a score 
of dead and dying husks on the 
ground around our fortress. 

Just to show them that we were 
the seers they thought us, and also 
to decimate the ranks of the ungodly, 
I picked off all those wounded robots 
whose tenants were vacating, dashing 
back and forth from window to window to give the effect of half a dozen 
sharpshooters. I think that gave 
them pause, for nothing else happened until well into the afternoon. 

Alec had a grazed cheek from 
which the blood was seeping, and 
Johnson had been cut on the shoulder by flying glass, but otherwise 
we were still intact. 

"What do they look like?" I asked 
Alec, as we stood together watching 
the deserted drive. "I can't tell 
much from those crumpled corpses, 
and you know they're so many dim 
shadows in misshapen sheaths of unearthly coloring to me when they're 
alive." 

"Oh, they're — normal. People 
you'd see anywhere, and never notice 
'em. Small business men, maybe, 
or out-of-work clerks. Nondescript. 
Certainly they're not seasoned fighters." 

"It's occurred to me that a lot of 



them must have got out of joining 
in the late world fracas, one way or 
another; through their bigwigs, you 
know. I doubt they'd care to go 
marching off to war in one of our 
little two-toil three-dimensional fracases, and I'll bet their ranks were 
full of shirkers and slackers and 
dodgers and pseudo-conchies. So 
maybe they have no experienced 
fighters! " 

"Those out there aren't," agreed 
Alec. "What duffers they looked, 
trotting up to our guns!" 

npHERE was one more attack , 
about four o'clock. This was 
a more carefully planned affair, and 
by utilizing all the cover they could, 
and coming in from all directions, 
they managed to get right up to 
the windows. When they did we 
retreated to the center of the hall; 
the windows framed them into perfect targets, and after losing a dozen 
or more they retreated in their turn, 
for the last time that day. 

At dusk we deserted the ground 
floor and, barricading the stairs as 
effectively as we could, took up our 
posts on the upper floor. Sentryduty was apportioned, and after a 
good meal and an hour of desultory 
talking we lay down to sleep as much 
' of the night through as the usurpers 
would allow. 

My watch was from three to fourthirty. I was prowling around the 
halls, peering into each room as I 
passed, when above the night noises 
and the snoring of the Colonel I 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



thought I heard an ominous creaking. On tiptoe I went down the hall, 
past the stairwell that went down into sinister blackness, and fetched up 
some yards thereafter before a gaping square hole in "the wall of the 
passageway. What the devil . . .! 
1 turned the beam of my electric 
torch into it. It was another staircase, narrow and steep, which I had 
not known existed. Without hesitation I started down its creaky old 
treads. The air was musty and 
smelled of a thousand generations 
of mice. More through my skin 
than my ears I got the impression 
that someone was descending these 
secret stairs in advance of me. 

T drew out one of my guns, with 
a childlike thrilling of my pulse, and 
muffling the torch's light with the 
fingers of my left hand so that only 
a thin streak or two of brightness 
preceded my searching feet, I went 
down. 

The square door at the bottom 
was standing wide. Slipping through 
it, with the torch now dark, I stood 
still and listened. 

^pHE moon's rays patterned the 
* cold floor under the windows, 
and across one of them I thought I 
saw a shadow glide. I swiveled my 
head quickly. Perhaps I had been 
mistaken. There was nothing there. 
I he end of the room in which was 
cradled the massive black fireplace 
Jay in impenetrable gloom. Watching this, I felt the skin of my neck 
creep and the hair bristle . . . 



Something had moved in that 
murk, I could swear it. Something" 
bigger and more ponderous than a 
body. I could not pin down the 
exact analogy I groped for: it was 
as if ... as if the wall had suddenly advanced toward me, and then 
sunk back again. I husked through 
a dry throat. This would not do. 
Despite the usurpers without, I had 
to risk a light. 

I shot the beam of the torch across 
the wall from corner to corner. 
Nothing moved. T went to the cold 
fireplace — feeling the eyes of a 
multitude of ghosts upon me as T 
moved — and ran the flash over it. 
I even knelt and peered up the gut of 
the chimney. Nothing. I found myself shuddering. One more sweep 
of the torch around the vault of the 
hall, and then I ran (I admit it freely) for the secret door. Pulling it 
to behind me, I raced up the narrow 
steps and with pounding heart slammed the upper one also. I saw then 
that it was a swinging panel, that 
looked much like any one of the 
other panels in the hall. This secret must be a relic of the bad old 
days, when Exeter Castle was young 
and the nobility was riddled with 
treachery, intrigue, and evil. 

After two minutes of cogitation, 1 
went and aroused Colonel Bedford. 
He listened to my tale in silence. 
Then, "This might be serious," he 
said. "Let's wake the others." 

We did, and in the short time 
before the early dawn of summer 
gilded the east windows, we combed 



6 4 IMAGD 

that castle from roof to cellars; but 
the incredible fact which we had 
uncovered remained, not to be dispelled or explained by any means in 
our power. 

Geoff Exeter, our poor gallant 
blind Geoff, had disappeared . . . 

CHAPTER XXI 

I truly believe that tJiat day was 
the longest and worst I ever 
managed to live through. 
. The aliens who ringed the castle 
did not attack in force; but they 
maintained a kind of sullen, dangerous watchfulness over the place, and 
every time one of us showed himself at a window, a rifle cracked and 
a slug spread itself on a wall nearby 
or buried itself in the ceiling above 
him. 

"What are they doing?" Marion 
asked me again and again. "Why 
are they waiting?" And I could 
not tell her. 

The night came, but our sleep 
was no more than an occasional 
leaden doze which left us unrefreshed, 
with gummy aching eyes and minds 
gnawed by worry. 

Where in hell was Geoff? 

Had they slipped in and abducted 
him, right out from beneath our 
noses? Hardly. The doors and 
windows were still bolted. 

Had he left of his own free will? 
And if so, how? And why? 

"The place is haunted," Alec had 
said somberly at dinner; and in my 
heart I half agreed with him. 



,'ATION" 

That night we had renewed our 
barricades at the head of the stairs, 
and kept our watches as before. 
About six in the morning I was 
starting to tear down the lumber 
once more when a hand w.as laid on 
my arm. and the Colonel, his face 
gray and drawn, said, "Leave 'em, 
bov." 

"Why?" 

"Come and look out the window. 
They've gathered. There must be 
two hundred if there's a one. We 
can't hold that great hall against 
them when they come. We've got 
to make a stand up here." 

It was true. The groves and the 
unkempt lawns swarmed with them, 
their loathsome bodies all gay and 
shining in the sunlight. 

"Still clerks and shopkeepers?" I 
asked. 

"No, this is a rather less appetizing lot. More like the mugs you 
were always spying on in pubs," 
said Alec. "They look — well, 
pretty competent." 

"We'll give them a reception," 
said the Colonel grimly. "Spread 
out, front and back, and fire into 
the brown of 'em when I give the 
word. Empty your rifles and then 
your revolvers as fast as you can; the 
fools are bunched so that we can't 
miss. There's not a military man 
in the lot, I'll be bound." 

I went to the farthest corner of the 
east wing, many rooms away 
from our G.H.Q. by the main stairwell; I swung open a window as 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



65 



gently as possible, then waited for 
the Colonel's signal. I imagined he 
would fire his 450-400. I was forgetting that for development of the 
lungs there's nothing to compare 
with half a lifetime of commanding 
the sepoys of India. To say merely 
that he shouted "Fire!" in a stentorian voice is like saying that the 
Last Trump will be rather loud. 
His bellow rattled the beams of oak 
in their stone sockets. Even the 
aliens on the lawns turned to look 
in his direction. 

I thrust out the muzzle of mv 
pachyderm blaster and let it speak 
twice in rapid fire: dropped it, threw 
down on the milling crew with my 
two Colts, and picked off three more 
usurpers before they could gather 
their wits and make for the groves. 
When the guns were empty I counted 
.seven bodies. If my friends had had 
as good luck, I thought exultantly, 
the foe had lost more than thirty 
of their number! I found subsequently that our total for the surprise attack was twenty-four or -five. 

This decimation must have shaken 
them to their toes, for the morning 
wore on and no assault came. 

Johnson brought each of us a bowl 
<>f soup and a plate of biscuits at 
noon. Staying at my post in the 
eastern corffer. I watched the trees 
and thought of Geoff Exeter. 

Could that have been Geoff whom 
I followed down the secret stair two 
nights since? Certainly it was not 
one of them; and Geoff of all people 
*'ou!d have known of its existence, 



for he had spent his childhood here 
in the castle. If it was him, where 
had he gone from the great hall? 
And what had moved in the black 
shadows of the fireplace? Had Geoff 
been spirited away by ghosts? I 
could credit anything, after these 
past months of hellish experience. 

As I was chewing my last biscuit, 
firing broke out at the front of the 
castle; first a single shot or two, 
then heavy volleys, as though all my 
friends were engaged in it. I shifted 
from foot to foot, wondering what 
to do. Finally, after a searching look 
at the groves and lawns where nothing moved, I ran for the hallway. 

"JVyT ARION and Alec were shooting 
from the windows of our sitting room. I dashed in, said foolishly, "What is it, an attack?" and 
looking out saw line after line of 
the beast-folk advancing rapidly on 
the castle, their numbers not bunched 
this time but spread out so that 
they presented more difficult targets. 
I judged them to be at least two 
hundred and fifty strong. "S'hoot 
low," I snapped, even as I brought 
the elephant gun to bear on a blue 
octopus-like brute and sent him 
sprawling. " Remember you're aiming downhill." 

The thunder of "a battering-ram 
smiting at the big door seemed to 
jar the floor beneath our feet. It 
ceased in a moment, and I heard 
the Colonel bawl, "They're in! 
Come to the stairs!" 

We gathered there behind our 



66 



IMAGINATION 



lumber-and-furniture barricade, six 
against an army. We did not say 
anything coherent, I believe, but 
continually shouting encouraging 
noises to one another, we fired and 
fired until our weapons grew hot to 
the touch. The beasts were thronging the hall below us, converging on 
the stairs and tearing at the mass 
of impeding obstacles which the 
Colonel and John had strewn down 
the length of the steps that morning. 
It was at once a hideous and a 
thrilling sight. The monsters were 
swarming up at us, a foot at a time, 
clawing at planks and barrels and 
broken chairs, hurling them back 
onto their comrades' heads; none of 
them seemed to be firing at us, 
though in the heat of battle I may 
not have noticed if they had. It 
looked to me as if they were too 
infuriated to bother with guns. Like 
so many enraged baboons, they 
wanted to get at us and tear us to 
bloody tatters with their hands and 
teeth alone. As they fought upward, 
those in the fore exploded soundlessly, horribly, and quickly, like 
multicolored bags of gaudy rubber 
stabbed with sharp knives, leaving 
their dead robots to roll and flounder 
to the bottom again. I had run out 
of ammo for the big gun; howling 
with a kind of mad glee, I blazed 
away into the thick of them with 
my twin Colts, putting my bullets 
into the dark human forms within the 
hybrid monsters. The castle rocked 
and echoed with the fury of the 
fight. Cordite and spilt blood reek


ed in my nostrils. One of the devils, 
a rhinocerous -brute with a towering 
ivory-tinted "horn" that wobbled as 
he moved, came scrambling on all 
fours up over the mess of wreckage 
toward us; I took him for my very 
own, waiting until he was within a 
yard of me and then presenting 
both my revolvers to his face and 
pulling the triggers. 

My guns were empty! 

TjEFORE I could recover from my 
surprise, he had gathered himself — he must have been an especially athletic fellow — and leaped 
straight for me. I went down under his weight, flailing my arms 
wildly. I was unprepared for a 
scuffle and for a few seconds could 
do nothing to defend myself properly. Before I had rallied, the 
body of the creature went limp and 
sagged down onto me, while his true 
form flickered away into nothingness. I struggled out from under him 
to see old Johnson pulling back a 
bloodied pig-sticker. He grinned at 
me complacently. "Still a trace of 
the old skill left, Mister Chester!" 

They were the last words he ever 
spoke. A volley crashed out below 
us, and he swayed and fell at full 
length, like an ancient tree cut at 
the roots. I knelt over ben, and saw 
that he was dead. 

I peered over the railing, while 
feverishly loading my guns, and saw 
that we were nearly done; for the 
aliens, sacrificing scores of their men 
in that wild attack, had almost clear


BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



ed the staircase. Now they were 
pulling back the corpses and the last 
of the impeding furniture, and only 
our barricade at the top remained 
between them and our garrison of 
five. Any of them who were in good 
shape and in the least degree agile 
could clear this barrier with ease. I 
knew we were almost done. 

Now there occurred one of those 
queer, inexplicable pauses that come 
in the thick of the wildest battles, 
when the men of both sides seem to 
draw back an imperceptible inch or 
two, cease firing and yelling, suck 
in a deep swift breath, and tauten 
their muscles for a final foray or a 
last furious defense. The usurpers 
in the hall and on the stairs fell 
silent as though by prearrangement; 
while we humans, as it chanced, 
were all either loading or taking careful sights over our gun barrels. 

And in that comparative silence, 
broken only by the susurrus of heavy 
breathing, we all suddenly pricked 
up our ears and listened. The pause 
lengthened, by a sort of unspoken 
mutual agreement between the two 
parties. I looked at the Colonel, and 
he gestured imperiously toward the 
nearest room that faced on the drive. 
I flew into it, making for a window. 

Because there had come to us the 
sound of many automobiles, driven 
at high speed down the country lane 
that led to Exeter Castle. 

CHAPTER XXII 

TJEHIND me I heard firing start 
up again, though not with any 



great volume. Below me as I leaned 
out of the window I saw a number 
of usurpers come running out of the 
broken door to see what was happening, then turn and go in again. My 
attention was not on them however, 
but on the drive, where the first of 
a line of motors had already pulled 
up and stopped. 

It was an old pre-war sedan. Its 
doors opened and six or seven men 
boiled out of it, staring at the castle 
and shouting as they moved. 

Men! Not were-folk, not monsters, but men! 

Had the sound of our fight carried 
to Exeter Parva? No, it could never 
produce these fifteen autos, decrepit 
though most of them were. Exeter 
Parva ran more to hay wagons. 

Then the riddle was solved. The 
second car, a battered Bentley, halted, and out of the front seat climbed 
a man I would have recognized on 
a dark night in a cellar. 

Dear old drunken, amoral, faithful 
Arold Smiff! Smiff to the rescue! 

"At 'em, Arold!" I whooped. "Inside, son!" 

He stared up at me, then waved 
joyfully. "General! Hoy, General! 
Gawddam!" He motioned fiercely 
to his henchmen. "Come on, you 
one-legged paralyzed barstids, earn 
your wack! Out arms and forrard!" 

Great God, did ever such a motley 
army advance on such an unearthly 
enemy? It was like the thieves of 
Paris defending their city against 
Burgundy . . . had that kingdom 
recruited its army from the swamps 



68 



IMAGINATION 



of Hell. From the line of cars 
swarmed a gang of shabby, dirty, 
swearing men. as tough and evil looking a mob as ever trod the soil of 
England. Spawned in the slums 
and reared on violence, every one 
of them! Muggers, knifers. coshers, 
men with scarred faces and broken 
teeth, men fitting brass knuckles on 
their fists as they came, men sliding 
straight razors (the favorite weapon 
of our underworld) from their frayed 
sleeves and clicking open big clasp 
knives, men drawing automatics for 
which you could have staked your 
life they had no permits, men who 
were scarcely more than wild boys 
and men who had grown gray and 
bald in crime; at once as undisciplinable and as effective a fighting troop 
as one could find anywhere. I think 
I screamed encouragement to them 
as they came, for I was half-hysterical with relief. Arold Smiff. miraculously, had come in time. 

\ S they ran toward the castle I 
ducked inside and went to my 
friends, loading my guns as I moved. 
The aliens were still attacking up 
the stairs, but now they wavered as 
the vanguard of the thugs struck 
them from behind. All roaring hell 
broke loose. 

I saw plenty of action in the last 
war; I saw the slaughter of the Normandy beaches and the havoc 
wrought through France, Germany, 
and several other countries; but the 
goriest brawl I ever laid eye on was 
the fight at Exeter Castle between 



Arold Snuff's hundred criminals and 
the motley hordes of the silver land. 

We were outnumbered, at the start, 
nearly two to one. But our crooks 
were professional killers, used to the 
mechanics of murder, and the usurpers were not. The hall was jammed from wall to wall with a struggling, howling, thrashing jam of 
fighters, so that often when a man 
was killed his body could not fall; 
conditions were thus perfect for our 
knifers and gougers. throttling experts and razormen. 

The aliens for the most part had 
turned from us to engage this new 
menace. We tore away our barricade 
and charged down to mix it with 
them. I caught a glimpse of Arold 
before I struck the level. He had 
an automatic in his right hand and 
in his left, one of those fearsome 
weapons used by the gangs in their 
private wars, called a "moley" — - a 
large potato, stuck half-full of safety 
razor blades. When pressed against 
the face and twisted, it made a grisly 
instrument of torture, mutilation, and 
often death. I grimaced. These were 
wicked men who had come to our 
rescue. 

With our heavy Colts we blasted 
back the beast-men till we had 
cleared a space at the foot of the 
stairs; standing shoulder to shoulder, 
we bellowed, "Rally! To us, to us, 
rally round!" and many of the rogues 
fought through the press to join us, 
so that shortly we were the nucleus 
of the battle. Bedford led a charge 
that smashed the center of the en


BEWARE. THE USURPERS! 



emy line and crumpled up the right 
wing as it returned. I saw John 
Baringer go down from a blow on the 
head; beat my way to him and 
dragged him to the relative safety of 
the big fireplace. 

T was entirely out of ammunition 
by then. Sticking the pistols in 
my belt for last-ditch use as clubs, I 
grappled with the human husk of a 
big sprawling beetle-beast, throttled 
him, took away a butcher's cleaver 
he was utilizing, brained him with it 
and waded into the combat once 
more. I was splashed with gore 
from boots to hair, my left arm was 
numb from a crack on the elbow, 
I was whooping like a maniac, and 
felt myself supremely happy. I 
would not have been anywhere else 
for ten thousand pounds sterling. 

I found myself next to Arold. I 
hugged him, and his muddy-crimson 
eyes squeezed up with a grin. "General! Bloody fine scrim!" 

"How did you know to come 
here?" I yelled at him; but the tides 
of battle flung us apart before he 
could answer. 1 knew, though. Nobody in the world but Geoff could 
have brought him. 

I found myself engaged with a 
razorman of our own forces, and had 
to explain who I was, in exceedingly 
rapid speech. Then I went hunting 
for the Colonel, and found him dripping blood (someone else's) by the 
stairs. Now the fight had become 
a massacre, and the aliens, fleeing, 
found a heavy guard on the door 



and no sanctuary anywhere short of 
the grave. "Colonel," I screeched in 
his ear, "your voice will carry over 
this hubbub. Go up the stairs a bit 
— tell 'em to- leave a few alive — 
got - to parley! " 

He clumped up the steps, and his 
bull : s roar quelled the racket like 
thunder drowning out a kindergarten 
choir. The thugs turned astonished 
eyes upward, and the few usurpers 
still on their feet shrank together in 
a corner. For one brief instant I felt 
pity for them. Then I remembered 
their plot to take over our world . . . 

"That's enough," the Colonel was 
saying. "Collect the remaining enemies and bring 'em here, lads." 

The "lads" did so. Alec and I 
went up the dozen steps to join the 
Colonel, Marion ran down from the 
upper floor, and Arold Smiff pushed 
through his followers to wring my 
hand heartily. Then we all looked 
at the things from the silver land, 
and I began to speak. 

CHAPTER XXIII 

'~p , HERE were sixteen of them left 
— sixteen out of two hundred 
and fifty. No wonder the castle's 
great hall was swimming with blood! 
No wonder we all looked like red Indians! "Who's the senior ghoul 
among you?" I asked, and a whitehaired robot encased by a yellow lumpy godhelpus moved forward a little. 
The Colonel hissed in my ear. 

"Good gad. I know that man! 
That's Sir Lawrence Hockling!" 



7 o I.MAUI 

"He's also a monstrous, warty, 
holey creature, like a lump of wormy 
cheese . . . Good afternoon. Sir Lawrence," I said loudly. "I believe 
you've been looking ftfr me. I'm 
Robert Hood of Manchester." 

"Ah yes, the Slasher." The bugaboo that was Sir Lawrence nodded 
briefly. "It seems we have failed to 
annihilate vou. No matter; others 
will." 

'*No, Sir Lawrence, you fail to 
grasp the situation. You're finished, 
you invaders. You've had your fun, 
but now you've got to pick up and 
go home, and never come back. 
Because we can see you." 

He held up his hand. "Wait, sir. 
We accept you as a seer, of course. 
There have been others — " Jack 
the Ripper, said I to myself with 
a chuckle — "others who have accidentally been enabled to pierce 
the veil between the lands. We 
have dealt with them, as we shall 
eventually with you. But your companions — let them describe us!" 

The Colonel pounced on this challenge like a tiger on a goat. I was 
breathless, thankful that I had described at least Sir Lawrence to him. 
"You're a cross between a speckled 
cheese and a diseased bit of garbage. 
Lumps and bumps all over your slimy 
carcass!" 

"Good enough," said the monster, 
quaking with wrath. "That will do, 
Colonel Bedford. I meant to say, 
let some of these — ah, rather unwashed gentry tell us of our true 
bodies." 



T was turning sick with fear, the 
fear that now we were done for. 
that now the colossal bluff would 
collapse. I had forgotten Arold — 
Arold, who could see them plain as 
day. 

"The bloke on yer right," he shrilled, "is lyke a shark, all silvery and 
slick, wiff a big glow in 'is guts lyke 
a blurry fire. Next t' him is — 
welp, it's 'ard to tell, but I'd say 
he were a ostopus, you know, one 
o' them big leather things under the 
ocean." 

"Shall I have each of them describe you all?" I leaped into the 
breech with a shouted challenge. 
"Shall we waste a couple of hours 
talking of your stalks and pseudopods? Or are you satisfied? Man, 
man, why do you think they came 
here, if not to crush you and your 
kind? Why did they fight you with 
such fury, if not because they can 
see you in all your horror?" Needless to say, Arold's ruffians were staring bug-eyed at all this incomprehensible arguing. 

"Well," said Sir Lawrence, "you 
obviously couldn't make so many 
men believe in us if they couldn't 
see us. I simply had to make sure." 
Fortunately he and the others never 
turned round to observe the wonder 
on the thugs' faces. I accept you 
as seers. How did you manage it? 
How did you warp their vision?" 

"You know as well as I." Now, 
Will Chester, bluff, bluff! 

"Yes," he said, "ever since we 
entered your world, centuries ago, 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 
we've been afraid that one day the mouth would split. 



7' 



secret of vision-tuning might be 
stumbled upon by some clever member of your species. The trick of 
it is, after all, ridiculously simple." 

I snapped my fingers to show how 
simple it was, as I thought grimly 
of that antique Tower musket blasting across my eyes. But through my 
brain the ideas were tumbling. There 
was an easy way to change one's 
sight, to peer into the silver land. 
That made my bluff much more 
feasible! 

"Yet it has been found too late, 
sirrah. We are ready to invade your 
plane by the millions, through every 
new birth that takes place on your 
globe. Can you, a handful of seers, 
wipe out so many? I think not!" 

"You fool," I said coldly, "do you 
think I risked our whole band in 
this slaughter? There are men all 
over England now, performing that 
simple operation on others. There 
are hundreds, yes, thousands of us 
already. We're wise to you, my boy; 
we've got an underground as efficient as your own. Already we're 
spreading to other countries. In a 
short time the entire world will be 
on guard against you — and men 
will be assassinating you in the 
dark." I let out my chest and roared 
it at him. I was suddenly an inspired 
Henry V before Agincourt, an impassioned Emile Zola addressing the 
jury of Dreyfus, a thundering Caesar 
in the Senate. Marion said later 
that my eyes flashed lambent flame 
and she thought the roof of my 



I had a great 
sense of my own power; I felt my 
frame filling with the elation of a 
true savior, a liberator, an emancipator. I curved my hands like talons and shook them above my head, 
intoxicated with a belief in my own 
wholly untrue words. 

<t"T\ON'T you see how useless it 
will be for you to be born 
into a world where you will be seen 
and immediately slain? From now 
on, the bestowing of double vision 
will be as much a part of a man's 
life as his — his education, baptism, and what-have-you. Forevermore we'll be on guard against you. 
I tell you now: go home, go back 
to your silver-lined wastes, and never 
try to trouble us again. Give up 
your infiltrating, your bestial usurping of bodies that ought to have had 
the chance to live and see and feel 
and think for themselves. Go home, 
God damn you all, go home! Your 
sole weapon, invisibility, is gone. You 
don't enjoy death any more than we 
do — I've felt your fear! I feel it 
now! Be sensible; you made a good 
try, but you've lost. Go hornet" 

The mouldy-looking thing that was 
Sir Lawrence began to collogue silently with his countrymen, after 
their fashion. I looked beyond them 
to the army of thugs. Most of them, 
giving up their attempt to understand what the toffs were talking 
about, were engaged in looting the 
dead. I wondered what to do with 
them after this was over, if my bluff 



IMAGINATION 



worked. Pay them off and send 
them home, I supposed. They would 
never talk about this pogrom — 
they'd be hanged! I'd have to see 
that they helped us bury all these 
corpses, alien robots and dead rogues 
alike, before they left. About twenty 
of the thugs had been killed. Who 
would miss them ? And an event 
was coming — I devoutly hoped! — 
which would engulf any such minor 
event as the disappearance of some 
three hundred men from . all walks 
of life . . . 

At last Sir Lawrence Hockling 
turned back to me. All his companions, too, faced my way. 

XJEVER, in all my journeying 
^ ^ among their foul kind, had I 
felt the concentrated effluvia of so 
much hate, so many noxious, diabolic 
waves of damnable ferocity beating 
against me like the wind off the 
Styx, turning me weak and sick. 
Malignant powers from the poisonous 
womb of Hell! I shook with uncontrollable nausea, with the dreadful 
revulsion caused by the towering, 
smashing, soul-wrenching blast of 
hatred flung at me by the group of 
beast-folk in that moment. It was 
beyond words. Nor was it my warped vision, affecting my other senses 
in the relatively mild way it had done 
before this. No, this was a feral 
force, a raging thing which knew no 
bonds of dimension or of the senses. 
It stabbed to the soul itself. Marion 
gave a muffled scream and huddled 
down on the step, clasping my knees; 



even the Colonel, the last man to 
be disturbed by an abstruse sensation, gasped audibly. As for poer 
Arold, he sat down with a bump and 
hid his face in his hands, whimpering; having as we did the added 
receptivity, that terrible blow nearly 
killed us both. The hall was blotted 
from my sight, a gulf opened below 
me, I felt myself hurtling down into 
unmentionable depths of agony. 
When I opened my eyes I did not 
know what to expect: perhaps the 
unknown wastes and plains of the 
silver land, whither their foul thrust, 
I thought, might very well have 
hurled me. As a matter of fact, 1 
was still standing upright on the 
staircase. I have never been more 
surprised. 

Then I saw that they were in the 
process of. leaving their human bodies, wrenching and hauling backward 
as though caught in a tight box. 
* "We accept your ultimatum," said 
the scholarly voice of the beast who 
was Sir Lawrence Hockling. "We are 
rational beings. We have been beaten, and we will return to our own 
plane, which lies at an angle to your 
space-time continuum. Please spread 
the word of the capitulation abroad, 
so that no more may die. Agreed?" 

"Agreed," I said. I leaped down 
the steps to stand face to face with 
his robot. "I give you three days 
of grace," I cried, "and then we begin to slay you all over England." 

T looked from him to the others 
of that group of inferno-bred 



BEWARE, TK 

ogres, shining like so many luminous 
bloated corpses at the bottom of the 
sea, with the colors of malice and 
savagery changing, coming and going 
in their rotten bodies; feeling the last 
exhalations of their enmity touching 
me like a palpable force. It had not 
begun to dawn on me that we had 
won. My head throbbed and racketed like a gourd full of thunder. Then 
I saw two men coming toward me 
through the mob, and my headache 
died to a near- forgotten dull throb; 
for they were John Baringer and 
Geoff Exeter. 

"Look what I found on the lawn." 
said the doctor. "Sitting out there 
as calm as ice, whistling Lili Marlene! " 

"What ho," said Geoff, groping 
with his hand until I had gripped 
it with mine. "You boys have fun?" 

"I knew it," said I. "I knew you 
were the one. How'd you get out? 
How'd you find your way to Birmingham?" 

"Long story, son . . . everyone 
okay ? " 

"All but Johnson." 

"The sergeant." said Geoff blankly. "Why, he's to live, forever, hang 
it." 

"He's gone." 

Geoff was still for a minute, and 
then burst out. "Well, don't say it 
like a morbid stuffed owl! After 
fifty years of civilian life, he smelt 
the powder and heard the shots 
again, God be thanked! So he died 
— so bloody what? It's how he 
should have gone." 



; USURPERS! 73 

"Right." said I, from the heart. 
I turned to the aliens then, and 
found sixteen grinning, drooling, 
mindless carcasses, staring round with 
blank dull eyes. They were empty 
hulks. The usurpers were gone into 
their silver-blue fastnesses, and the 
fight was done. 

CHAPTER XXIV 

A week had gone by. The seven 
of us sat over our dessert in 
London's finest dining room: Arold 
Smiff well-scrubbed and ill at ease, 
Geoff cheerful as ever. Alec busy 
savoring the coffee. John cynical 
again. Colonel Bedford complacent 
and stolid, my Marion all radiant 
and lovely, and myself, the erstwhile 
most savage one-man crime wave 
since Genghis Khan was a pup, fiddling with the silverware and feeling 
rather mournful, now that all was 
over. 

At first we spoke of the past, as 
though each of us hated to think of a 
future apart from his companions. 
We asked one another questions of 
which we had heard the answers a 
dozen times before. Geoff told again 
how he had wandered down the secret stair that night, feeling his way 
along the walls, lonely ^nd worried, 
and how he had remembered as he 
came to the ground floor that there 
was an old hidden exit in the back 
of the fireplace. 

"I give you my word I never 
meant to use it! I only wanted to 
see if f remembered the trick of it. 



74 



IMAGINATION 



You twist one of the hounds on the 
stone coat of arms, and the door 
opens behind the logs. Well, I did 
it, and heard the door clink open; 
I hadn't tried it since I was a kid, 
and I thought, By golly, what a lark 
to go through the underground tunnel and see if the other end's still 
workable! I guess I had some vague 
notion of us using it for an escape 
route, if things got too hot for us 
in the castle. So I went in, and 
closed the door behind me. 

"I bumbled along the tunnel — 
how I recalled the feel of those damp, 
rough bricks! — and came after 
three hundred feet to the other end, 
where a hidden trap leads to a summerhouse. I lifted it cautiously, still 
with no idea of leaving the tunnel, 
and felt the breeze on my face; and 
I knew then that I had to go on. 
I'd come this far and suddenly I 
knew I had to keep travelin' till I 
got to Birmingham and Arold. So 
I slipped out and cut straight through 
the woods till I came to the roarf. 
My lack of sight was no handicap, 
because there's not a chunk of turf 
within five miles o ! the castle I 
don't know by its first name. 

U A FTER I hit the road it was 
easy. I just groped my way 
for a few hours till I knew by the 
sound of the farm dogs that I'd 
come to Granny Moore's place. After 
running into a fence and a cart or 
two, I found the door and banged on 
it; explained to Granny that I had to 
get to Birmingham as quick as pos


sible; and she, bless her staunch 
old soul, detailed her youngest boy 
{ a lad of forty-nine) to take me 
there, without so much as a single 
query as to my reasons — and that's 
all. I found Arold that afternoon at 
Old Mag's." 

"To think 1 was standing in the 
hall when you went through the door 
in the fireplace," I said. "God! T 
thought it was ghosts I heard.'' 

"I'd have left a note, or come 
back to tell you, but I was all carried away with the spirit of rollicking 
adventure and looniness," said Geoff, 
filling his pipe. "I expect I gave 
you some bad hours. I'm sorry." 

"Forgiven," gruffed the Colonel. 
"You saved our bacon." 

"And the world," said Marion 
quietly. 

"Yes. the world! The jolly old 
human race, that didn't even know 
it was in danger, and wouldn't believe it now if we told it! Hell's 
sweet bells, it's hard for me to believe! " Geoff laughed. "Did we 
really pit ourselves against ten thousand fantastic beasts, and drive them 
from our dimension by a colossal 
bluff? Or did we dream a long horrid dream, we seven strange crusaders?" 

"I begin already to doubt my memory," answered Doctor John. "I was 
never cut out for a cavalier, wooing 
weird adventures. I'm a solid citizen. I'm going back to my practice 
on the steamers." 

"When?" I asked. 

"Next week." Now the present 



BEWARE, THE USURPERS! 



75 



had intruded in our talk, and the 
future. "What will you do, Colonel?" 

''Been thinking of retiring to the 
country, but I doubt I could stick 
it after all the excitement we've been 
through. I expect I'll stay on at 
the Albany. Lots of things happening about one 3 you know, keep 
a chap young." 

T laughed to myself at the thought 
* of the staid old-fashioned Albany 
being a bee-hive of activity, but said 
nothing. John went on. "You, Alec, 
what will you do?" 

"Huh? Me? Dunno," said Alec 
blankly. "Haven't cogitated on it." 

"Me neither," said Geoff. 

"Marion and Will will marry, of 
course," said the Colonel, as though 
that accounted for us forever, and no 
question about it. "And you, sir," 
he said to Arold, making that worthy 
leap in his chair, "what do you intend doing? You're a fairly wellto-do man now." 

"Ah, yes, thanks to you gents! 
As generous and kindly a lot o' toffs 
— that is to say, gentlemen ■ — as 
you could arsk for. Me? I'm going over the border. Scotland, that's 
the ticket for Arold Smiff; nice little 
village, cozy house, new name, and 
plenty of gin — welp, anyway, Urn 
going to Scotland. Never meet nobodv there who'd know me, and 
that's 'ow I wants it after the killings we done down at that there 
cawstle. Some of the blokes I 'ad 
to enlist ain't what you'd call above 
thinkin' of blackmail, to put it 



straight out. Course they don't know 
you, but they knows Arold Smiff. Me 
for the heather! " 

"What did you think of the 
fight.?" I asked him. "How did you 
explain it to them?" 

"Hexplyne? To - them barst — 
them blokes? I guv 'em fifteen 
quid apiece and all the loot they 
could find. What else 'Id they be 
wanting?" He grinned. "I might 
have cawst a few 'ints, such as that 
we was involved in a political move: 
the boys is hell on political moves. 
Maybe I mentioned the Sinn Feiners. 
careless-lyke. They drawed their 
own conclusions." He squinted into 
his cup. "I think I shall call meself 
Jock MacSmiff," he said meditatively. "Ar, that's a good Scotch name. 
Maybe I'll even give up the gin. 
Take Scotch whisky instead, I mean. 
More patriotic, lyke." 

"You'll be able to afford it, old 
chap, should you live to be a hundred," I told him. "It was nearly 
all your doing, yours and Geoff's, 
that we won our fight." 

The waiter brought a bottle of 
Ijiper Heidsieck '43. The Colonel 
stood up to propose the first toast. 

"Gentlemen and Marion, I give 
you ex-Sergeant Henry Johnson. 
There is only one thing we can say 
of him; greater love hath no man, 
that a man lay down his life for 
his friends." 

WE drank standing. The waiter 
popped up with a second bottle. We resumed our seats, and Alec 



76 



IMAGINATION 



said, "The next is mine. I drink to 
the good green earth, and the race 
of men who live on it. Maybe they 
don't go about slopping over with 
gratitude for its beauty, but I think 
they appreciate it just the same, and 
I'm damned glad we saved it for 
'em! " 

Half-laughing, we drank that one, 
and many more. I drank to my 
Jaguar, now. a deep red color and 
never to be identified with the sinister black car which flew out of 
Manchester that night so long ago. 
Doctor John drank to Jerry Wolfe, 
wrjo first discovered the abominable 
race of beast-folk. Geoff toasted 
our army of rogues. 

They all drank to our happiness. 
Marion's and mine. Then we called 
for a fifth bottle, and drank a tall 
glass down "in memory of our victory, 
total and forever final, over the 
beast-folk of the silver land. I 
twirled my glass and stared at it. my 
eyes unfocused slightly, and I mused 
on them. 

The usurpers . . . 

Sir Lawrence Hockling, to give him 
his human name, had been as good 
as his word. Within a day. all 
through the land, the aliens had begun to decamp in disgust. As messengers raced behind the veil to tell 
their brothers the sad news, the 
exodus spread : first through the 
great centers of population, London 
and Birmingham and Sheffield, Cardiff and Liverpool, and thence into 
the countryside until all England was 
touched by this incredible mass des


sertion of a world, the beasts relinquished their stolen bodies and retreated into their own dimension. 
Well within my time limit of three 
days, the flight was completed. Some 
twenty-seven thousand robots were 
abandoned in the withdrawal. 

Yet these puppets, these husks, 
had not died . They had become 
brainless, true; incapable of performing the simplest acts of caring for 
themselves; but they lived on. It 
was more horrible than their deaths 
would have been, I thought . . . and 
yet there was a ray of hope. I had 
talked it over with my friends, and 
they agreed there was a chance of 
its coming true. 

These new things (one could no 
longer call them puppets, when the 
marionette-masters had . gone) were 
like nothing on earth so much as 
new-born babies, babies in grown or 
half-grown bodies. What if their 
brains, unimpressed thus far by any 
experience, now began to develop, 
even as a baby's begins? What if 
they were not idiots, as they seemed 
to a horrified world to be, but simply 
newly-born humans who must be 
taught learning and manners and 
speech and all the rest, as though 
they were so many victims of a. titanic wave of devastating total amnesia? 

IF this were true — and it logically 
might be — then our rescue of 
the world would have been bough L 
even more cheaply than we had calculated. Twenty-seven thousand am


BEWARE. THE USURPERS! 



77 



nesia victims to retrain is a damned 
sight better than that many idiots or, 
as we had expected at first, corpses! 

There would still be sorrow and 
tragedy in the wake of the thing we 
had done. Couples who had spent 
lifetimes together had found themselves split, their mutual memories 
lost forever, as one turned infantile 
and looked mindlessly at the other. 
Men who had been forces for good 
in England (the usurpers were not 
intent on corrupting our daily lives, 
be it remembered, but on taking over 
our whole plane) had become useless 
hulks, great dribbling infants in old 
bodies. Many suicides had followed 
the plague of total amnesia. 

Yet if my ray of hope chanced to 
be true, it took nine-tenths of the 
curse of the business off our consciences. 

And some of the problems connected with the plague would then 
appear much smaller, and even rather 
funny; as for example, the twentyseven thousand adolescents and 
adults who had never been housebroken . . . 

Well! I came back to myself, filled 
up my glass again, and drank Arold's 
toast to Lord Nelson. How he ever 
crept into our party, I'm sure I 
don't know. By then, perhaps, we 
were all a little bit drunk; so we 
welcomed Lord Nelson, and drank 
to him joyously. Then we drank 
a final round to our long bitter fight 
with the usurpers, and we adjourned 
for the night. The next day we 
separated, each to his own place, 



and the great adventure was over at 
last. 

CHAPTER XXV 

TT is just a year since we drove 
the usurpers out of England. 

(About the robots that they left 
behind, my hunch was right; for 
they are learning to take care of 
themselves, to walk and speak and 
act decently, and many have even 
begun to read and think again. 
When I consider this, I am inclined 
to go to my knees in thanks. W^hat 
might have happened . . .!) 

For a while I could not realize that 
my wild bluff had actually worked. 
I kept expecting a trick, a wholesale 
re-invasion of our world by the 
ogres. Even yet it is hard to comprehend. I suppose the only explanation is that all created things 
hate and fear death; in their fashion, 
the usurpers were just as scared of 
dying as the humblest human, and 
must have decided that the vicarious 
pleasures of earth weren't worth it. 

Selfish fear gripped them, selfish 
deadly fear of murder in the dark. 
They shrugged themselves out of 
their stolen bodies, and abandoned 
the world they had hoped to conquer. 
The simplest of weapons, the easiest 
to employ, had done our work for us 
in a manner beyond our most optimistic dreams. The simplest weapon 
. . . fear. 

Marion and I were married, of 
course, a year ago. The delirious 
happiness of our marriage has not 
cooled for me. Some day, perhaps, 



7* 



IMAGINATION 7 



my feeling will have calmed to a 
steady, staid, cozy sort of affection; 
but not yet. Not for a long time yet. 

I bought a little bookshop in Bury 
St. Edmunds, and took in Geoff and 
Alec as partners. It's the proper 
life for a quartet of reformed crusaders like the three of us and 
Marion. Peaceful, contemplative, 
and yet stimulating. We like it. 
And we like being together. 

John is back on the seas as ship's 
doctor, the Colonel is laired up at 
the Albany, and Arold lives in Kirkcudbright, swilling great vats of 
Scotch whisky, I have no doubt. One 
day soon we must all get together for 
a grand reunion . . . 

T)UT a man cannot walk through 
fire without being burnt; and 
as there cannot be many such conflagrations as that through which I 
groped and fled and sought my way, 
it is only natural that my mind carries even yet a few scars of the burning. I do not expect — I dare not 
hope — that they will ever be wholly 
healed. 

In certain moods, usually on dreary 
days when the sky is overcast and 
the sun is hidden, or sometimes at 
night when the great yellow hunter's 



moon rides in a black sky, the horror 
of the usurpers comes upon me with 
fresh and lurid obsession, more appalling than ever it was in the 
weeks of my hectic and headlong 
warfare. Then I go out into the 
streets or wander on the moorlands 
and fight with my hallucinations. 
A thousand times I tell myself that 
they are gone, that the world is clean 
and inviolate again; and a thousand 
times I hear in reply the hideous 
laughter of the fear that lives forever at the bottom of my soul. 

I walk past a tavern, and see its 
door swing open, and catch a glimpse 
of the barman; and he seems to me 
in that moment to be, not a jovial 
red-faced fellow, but a twisting writhing monster shot with vivid lights and 
fringed with rippling pseudopods. A 
friend comes up behind to clap me 
on the shoulder, and I dread to turn 
and look at him, for fear of what 
he may be. I hear a snatch of 
speech from a wireless set, and the 
soft cultured voice emanates, I believe in a sudden jolt of panic, from 
the lips of a marionette-creature controlled by a hellish and malevolent 
incubus. 

So at last I take my terror home 
to Marion, and lose it in her arms . . . 



NEXT ISSUE'S FEATURE NOVEL:— 

SPECIAL DELIVERY 

by KRIS NEVILLE 

Parr came to Earth in the guise of a human to pave the way 
for an invasion. The plan was unique — with ovary person on 
Earth being sent a special delivery package! Watch for the 

JANUARY ISSUE ON SALE THE FIRST WEEK IN NOVEMBER 



innin 



9 



PROFESSOR George Gamow, the 
famed astrophysicist and popularizer of astronomy is well known 
for his habit of coining new words. 
His latest is a word necessary to describe the state of the Universe an 
almost infinitely long- time ago. 

He believes ( and many modern 
scientists concur) that "in the beginning . . ," the universe was made 
up of a very dense mass of protons, 
electrons and neutrons, jammed together inconceivably tightly, and 
surrounded by empty space. This 



vast mass together with its surrounding space constituted the primal matter of which the universe 
was made. Gamow calls it "ylern" 
— this time not a coined word really, but an ancient one meaning primitive. 

Unfortunajtely Gamow doesn't 
present a perfectly clear picture of 
the initial stimulus that caused this 
ylem to disintegrate and form our 
present matter, though the process 
by which this occurred is pretty 
well worked out. 



-America ^JeeM ^efo f 



IN spite of all the griping and the 
moaning by people conscious of 
the role of American technology in 
world affairs, the manufacturers and 
the government sit idly by while 
the British engineers and aerodynamicists steal the golden prize of 
commercial jet flight from under 
our nose. Why can't something be 
done about it? 

In a matter of time the British 
will institute overseas flights with 
gigantic streamlined jet liners called 
"Comets." They will be used all over 
the world starting at first with the 
London-New York flight. Flying 
times will be reduced sharply, this 
last-named flight being a matter of 
little more than six hours! 

This pre-eminence of the British 
in commercial jet planes does not 
mean that they're better than we 
are — far from it. We have superb 
jet motors too, but we've limited 
ourselves to fighter and bomber 
planes, ignoring the fact that it is 



commercial aviation which precedes 
powerful military aviation. Private 
companies claim that they can't afford to experiment with jet craft 
and must cling to the out-moded internal combustion reciprocating engine. That's like saying, "I'll stick 
to the horse and buggy; I can't afford a car!" 

This is a plea to the government 
to do something. Until now America 
and American planes have been outstanding, the backbone of the world's 
commercial aviation. Apparently this 
is not true now. The world's airlines 
— including our own — will be forced 
to buy British jet-airliners in order 
to stay in competition. Let's do 
something about it. 

Remember jet motors are one 
stage removed from rockets — and 
those are the motors of the future. 
Dare we allow America to lag at 
all in this field? The answer is a 
simple, unequivocal NO! 



79 



They Reached For The Moon 

B, WMam OLr/Ul 

The major problem in achieving space flight lay in 
overcoming gravity. That had been done and men had 
reached the Moon. But strangely, they never returned! 



Si 



82 



IMAGINATION 



THEY took a thousand days to 
build the great, gleaming 
monster, and another two 
hundred to groom it for its trip 
around the moon. All this they did 
with an air that made a trip to 
the moon seem quite natural and 
sure, even though three other rockets had gone before and not one 
had returned. 

"This one will," they said, as 
though convincing themselves. 

But they were not sure. They 
were stubborn, perhaps proud, but 
not sure at all. All the world had 
watched three other such rockets, 
with men in them, go screaming off 
moonward. All had waited for them 
to return. And all had seen nothing 
come back down from the sky. Not 
even a small scrap of metal. This 
one might return, and, if it did, 
the men in it just might be alive to 
tell. But that was not being sure. 

"A military base on the moon! ; ' 
the leaders had cried. And that had 
been that. Robot rockets had gone 
first. They had landed on the moon. 
They could do that, but they could 
not establish the desired base. So 
men had started on a round trip, 
around the moon, first to prove 
that men could do it. The only 
thing they proved was that whatever goes up need not come down. 

Now the fourth rocket waited, 
leaning over against its heavy 
launching rack, ready to face whatever unknown danger lay out there 
beyond. 

On a certain night, a night long 
appointed, one overshadowed with 



heavy clouds that brought a threat 
of rain, there were lights about the 
rocket and in the low, concrete 
buildings that cowered back a ways 
from the upright metal giant. 
Around the base of the rocket men 
scurried like ants, making last minute preparations and seeing that 
everything was just so and not being satisfied with "good enough". 

In one building, a little nearer 
the rocket than the others, two men 
lounged, talking of the coming trip 
and other things that concerned last 
night's women, and smoking endlessly, the last smokes they would 
have for four days. These men 
would soon climb into a long, metal 
thing and try to do what others 
had failed to do. 

In other buildings were men with 
great ideas held firmly in their 
minds, doing things with pencils 
and paper and adding machines. 
These checked back over figures 
and charts, knowing all the time 
that everything was flawless, but 
checking just the same. Some were 
Army men and some were not. 

The feeling that seemed to grow 
over everything was one of waiting 
and suspense, and one might know 
without asking, without seeing the 
many glances at watches and clocks, 
that it would soon be time. 

OTRANGELY, the two men wait^ ing and speaking mostly of wine, 
women and general good times, 
knew very little of the import of 
what they were about to do. In fact, 
they had no real concept of even 



THEY REACHED 



FOR THE MOON 



83 



the size of the earth, let alone the 
magnitude of space, the moon and 
the stars. This, however, was as intended. 

The men who had gone in the 
other rockets had been scientists, 
greatly skilled men, men of high 
I.Q.'s. So the brass and the brains 
had gotten together and reasoned, 
and pooled data, and considered 
statistics, and finally decided that 
the strain of being completely out 
of one's natural element, exposed to 
the terrible, thought-twisting blankness of space, might be greater than 
had been supposed. And the highstrung, sensitive, sometimes slightly neurotic minds of the highly intelligent might well be expected to 
crack under the strain. 

This, of course, was at most a 
poor explanation. But it served, at 
least, as an excuse for retaining the 
great minds and sending those more 
expendable. These, not knowing, 
would probably consider the whole 
thing nothing more than a slightly 
unusual adventure. 

So when the Army officers came, 
very stiff and orderly, and opened 
the door to the little building, the 
two men came out laughing and 
pushing at one another playfully. 
They followed the little group of 
officers toward the gleaming rocket, 
not at all worried, like men going 
off for a happy spree at some local 
bar. 

The rocket seemed to loom high1 er as they neared it. It was now 
bathed in the light of many spot


lights, reflecting back the light in 
such a way that one might think 
he would go blind if he looked 
too long. Only when they stepped on 
to a platform, with two of the higher officers, and were lifted swiftly 
upward, did they give a thought 
to what was going on. 

The platform halted its climb 
just below a round hole near the 
nose of the rocket. 

"You men should know exactly 
what you are to do," said the higher 
officer, "and that is not much. You 
are not, under any circumstances, 
to touch anything until you near 
the moon. Up to that time, the 
rocket will be guided by at least 
one control station here on Earth." 
The officer paused and tried to see 
understanding in the eyes of the 
two. He was one of those who did 
not agree with sending such dense 
fellows. 

"You have been trained for 
months," he continued, "to read a 
few instruments and to perform the 
fairly simple tasks required to take 
you around the moon and start you 
back. Do only what you have been 
taught. Do nothing more. You must 
remember that certain conditions 
near the moon, which interfere with 
radio reception, and which we have 
been unable to overcome, will put 
you entirely on your own until you 
start back." 

One of the men, a little uncertain, acted as if he wished to speak. 

"Yes?" said the officer. 

"Didn't they send rockets once 



8-4 



IMAGINATION 



without no men in 'em at all?" he 
asked. "Then, how come they can't 
do like we wasn't even there?" 

"My dear fellow," said the officer, perplexed, "to aim and fire a 
rocket at so near and so large a 
target as the moon is a simple matter. To guide one around the moon 
in a precise orbit is a matter entirely different." He paused. "Any 
more questions?'' 

"No sir," said the men. 

"Very good." The officer seemed 
glad there would be no further conversation. "In you go now." 

The men went into the opening, 
helped by the officers, like olives 
being put into a bottle. In a moment the officers had gone and a 
cover had been placed into the 
opening and screwed firmly into 
place. 

THERE was lead-glass, very 
heavy, in the windows of all 
the buildings. The thick cement 
walls and doors were covered with 
sheets of lead. 

Inside the most distant buildings, at the small windows, men 
stood with black looking glasses 
over their eyes, watching. Each 
time a rocket went into space it 
was exactly thus. The atomic drive 
was new and not completely perfect. Always there was a chance 
that something might go wrong. The 
radiation grids could go haywire, 
there could be an explosion, or the 
ship could falter and slip on the 
way up. 



So the men waited and watched 
in their little buildings, with fingers 
crossed, hoping for the best. 

Now it was very quiet. The spotlights had been extinguished because every bit of electric power 
was needed to start the amazing 
rocket motor. Only enough was 
spared for lighting, where needed, 
in the buildings, and for the P.A. 
system. And over the P.A. system 
voices spoke. 

"Trackers ready?" 

"Trackers ready." 

"Control station ready?" 

"Control station ready." 

"Radio room, report!" 

" Radio reporting. All tracking 
and control stations reported or relayed in." 

There was a pause. Then: "Stand 
by." The silence seemed to grow 
even more intense. The ticking of 
clocks and watches could be heard. 
The unreal atmosphere of a dream 
settled over the clustered buildings on the plain. 

"Activators! " 

Out on the plain, the rocket came 
to life. It surged and clattered 
against its launching rack, nearlyleaping, pawing the ground with 
hot explosive blasts. Now it became 
a living wild thing, a bound monster 
surging against its chains, fighting 
to be free and away. 

The voice, in a short while, came 
again, a little strained. "Ready . . . 
Ready . . . Ready . . . ROCKET 
AWAY!" 

The great, gleaming monster lift


THEY REACHED FOR THE MOON 



35 



ed up from the plain, bellowing 
its defiance of space with the voice 
of ten thousand waterfalls. It rode 
up from the center of a tremendous 
flower of glowing dust on a pillar 
of intense blue flame, slowly gathering speed, like a whale rushing 
up from the depths of the ocean. 

For a while it lighted up miles 
of rolling plain with its glare, and 
sent its thunder out to crash against 
distant hills. Then it was gone beyond heavy clouds, leaving only a 
smear of light above and a hollow, 
boiling rumble, muted by distance. 

In the thin, cold air above the 
clouds the rocket pointed its sharp 
nose eastward. It raced across the 
sky, a blue streaking and a stuttering 
scream. It crossed a nation with 
amazing speed and moved over the 
Atlantic. 

In an instant the moon and the 
stars were gone and the rocket was 
looking at the sun. Clear morning 
fled away in fear of this flaming 
beast and it was noon within minutes after sunrise. In an hour the 
night returned, the stars and the 
moon with it. 

iCT>ROTHER, we're in!" cried 
Pfc. Walter Jones, in the 
head of the rocket. "Boy, the 
babes'll mob us after this. Real big 
shots, that's us. The men in the 
moon! Hah!" 

"If we get back," Pvt. Robert 
Moore shouted over the roar. "Remember, we gotta get back yet." 

"Chicken!" shouted Jones. 



"Chicken's what you are!" 

"Oh yeah? So what happens to 
them guys what went before?" 

"Nuts to that," Jones sneered. 
"I hear they's a lot of places up in 
space we don't know nothin' about, 
where there's maybe a lot of nice 
babes and buildings made out of 
gold and stuff like that." 

"Scientists don't go much for 
babes," Moore said. 

Jones kicked back in his seat . 
roaring laughter. "Hah! Don't kid 
yourself, son. Anyway, so what? So 
they get a chance to be kings, or 
somethin', on account of being from 
Earth. What do they do? They stay 
an' be kings, natch"! " 

"It ain't for. me," said Moore, 
moodily. "I know babes on good 
ol' Earth. An who wants to be 
king?" 

"That's what I'm tellin' you,'" 
Jones shouted. "We ain't got no 
worry at all. All we gotta do is 
not let them guys up there sidetrack us." 

"I hope you're right," said Moore. 

They fell silent, looking down at 
the reeling Earth. On the ground, 
two hundred miles below, at every 
tracking and control station around 
the world, men worked without 
pause, trying to make their tired 
minds outrace a speeding rocket. 
Night side and day side, messages 
flashed through the ether. They reported in : position, time, corrections made, passing the rocket 
quickly, from one to another like 
a hot potato. 



86 



IMAGINATION 



On its last lap around the world 
before flinging itself moonward, the 
rocket screamed across the much 
worn boot of Italy. It climbed 
swiftly up the sky of the Holy Land 
and plunged down in the east, 
drawing a blue pencil line across 
the heavens that faded slowly. 

At last it turned upward, and 
breathing streamers of fire and light, 
shot into airless space, a silver arrow gone from the bow and dead 
on its mark. 

"It sure seems quiet," said Moore. 

They looked through the glassite 
port into the great distances. 

"Quiet, and empty." 

"Yeah!" 

"Do you feel different?" Jones 
asked suddenly. 

"I don't know. Maybe. In a 
way." 

"Like you can think a lot better?" 

"Something like that," Moore 
said. 

THEY sat and thought about it. 
The rocket was now fifteen 
hundred miles up, climbing swiftly. 

"For one thing," Moore said, 
"we are lighter. What do they call 
it? Gravity? Gravity is less." 

"I don't like it," cried Jones. "I 
don't like it at all! " 

"What?" Moore looked at him. 
Jones stared back, frightened. 
" It's nothing like I thought it 
would be. Maybe we'll get so light 
there won't be anything left! Where 
is everything? It's so empty it don't 



make sense. Something's wrong, Bob. 
Let's try to turn back before we 
die like the others! I don't want to 
die! I want " 

Moore reached over and slapped 
the other's face. hard. Jones focused 
glassy, unsteady eyes, surprised and 
hurt. "Why did you do that?" 

"You called me yellow a while 
ago," Moore said, disgusted, "Now 
it's you who are acting like a woman or a child . You would really 
kill us, trying to turn back at this 
velocity." 

"I'm still afraid," Jones said, but 
not wildly. "I don't know what's 
happening to me. I can remember 
things that happened years ago ; 
things I hardly noticed. I'm starting to understand things I never 
understood before, and some of the 
things are hard to take." 

"Don't you think I feel it, too?" 
Moore looked out at space in a new 
way, understanding. 

For a while there was silence, a 
little strained, while the rocket sped 
another thousand miles. After that 
it was not so strained. It was more 
an atmosphere of concentration, of 
two men, thinking within themselves. There was no more fear. 

"So this is what happened to the 
others," Moore said finally "But 
what do we have to fear?" 

Jones shrugged. "I'm not afraid 
anymore, but maybe I should be." 
He leaned back and looked at 
Moore. "Have you any idea what 
is happening to us?" 

"I'm not sure," Moore frowned. 



THEY REACHED FOR THE MOON 



87 



"It's as if some great obstacle to 
clear thinking has been removed. 
Have you noticed how we have been 
speaking? Our memory has so improved that we are able to use 
words we may have seen or heard 
used only a few times. And the new 
sharpness of mind that enables us 
to use these words properly also 
makes us able to grasp quickly new 
ideas and to reason logically. As 
to what causes the change, I do 
not know." 

"I have been thinking about 
gravity," said Jones, reflecting. "It 
seems to me that the change in 
mental power is just about inversely proportioned to change in 
gravity. That might, in some way, 
have something to do with it." 

Moore sighed, frowning. "You 
may be right. But, granting that 
you are, we are still in the dark 
as to the nature of the danger we 
must face." 

"I think I'm beginning to get 
some idea," said Jones. "I wouldn't 
be surprised if my first crude idea, 
in a way, was very nearly right." 

Moore showed surprise. "You 
still think those others found someone out here who made them kings, 
or some such?" He laughed. 

"Not exactly," Jones said. "But 
there may be even stranger things." 
And he would say no more. 

\ T fifty thousand miles they had 
lost all thought of danger. They 
spoke of space and the unseen medium that must be there. After form


ing the only logical conclusion about 
the nature of this, they passed on 
to matters of relativity and the nature of time and of life itself, understanding each in its turn. 

They became so absorbed in conversation they did not even notice 
when they stopped talking and conversed in pure thought. Not even 
did they realize that a golden glow 
had come to their faces and bodies 
that was not simple light. And they 
were content in knowing they would 
never return to earth, knowing also 
that they would not die. 

The rocket carried them one 
hundred thousand miles through 
space before it happened. 

"There is someone behind us," 
Jones said, simply. 

They looked, and beheld a man 
standing in space. He was hardly 
a man anymore, as men are called, 
but one like themselves. A golden 
glow seemed to blend with him. He 
smiled. 

"Welcomel" 

"We have been expecting you," 
said Moore, smiling in return. 
"Your voice, your thoughts reached 
us. We krfow you are one of those 
who came out in a rocket before us. 
But your name is not clear." 

The being seemed mildly surprised. Then he laughed; a thing 
that was as the tinkle of small bells, 
as the dew of a cool meadow before the rising sun or the joyous 
song of a nightingale. 

"I am one of them," he said, 
"and all of them. We who have 



88 



IMAGINATION 



overcome the chains of gravity, who 
have become one in thought and 
find it impossible to do otherwise, 
have no need for individuality." 

"But you have a body," said 
Jones. "Surely that gives you some 
sort of individuality." 

"Yes, if one's mind is bound, 
controlled by matter. But the mind 
working without resistance is a perfect machine. It is able to control 
matter in every respect. We take 
this form or that form as a matter 
of expedience." 

"We have reasoned that all this 
is due to release from gravity," 
Moore reflected. "But we do not 
understand completely. Will you 
tell us?" 

"Even those on Earth know that 
gravity hampers the mind," the being said. "This they have learned 
through observation of mental factors in relation to the gravitational 
pull of the sun and moon. But look 
into my mind and you will see 
more clearly." 

They looked, and saw a copper 
disk turn before a powerful magnet. 
And they saw resistance .caused by 
electric currents induced in the copper, so that a great deal of power 
was required to turn the disk, even 
slowly. This, the thoughts indicated, 
was a principal well known to those 
yet on Earth. 

Next came the relationship between magnetism and gravity, 
clearly demonstrated. 

They then saw a human brain, 



locked in the powerful embrace of 
gravity. And the tiny pulsations 
and complex motions, the processes 
of thought, were, as with the disk, 
sluggish — in large portions not even 
present. They watched a brain come 
alive as gravity decreased. It bulged, the tempo of motion rising, 
parts long dormant surging with 
power. They saw and they understood. 

"If only we could go back and 
help them," sighed Jones. "If we 
could overcome that gravity on 
Earth!" 

Again the being smiled his kind 
smile. "If you returned it would 
be to the same mental prison. You 
could not, in your crude manner, 
convince them." 

-The two knew what they must 
do, even before the being spoke 
again. 

"The others, the rest, wait beyond the light of universes," he 
said. "We think. We learn. Soon, 
we will find a way of helping those 
on Earth, and we will return. Come 
with me." 

They replied together. "We are 
ready." 

On the dark side of the moon, 
where they had been projected 
by identical velocities, lay the battered wrecks of four gleaming rockets. And in all the wreckage, among 
all the bits of twisted metal, there 
was not a single drop of human 
blood. 

THE END 



Sound $nd Jur t 



THE name of Professor Hans 
Thirring is becoming increasingly well-known in the scientific world, not because of any great 
discoveries the good Doctor has 
made, but rather for some unusual 
calculations he has performed. Dr. 
Thirring is Austria's foremost physicist and has contributed some notable discoveries to physical science. 
Among Europeans he now knows 
as much about the theory of atomic 
and hydrogen bombs as anyone there. 
He has put this knowledge into a 
graphical, easily understandable 
form which is rapidly penetrating 
the consciousness of people everywhere. 

In terms of what he knows about 
atomic physics and modern industry, 
he has computed that a first-rate 
industrial country 4ike the United 
States, Great Britain, Germany, 
Russia — that's about all — can, at the 
expenditure of around forty billion 
dollars, destroy all Mankind ! 

When that statement was first 
made and the evidence submitted, 
Thirring was laughed at. An examination and a check of his work by 
American and foreign physicists has 
since disclosed that it is remarkably accurate — he is not exaggerating at all. 

He takes as his starting point, 
the hydrogen bomb, which is yet to 
be developed. This instrument of 
destruction must be triggered or 
fired by an atomic bomb. Then the 
hydrogen bomb is surrounded with 
a shell of cobalt metal. When the 
atomic bomb is detonated it fires 
the hydrogen bomb, which in turn 
goes off and vaporizes the cobalt 
metal, turning it into a deadly ra


dioactive vapor. 

By exploding a fair number of 
these "ultra-bombs" the entire atmosphere of the Earth would quickly be polluted with deadly radioactive cobalt which would reach into 
every nook and cranny — from * the 
Antarctic to the Equator. After a 
short time, no living thing would 
live on this planet — it would be utterly sterilized! 

Professor ' Thirring is not just 
beating his gums as an alarmist. 
Instead, in a remarkably cool and 
concise calculation he has shown 
that Man does hold the power to 
destroy himself — if not immediately, within the very near future. 

The explosion of these bombs 
would contaminate the air, the land 
and the oceans. Nothing living, animal or vegetable, would survive 
from the depths of the sea to the 
greatest heights. 

But the organic cycle could start 
over again, Thirring assures us. 
Plant life buried deep in the soil 
would stand some chance of surviving and hence the entire chain of 
evolution might be gone through 
again. When asked how long he 
imagined it would take for the second coming of Man, Thirring replied "about two billion years!" 

Man has been on the Earth for 
a little more than three hundred 
thousand years. It is incredible to 
think that he has reached such great 
heights — and such great depths. 

The future indeed appears black. 
Man holds it in his power to convert this Earth, through the miracle 
of technology, into a paradise, or 
into a barren spherical shell — 
which shall it be ... ? 



89 




THE OWL 
AND THE APE 



oC. Spra cjite r2)c C^a ntp 

Soncheth Sar wanted the magic manuscript, 
so he sent his young apprentice to buy it. That 
was simple enough. Delivery was another matter! 



DJARRA was always promising 
to complete Geztm Lorska's 
education for him and never 
getting around to it. This was one 
of the times: 

". . . so if you'll come into the 
garden after the supper-hour, 
Gezun, I'll show you some of the 



singular things one of Father's 
sailors taught me . . ." 

Gezun Lorska said: "Meseems 
I've heard all that before." He 
grasped her wrist. "I suspect that 
what vou real 1 v vea rn for . m v 
lass—'' 

"My goodness. Gezun!" she said. 



90 



IMAGINATION 



92 

"Aren't you strong! Are you sure 
you're only fourteen?" 

"Quite certain." (Actually he 
thought his fourteenth birthday was 
yet some days off. In the year 
since he had been sold to Sancheth 
Sar he had somewhat lost track of 
time, and moreover the calendar 
used here in Ezvelar differed from 
that of his native Lorsk. Still, her 
question had cogency, for a foujteen-year-old Pusaadian like Gezun 
might well be as tall as a mature 
Hauskirka.) 

"As I was saying." he continued. 
"I'm a peaceable wight, and like not 
to slay folk save those that wantonly offend me. But I take not 
teasing kindly, and am minded to 
drag you back into this fabulous 
garden of yours . . ." 

''Not now.'" she squeaked. 
"Mother's hanging out the — " 

"Gezun! Gezun Lorska!" came 
the familiar caw of Sancheth Sar. 
"Boy! Hither, forthwith! " 

Gezun dropped Djarra's wrist. 
"Run along, Djarra; this is men's 
business." 

He stuck his thumbs into the 
belt of his kilt and ambled around 
to the front of Sancheth Sar's 
house, fast enough to avoid serious 
trouble with his owner but not so 
fast as to give the old wizard exaggerated ideas of his submissiveness. He was secretly grateful to 
Sancheth for rescuing him from 
what might, as a result of his own 
youthful ignorance, have developed 
into an embarrassing situation. 



What if Djarra had said "Yes"? 

"You take long enough, yon 
young bull-mammoth," said Sancheth Sar, leaning on his stick and 
glaring down his hawk's nose. 
Though in former years the sorcerer had stood a good span taller 
than G«zun did now, age had bowed 
him until the difference was no 
longer great. 

"Yessir sorrysir." 

"When you apologize, speak distinctly and run not all your words 
together ; else the whole effect be 
lost." The sorcerer blew his nose 
on his mystic robe and continued: 
"Where was I? Ah, yes, the 
auction." 

"What auction. Master?" 

"Why, lout, the auction of Dauskezh Van, what else? But I forget; I've not advised you thereof. 
Dauskezh Van, wishing to retire 
from active practice of the arts 
sorcerous and thaumaturgic, has — " 

"Who's Dauskezh Van?'" 

ttOUCH ignorance! He's the 

^ greatest, the wisest, the pro- . 
foundest magician ever to practice 
in Nembiar. But now, despite all 
that longevity and rejuvenation 
spells can do. age claims him for 
its hoary own. Where was I?" 

"You were telling me about the | 
auction." 

"So I was. Well, wishing to retire from practice and spend the 
balance of 'his life in peace, he's 
selling off all his magical talismans, 
tokens, sigils, relics, and other ac


THE OWL AND THE APE 



cessories. I was to have departed 
to wend my way to his cave on 
Tadhik Mountain in rocky Gozau 
beginning on the morrow, but now 
that Nikurteu -has sent this cursed 
tisick upon me I must remain at 
home my infirmities to cherish." 
He sneezed. 

"You mean you wish me to go to 
Gozau in your stead?" cried Gezun, 
torn between excitement and apprehension. 

"With admirable promptitude you 
grasp my meaning ere I've formulated it in words. Aye, boy, the 
task is yours to dare and do." 

"What do you wish me to seek 
to buy? Anything that seems 
good?" 

"By no means! But one particular item, namely: the Hordhun 
-Manuscript." 

"What's that?" said Gezun. 

"As the name implies, a set of 
waxen sheets with pictographs inscribed thereon." 

"I mean, what's in it?" 

"Spells." 

"What sort of spells?" 

"Curse you for a nosey quidnunc! But then, perhaps indeed 
you ought to know, that you shall 
watch well where you place those 
monstrous feet of yours. As you 
are no doubt aware, your land of 
Pusaad is slowly, in the course of 
many earthquakes, sinking beneath 
the waters of fine W r estern Sea." 

"So I've heard. Tis said that 
one can take a boat in the harbor 
of Bienkar on a calm day and 



93 

through the water see the ruins of 
former edifices, once on dry land 
but now paving the harbor-bottom." 

"Just so. My reckonings show 
that in three thousand years there 
will be nought left of Pusaad save 
chains of islands, now the tops of 
mountains." 

"What difference does it make 
what happens thousands of years 
hence?" 

4tnpO you none, stripling, but 
king's must take a view that's 
longer than the span of their own 
petty lifetimes — at least if they'd rise 
above the level of mere crowned 
beasts — and it is with kings I'd 
deal. The Hordhun Manuscript, 
'tis rumored, harbors speHs of such 
puissance that they'll either halt 
or speed this continental settling. 
With that in my hands, see you in 
what an advantageous site I'd be 
respecting the Pusaad ian kinglets?'' 
"I see. Do these spells really 
work ? " 

"That I know not; but even if 
they don't, they'll furnish a lever 
wherewith to pry open the bulging 
coffers of Lorsk and Parsk and the 
rest." 

"Then I saddle up Dostaen tomorrow, ride to Dauskezh's cave, 
and out-bid our rivals when this 
work comes up?" 

"Yes, but 'tis not quite so simple. For this auction does entail 
two attributes unique. First, you'll 
not see the faces of your fellow-bidders, because 'tis one of Dauskezh's 



94 



IMAGINATION 



crotchets to make all who'd attend 
his auction wear masks resembling 
the visages of animals." 

"Do I don such a mask here?" 
Gezun had an unpleasant mental 
picture of himself wearing the head 
of a leopard or ibex and jogging 
through Ezvelar on his mule, to 
the uproarious mirth of his fellowstriplings. 

"Nay; Dauskezh will furnis*h 
them on your arrival, assigning to 
each the semblance of the beast his 
hoary fancy thinks that bidder most 
in soul and character resembles. 
And that fact provides you with 
your only clue to the second difficulty, to wit: that neither will 
the items to be sold be openly displayed, but be identified by number merely." 

"What japery! How shall I 
know the Hordhun Manuscript 
when 'tis offered?" 

" 'Tis the conceit of Dauskezh 
Van that a true magician can perceive without being told: and in 
sooth, were I there, I'd no doubt 
contrive to make head against his 
quillets. Lacking such skills, you 
must devise another means. Now, 
there's no doubt that Nikurteu 
Balya, may the gods blast his leprous soul, is also bent upon procurement of this manuscript. And 
if you rate the wizards of Nembiar 
in order of intelligence, Dauskezh 
stands first, myself second, and 
Nikurteu third. It follows that of 
all who come in masks to this event, 
Nikurteu'll be the most sagacious. 



Therefore you should know him by 
his mask, which I presume will be 
that of an owl since that bird is 
universally conceded to be the wisest of the brute kingdom. And when 
you perceive that be displays unwonted interest in some item, you 
may infer that that's the manuscript in question, and bid the 
limit." 

"But," said Gezun Lonska, 
"what's to hinder this same Nikurteu from casting on me some baneful spell that shall strike me immobile or speechless till the bidding 
be completed?" 

"Oh, a trifle, a trifle that had 
slipped my old mind. I'll put on 
you a counter-spell that should endure till your return, so that such 
assaults unnatural shall rebound 
and recoil upon the sender." 

"Why not lend me the ring of 
star-metal?" 

Gezun indicated the band of metal, like silver but duller, that encircled the finger of Sancheth Sar. 
What the metal was none knew, 
save that it was harder than the ! 
toughest bronze, and was said to 
have come from a stone that fell 
from the sky. It was so effective 
as a repellent for all sorts of spells 
and spirits that Gezun's master had 
to doff it before he could undertake any magical operation himself. 

"Heh-heh, and have you defy my 
commands with impunity, you 
young coystril? Not likely!" 

"Huh. You care not what be


THE OWL AND THE APE 



05 



comes of me, it seems, but only for 
your art. Some day I'll slay myself in sheer despite." 

"Oh, come now ... I'll tell you. 
You've been a good boy, though 
betimes exasperating; in recognition 
whereof I'll make you a bargain. 
I have another of these rings, raped 
from the same sky-stone, and do 
you procure t'his manuscript maugre 
all perils, I'll give you this spare 
ring to keep." 

Gezun Lorska grinned under his 
mop of black Pusaadian curls. "I'll 
fetch your zany writing. Master, or 
perish in the trying! You'll faithfully feed my beasts whilst I'm 
gone?" 

"Aye; though I know not why I 
submit to having my house turned 
into a menagerie. Go now, fetch 
our supper, for your tomorrow commences ere dawn." 

EZUN Lorska rode his mule for 
three days into the deep defiles 
and gloomy mountains of the peninsula of Gozau, with plenty of time 
to think. 

He wondered, for instance, at his 
master's plan to extort treasure 
from the kinglets of Pusaad by 
means of the Hordhun Manuscript 
and its alleged spells. These kinglets included his own former sovereign, Vuar the Capricious of 
Lorsk. Now, whither lay his primary duty, towards King Vuar or 
towards Sancheth Sar? This was 
| |is first real dhance to ponder such 
problems since his purchase from 



the pack of Harreimorka pirates 
a year before. Ever since he had 
been kidnapped while exploring his 
family's estate on the supposedly 
safe western shores of Lorsk he had 
lived jn too constant a ferment of 
sudden terrors and new experience 
to have time to think. 

He was hazy as to what rights 
a slave had. If he ran away but 
was recaptured before leaving the 
confines of Nembiar, he knew he'd 
be forcibly returned to the custody 
of Sancheth Sar, minus an ear as 
a reminder. On the other hand if 
he crossed the Tritonian Sea to 
Pusaad he would, he thought, be 
safe; and once in Lorsk his family's influence could interpose an 
army between him and any pursuers. 

Unfortunately there lay that 
somber sea between himself and 
home, and passage would not easily be arranged for a fourteen-yearold boy with a slave-brand on his 
hand. 

And how eager was he to escape, 
really? To him enslavement was 
one of the normal risks of life, and 
he would no more have thought of 
attacking the institution as a whole 
merely because it had caught him 
in its toils than he would have 
thought of proposing a law against 
dying. 

All things considered, he had gotten off rather well. Sancheth Sar 
had not inflicted on him any mutilation besides the pirates' brand, 
and had, in his erratic and absent


I 



06 



IMAGINATION 



minded way, treated him kindly 
enough, so that Gezun had become 
warily fond of the old man. Or as 
fond as any adolescent normally 
becomes of an adult master. His 
real friends were those of his own 
age in Ezvelar, whom he dominated 
partly by a certain amiable ingenuity in plotting forays against the 
common enemy, the adult world; 
partly by the glamor of his magical 
apprenticeship; and partly by sheer 
size. 

If he continued to work with reasonable fidelity for this strange 
master, he thought, he might even 
look forward to stepping into the 
wizard's shoes some day. Such a 
career might well provide more fun 
and glory than life as a petty lordling on the 'bison-swarming plains 
of windy Lorsk. Perhaps he could 
set up headquarters in lordly Torrutseish, whence Sanc'heth Sar had 
originally come. Maybe he could 
win a daughter of the King of Nembiar to concubine; become vizier, 
or even king himself . . . 

Another thought made him grin: 
He certainly wouldn't leave Ezvelar until he had had a showdown 
with Djarra on that matter of completing his education. 

V\/ r HEN the mountains of Gozau 
* y had grown so tall that they 
seemed to lean over and glower 
down upon him, Gezun Lorska 
came to Mount Tadhik and the cave 
of Dauskez-h Van, which opened out 
into a natural amphitheater among 



the crags. A small almost-human 
being came up and took Gezun 's 
mule and led it to where other 
beasts of burden were tethered, then 
returned to Gezun. It laid a finger on its lips and led him into 
the mouth of the cave, picking up 
a small copper oil-lamp whose 
flame cast a meager yellow glow 
into the dark. 

"Almost you were too late," it 
whispered, tugging Gezun along the 
rocky corridor. "Wait here." 

It disappeared into a side-cave 
or room and came out again with a 
curious object: a hollow head-mask 
in the form of a lamb's head. Gezun 
Lorska remembered his master's 
warning about Dauskezh's custom 
of making the bidders don masks 
that symbolized their respective natures, and felt anger stir within him. 

"Why you — " he began, but just 
then the creature popped the object 
over his head and tied it in place 
with a draw-string before he could 
avert the event. 

Gezun s anger subsided and he 
allowed himself a chuckle. Let 
them think him a lamb; the reputation of being a simpleton might 
be an asset to a man — provided he 
were not one in fact. 

Then the being led him swiftly 
further back into the labyrinth of 
caves where Dauskezh made his 
home. Here and there the little 
lamp showed where the wizard and 
(his helpers had improved the natural formations for their own con- ' 
veniences, enlarging a minor vug 



THE OWL AND THE APE 



97 



to serve as a storage space or shoring up a precarious bit of cave-roof 
with planks and props. Then they 
entered a large cavern lit by several lamps, in which were gathered 
Gezun's fellow-bidders, seated on the 
swept stone floor in concentric crescents and wrapped in the black 
mantles of Nenvbiar. 

As the being pushed Gezun 
Lorska into a vacant place in the 
last row, most of the heads of the 
earlier arrivals turned towards him, 
exhibiting, not human faces, but 
more animal-masks. Through the 
eye-holes in his mask he saw a 
horse, a lion, an aurochs, a fallowdeer, a rhinoceros, a badger — even 
one grotesque simulacrum in miniature of a mammoth's head, complete with curling tusks and dangling trunk. 

T>Y the lamplight he could discern along the walls row after 
row of dim-lit paintings of animals, 
executed in a lively and life-like 
though archaic style. There were 
mammoths and bison and the giant 
deer now found only in savage 
Ierarne. This, then, must be one 
of the caves of which the legends 
of Pusaad told, where his forebears had lived scores of centuries 
earlier, before the gods had taught 
men the copper-smelting art— before the short sharp-browed Hauskirik had driven the Pusaadians 
across the Tritonian Sea and made 
all of Nembiar theirs. His people, 
though individually larger than the 



Hauskirik by the length of a foot, 
had been too much absorbed in 
their art, their songs, their totemistic 
religion, and their intertribal feuds 
to resist these taciturn and tenacious newcomers, who swarmed into the land like hornets, bringing 
a new and deadly sting: the bow 
and arrow. 

Now the Pusaadians on their 
sea-girt land painted new pictures 
and dreamed dreams of returning 
to their homeland. The animals 
on the wall reminded Gezun that 
he was a Pusaadian too, and that 
his real name was Dopueng Shysh. 
not this servile cognomen his master had imposed upon him as easier 
for Hauskirik vocal organs to pronounce than the vowels of Pusaad. 
Gezun wondered whether he could, 
by taking Sancheth Sar's place and 
becoming the greatest wizard in 
Nembiar, expedite this homecoming 
before all of Pusaad sank beneath 
the Western Sea. 

But right now he had to pick 
Nikurteu Balya out of the crowd 
without a face to go by. Sancheth 
Sar had hinted that Nikurteu, for 
sagacity, might be honored with an 
owl's head. Gezun, however, knew a 
lot about animals. He had kept as 
a pet practically everything short 
of a bison, both home in Pusaad 
and here in Nembiar, and had given Sancheth Sar a terrific turn by 
producing a pair of snakes at supper. Unknown on Pusaad, these 
reptiles had fascinated Gezun's artistic eye by their grace, and for


IMAGINATION" 



tunately they were not of a 
venemous species. 

Gezun Lorska knew that the owl, 
for all its sage appearance, was no 
more intelligent than any other bird 
— if anything rather less so. 

He peered through the crowd, picking out a leopard, a hyena, a bear, 
a wolverine, a wild ass, and a monkey. He had also had to do with 
monkeys, and knew something of 
their trickfiness and resource. It 
seemed to him that if Dauskezh Van 
were as wise as he was alleged to 
be, and were going to choose an 
animal to symbolize the character 
of Nikurteu, he could hardly select a more suitable symbol than 
the monkey. 

Well, he'd be taking a chance 
either way, so he might as well 
take it his way as another's. The 
ape it should be. 

Leather curtains rustled and 
Dauskezh Van came in. He was 
even older than Sancheth Sar, and 
in the dim light he seemed to Gezun 
to be already dead and reanimated 
by some not altogether successful 
witchery. 

"Bids on One," whispered Dauskezh Van. 

"Fourteen nasses of gold," responded a wizard with the head of 
a chamois. 

"Fifteen," said a beaver. 

"Sixteen," said the owl. 

/^EZUN Lorska felt an urge to 
^jumptothe conclusion that the 
owl was Nikurteu Balya after all, 



and began bidding against him. He 
restrained himself, bearing in mind 
that he had reached his decision dispassionately, uninfluenced by the 
excitement of the moment, and had 
better stick to it. 

Item Number One went to the 
Chamois and Two came up. It was 
a very dull business, and Gezun 
Lorska almost fell asleep when a 
bid on Number Twenty-Three from 
the direction of the monkey brought 
him sharply out of his doze. 

"Twelve nasses," said the 
monkey. 

"Fifteen," said Gezun, heart 
pounding. 
"Twenty." 

"Twenty-five," said Gezun, thankful now that Sancheth Sar had 
forced him to learn simple sums. 

They went on up in jumps of 
five until they neared fifty, Sancheth Sar's limit. It was a formidable price; not only for Sancheth, 
but also, apparently, for his rival, 
for the monkeyhead began slowing 
down as they neared it. 

"Forty-eight," said the monkey. 

"Forty-nine," said Gezun. 

"Fortv-nine and a half." 

VFifty." 

Now Gezun waited, feeling as 
though his heart would burst 
through his chest. All the monkey 
had to do was add another fraction 
of a nas, no matter how small, and 
take the item . . . 

"Sold!" croaked Dauskezh Van. 

"Item Number Twenty-four . . ." 

Gezun relaxed, letting his breath 



THE OWL AND THE APE 



99 



out — then caught it again as another fear • fingered his windpipe. 
Suppose he had been mistaken and 
the ape was not Nikurteu after all? 
Or suppose Number Twenty-three 
were not the Hordhun Manuscript? 

It Would all come out in due 
time. If he had gone astray he 
could at best expect a beating from 
Sancheth Sar — not that he held 
Sancheth's beatings in much awe, 
for ithe old wizard no longer had 
the strength even to raise a welt 
on Gezun's tough hide. More serious was the prospect of having Sancheth cast upon him some bothersome curse, like muteness or inability to touch water— but then, he 
now carried a protective spell from 
Sancheth himself, and by the time 
it wore off, the sorcerer would have 
simmered down and forgotten his 
costly error. 

Item Thirty proved the last of 
the lot. The near-human thing 
touched Gezun Lorska and beckoned while the others kept their places. Gezun inferred that under 
Dauskezh's quaint rules the bidders were allowed to depart at intervals only, so as not to see each 
other's faces. He, being the last 
to arrive, would go first. 

So it proved. The being stopped Gezun at the anteroom, took 
the lam b 's head from him , a nd 
handed him a cylindrical package 
wrapped in lambskin and tied with 
a string of esparto grass. In return Gezun handed over the entire 
contents of the bag of gold weights 



which Sancheth Sar had sent with 
him. The being weighed the gold 
with care before letting Gezun go. 

Once free, Gezun Lorska wasted 
no time but rode off on Dostaen at 
once, chewing a great chunk of 
barley-bread from his scrip. 

r T ,, HE sun was sending a last red 
A ray through a notch in the 
mountains of Gozau, and Gezun 
Lorska was lolling on his mule and 
humming a song of Pusaad, when 
two men sprang out from behind 
the rocks. One, who carried a big 
bronze sword, seized Dostaen's bridle; the other made at Gezun 
Lorska with a hunting-spear. 

As the man with the spear drew 
it back for a stab, Gezun tumbled 
off his mule's back, so that the 
bronze spearhead darted like a 
snake's tongue through the empty 
space where Gezun had just been. 
He scrambled to his feet on the 
leeward side of the mule and made 
off up the nearest slope as fast as 
he could. 

Gezun Lorska's ear caught a 
fragment of speech between the 
men: something like . . you hold 
the -mule whilst I ..." A glance 
showed the spearman coming after him, bounding with great leaps 
from rock to rock, his black cloak 
flapping like bat's wings. Though 
more agile than the man, Gezun had 
a horrid feeling that the fellow 
would run him down in the long 
run. And he had nothing but a 
modest bronze knife to fight with. 



JOO 



IMAGINATION 



He ran on anyway. The slope 
narrowed to a tongue of land as 
Gezun neared the end of the summit of a small hill which on the far 
side dropped away in sheer precipices. A quick look showed no way 
down on that side. He was cornered. 

The panting breath of the pursuer came louder and louder to 
Gezun 's ears; any second the man 
would appear. The knife would be 
of little use. So would his sandals. 
His only other possessions at the 
moment were the Hordhun Manuscript (if such it was), his kilt, and 
the broad leather belt that held 
the kilt in place. His cloak he had 
shed at the start of the chase. The 
bronze buckle on the end of the 
belt might prove useful . . . 

A jumble of rocks lay about the 
hilltop; one nearly the size of his 
head and of curious elongated 
shape, like an enlarged fingerbone. 
Gezun whipped off his belt, letting 
his kilt fall; made a loop of his 
belt, and slipped the loop over the 
narrow place in the middle of the 
stone. 

When the spearman topped the 
rise, Gezun rushed at him. screeching in hope of disconcerting him. 
First he threw the rolled-up kilt at 
the man's face. The man dodged, 
but his at ten ti on was d is t rac ted 
long enough for Gezun to step in 
close, whirling the stone around his 
head on the end of the belt-loop. 
The spearman was scarcely taller 
than he was, and ithe slope gave 



Gezun some slight advantage. 

npHE stone struck the side of the 
man's head with a solid sound 
of crunching bone, and the man 
fell sidewise across his dropped 
spear. Gezun made sure the fellow 
was dead by severing his head, then 
pondered. He could not press his 
luck too far. The other man, he 
was sure, would recognize him the 
minute he appeared, and would be 
ready to meet him with sword and 
rolled-up cloak. Craft was indicated. 

Gezun Lorska therefore donned 
the dead man's clothes, pulling the 
black mantle over his head as these 
Hauskirik did at night. Them, picking up ithe spear, he swaggered back 
down the slope. The sun had disappeared. 

The swordsman, still holding the 
mule, looked up as Gezun approached and said: "Did you get it?" 

"Uh-huh," grunted Gezun, striving to imitaite with his changing 
voice the deeper accents of his victim. When he was close he said: 

"Take it." 

But as the swordsman tucked his 
sword under his left ami and put 
out his right hand, what Gezun laid 
on the hand was not the Hordhun 
Manuscript, but the freshly-severed 
head of -the spearman, which he had 
been carrying under the cloak. 

The swordsman gave a cry of 
horror and dropped the head with 
a thud. Gezun Lorska whipped up 
the spear and plunged the point in


THE OWL AND THE APE 



IOI 



to his foe's thick body. When his 
young muscles failed to drive it 
very far in on the first thrust, he 
s-hoved on the shaft with all his 
might, pushing the man back from 
him. 

The man dropped his sword with 
a clatter and tried to recover it, 
but another push by Gezun forced 
him off-balance and he fell. He 
tried to wrestle the spear-shaft out 
of his body, but Gezun kept pushing 
it in; then to reach Gezun, who was 
now at the far end of the spear and 
beyond reach. At last the man 
threw himself away from Gezun, 
tearing the spear-shaft out of his 
grasp. 

Gezun danced back as the man 
rounded on him and pulled the 
spear out of his side, hobbled back 
to where he had dropped his sword, 
picked it up too, and set out after 
Gezun with a weapon in each hand. 
Gezun ran — not uphill this time, but 
down. Behind htm the man plowed 
through the scrub and scrambled 
over the rocks, cursing by his various gods in a gasping undertone. 

The chase went on until Gezun 
realized that the gasping breath 
and the muttered curses were no 
longer keeping up with him. He 
looked back and saw a dark shape 
sprawled on the hillside among the 
boulders. 

He scouted cauAiously towards it. 
The man was lying and holding his 
side, but as Gezun approached he 
sat up and hurled the spear at him. 
It was a bad throw, for the spear 



slewed sidewise in the air and the 
shafit hit Gezun on the forearm he 
threw up to ward it off — a bruising 
knock but not crippling. Gezun 
Lorska picked up the spear and 
backed as the man tried to rush 
with his sword. Lacking the strength 
to make it. the fellow sank down 
again among the rocks. 

GEZUN Lorska sat down on a 
boulder and waited warily for 
the man to weaken further. Darkness deepened; the evening star appeared. The gasping. breath became 
a rattle and then stopped. Gezun 
rose, bounded around behind the 
man, and drove the spear into his 
back to make sure he was dead. He 
looted the corpse with quick efficiency and found his way back_ up 
to the road, where Dostaen placidly 
munched the scanty herbage. 

A few minutes later, wearing his 
own clothes and carrying the Hordhun Manuscript and the weapons 
of his late attackers, he set out 
again on the way to Ezvelar. 

"Gezun! Gezun Lorska!" cried a 
voice. 

Gezun recognized it. "Djarra!" 
he shouted. "What on earth are 
you doing here?" In his excitement 
his voice slid up into the high boy's 
range. 

She hopped down to the road and 
caught his leg. "Oh, right joyful 
am I that you came! My father 
brought me on a trading-trip adown 
Gozau, and a pack of knaves set upon us and scattered the caravan, 



102 



IMAGINATION 



though I think my father got away 
safe. Will you take me back to 
Ezvelar?" 

"Certes! What think you? Here, 
catch my hand and hop up behind." 

''Won't you dismount a minute 
first? So weary am I of wandering these forsaken hills, and you 
can't go much further tonight in 
any case." 

"I'll go far enough to put a healthy distance betwixt me and the 
ghosts of those I sped!" 

"You've been manslaying again?" 

"Merely in * self-defense. There 
were six, but I drove Dostaen at full 
gallop into the ruck, slew two at the 
first onset and put the rest to 
rout." 

"Marvelous! You shall tell me all 
about it: but meanwhile dismount. 
Have you aught to eat? So weak 
of starvation am I that without a 
bite I fear I can go no further." 

"Oh, very well." Gezun vaulted 
off. "But for all these things there 
is a price, as says the philosopher 
Goishek." 

T AUGHING she put her face up 
-'—'to be kissed. Although the light 
was too dim to discern her features 
clearly, her Hauskirik eyebrows, 
like a pair of little black sickles, 
showed against the lighter tone of 
her skin. She melted into his arms 
and he felt her ripening young body 
against his. He kissed her frantically, his pulse pounding. 

"There's a place — nearby — " she 
gasped, "where — your education 



might—" 

Somewhere an owl hooted. The 
sound touched off a train of thought 
in Gezun Lorska's mind, even while 
he was kissing Djarra. The owl is 
really a stupid creature, he remembered, for all his appearance of 
wisdom; and was he playing the 
owl by any chance? 

It was odd that when he had 
seen Djarra four days ago she had 
said nothing of any such trip; it 
was odder that Djarra's father, a 
patriarch with strong ideas of the 
place of women in society, should 
take his daughter with him on such 
a commercial foray. Perhaps it was 
more than a coincidence that the 
type of education which Djarra 
proposed to give him was precisely that guaranteed to dissolve 
and cancel the spell Sancheth 
Sar had cast upon him to ward off 
the maleficent magic of Nikurteu 
Balya. 

As he hesitated, torn between 
prudence and passion, the owl hooted again. With that he thrust her to 
arms' length, looking at. her through 
narrowed eyes. 

"What's the naime of my mother?" he demanded abruptly. 

"Why Gezun, as if I should know 
that . . ." 

"Then be damned to demonland!" he shouted, vaulting back on 
the mule. "May all your brats be 
stillborn ! May Dyosizh smite 
your tenderest parts with an itoh! 
May the teeth rot in your head!" 

He trotted off into the night, 



THE OWL AND THE APE 



knowing full well that the real 
Djarra knew the names of his parents perfectly well. Hadn't he 
spent hours telling her of his life 
in Lorsk? 

A glance back showed Djarra 
standing quietly by the road. As 
he watched, her features changed 
into something not quite human, 
and peals of shrill aged laughter 
came after him. He spat and wiped 
his mouth with his mantle. 

"Thinks he can befool me with 
his shape-changing sprites, eh?" he 
mused. "Me, me? Dopueng Shysh 
of Lorsk, the future king of Nembiar?" 

He gestured with the spear 
against the unresisting night air. 

npHE heart of Gezun Lorska beat 
*• high as he rode into Ezvelar in 
tihe early morning. At the edge of 
town he dismounted to lead Dostaen the rest of the way, for the 
narrow streets did not encourage 
cantering, and anyway Gezun's bottom was sore from days of hard 
riding. He paused at the little 
bridge over the Arrang to watch a 
gang of workmen digging a foundation for a house. He became lost 
in contemplation, thinking of the 
fine palace he'd build when he was 
king, until a voice behind him 
roused him: 

"Day-dreaming, Gezun Lorska? 
You'll never attain the style of 
magician by that road!" 

It was Nikurteu Balya, riding 
past on his fine black horse. With 



a laugh Gezun's master's rival rode 
on and disappeared. 

Gezun Lorska pulled himself together and trudged the small remaining distance to Sancheth Sar's 
house. Sancheth Sar himself hurried to the door at the sound of his 
approach. 

"What news?" creaked the old 
wizard. 

"Success, Master!" 

"Haulae! Glorious! You're a fine 
lad, as I've always said!" Years 
fell away from Sancheth as he waved his stick, did a little dance-step, 
and thumped Gezun affectionately 
on the back. "Tell me all about it." 

"Here's the manuscript," said 
Gezun, handing it over. "But before I begin, wasn't there a certain 
other bargain between us?" 

"You mean the ring? Here, take 
mine: I'll use the other." 

Sancheth Sar slipped the ring of 
sky-metal off and handed it to 
Gezun, who experimented till he 
found a finger it fitted comfortably. 

"And now to your tale — wup! 
What's this?" 

As Gezun Lorska watched with 
increasing alarm. Sancheth Sar's 
eyes widened, the corners of his 
mouth turned down, and his fingers 
began to shake. 

"Listen," he said in a voice like 
one of Gezun's pet snakes in a rage: 

"To my esteemed colleague, Sancheth Sar, from his admirer Nikurteu Balya. Your servant bore himself nobly on the mission whereon 
you sent him. Nevertheless it is 



104 



IMAGINATION 



written in the Book of Geratun that 
he who assigns to a boy a task 
properly appertaining to a man shall 
rue the day he did so. For Gezun 
Lorska shrewdly surmised which 
item of the auction was the Hordhun Manuscript and overbid me; 
he bravely fought and slew two servants I sent to waylay him; he resisted with inhuman self-control 
the advances of a sprite I sent to 
entice him from the path of rectitude in the form of his sweetling. 
Yet when he entered Ezvelar did he 
stop to watch four men digging a 
hole in the ground — four men whom 
I, knowing that no boy can resist 
the spectacle of an excavation, had 
hired for the purpose. And so bemused became he that it was no 
tough task to take the Hordhun 
Manuscript from his scrip and substitute this commiseratory screed. 
Farewell! " 

"You I" screamed Sancheth Sar, 
and his eyes were like those of a 



hungry eagle. "You bawbling oaf! 
You imperceiverant hilding! You 
incondite loon! Til cast upon you 
an itch that shall leave you no 
peace for — " 

"Forget not this. Master!" cried . 
Gezun Lorska, backing toward the 
door and holding out the clenched 
hand that bore the ring of starmetal. "Enchant me you cannot!" 

"But that protects you not from 
more mundane chastisement!" yelled Sancheth, and went for Gezun 
Lorska with his stick. 

And thus it came to pass that the 
citizens of Ezvelar were treated to 
the diverting if not uplifting spectacle of Gezun Lorska running fulltilt down the main street, while 
behind him came the town's senior 
sorcerer, Sancheth Sar, making a 
speed that none would have expected in a wizard of his centuries, and 
cleaving the air with his mystic 
walking-stick. 

THE END 



OcecinA Of Sf. 



ace 



THE handwirting is on the wall; 
it's clear and legible for anyone 
to see. Man is going out into space, 
to the farthest planets, into the 
trackless wastes of emptiness— and 
he's going to make his mark. We're 
on the verge of this, it's true, and 
though it will be a long time before 
it happens — in every way we're preparing. 

Offhand you wouldn't think 
there'd be any connection between 
sea-going light ships — and inter


planetary space — but there is. It just 
requires a slight extension of the 
mind. 

The other day it was announced 
that the Coast Guard is experimenting with a number of completely remotely controlled light ships, those 
vessels carrying radio beacons and 
light signals which guard the entrances to ports and prevent oceangoing ships from cracking up on the 
shoals. These ships are simply metal shells filled with electro-mechan


OCEAXS OF SPACE 



105 



ical equipment ranging- from three 
automatic diesel engines to complete 
transmitters. Once every few months 
they will be refueled by tenders, 
their apparatus checked, and their 
seaworthiness established — just as is 
.lone with the smaller automatic 
buoys. 

This is, in its way, a direct preparation for the future. Inevitably 
radio and light and radar beacons 
are going to be required in the remote fastnesses of interplanetary 
space. Automatic signal generating 
equipment will be required to maintain a constant vigil, to provide a 
"spacemark" for traveling spaceships. Certainly these space stations 



FAMILIAR in legend, story and 
song to French and Swiss metal and coal miners, are the mischievous "Kobalds" — "dwarfs" to us 
and inspired stimulation to Walt 
Disney in his famous roly-poly little 
elves of "The Story of Snow-White 

The original "kobalds" of the mining legends were the personification 
of the miners' troubles. If a mine 
caved in, the kobalds had caused it. 
If a miner hurt himself, it was because of the kobalds, and if a miner 
vanished in the labyrinth, stygian 
depth of the mine fastnesses, it was 
the kobalds who had stolen him. In essence the kobalds were the simple 
miners' expression in speech of the 
woes associated with that dangerous 
work. 

But so fascinating were the tales 
told of the kobalds that gradually 
their fame branched out to the storytellers who changed them into more 
benevolent creatures. The name kohald is the origin incidentally of 



will be a far cry in their mechanical 
and electrical natures from the preceding lightships. But essentially, as 
in all scientific devices the principles and techniques will be about the 
same. 

An automatic radio in space won't 
be much different from the same 
thing on the ocean. Sure, the power 
plants won't be diesel engines, but 
there will be power plants! 

The overall effect of this activity 
is this; we are preparing for the 
future whether we know it or not. 
Every single advancement that occurs here on Earth will eventually 
find its counterpart in space. 
* * * 



Capers 

the word "cobalt" — color and metal. 

One of the most famous of the 
kobald legends tells of Miner ("Bergwerker" in Swiss) Mueller, who, in 
a fit of rage when a lump of ore 
dropped from the roof of a mine 
and struck him on the head, cursed 
the kobalds and all their descendants. 
His curse was overheard by the kobalds and Miner Mueller suddenly 
disappeared from the ken of his 
fellows. Miner Mueller had lost his 
way in a gallery and had starved to 
death explained the mine foreman 
when they came upon a heap of 
bones years later. But the miners 
themselves knew better. The kobalds, 
they said, in revenge for Mueller's 
curses, had removed his soul and 
body from around his skeleton and 
condemned him to wander in and 
out of mines forever, always wailing and weeping in weird tones. To 
this day they say in the mines, when 
the creaks and whispers and moans 
and sighs are heard, "Miner Mueller 
is walking today ..." 



* 



Raman Raym 



PLAYMATE 

ll3u jCeilie -A. routed 

Dickie was a swell playmate. But there was something unusual about him — like the way he needed oil 
sometimes — and pounded nails with his fists . . . 



Iwas in the kitchen hunting for 
matches to light my pipe when 
Bobby came bouncing through 
the door, letting the screen shut 
with a shattering bang. Without 
seeming to even pause in his rush 
he got out all in one long breath: 
"Hey, Mom. can I have Dickie for 
.supper tonight?" 

Betts paused at her task of trimming a pie before popping it in the 
oven. 

"Who's Dickie, dear?" she asked. 

Bobby snuffled, slyly helping himself to a cookie. "He's the new boy 
who moved in next door, Mom." 

"Is he a nice little boy?" 

I snorted a bit to myself at this. 
T don't cross Betts; it doesn't complement the happiness and tranquility of a home to tell a woman 
how to raise your son. You just let 
'em go their own way, and watch 
the offspring go his. 

"Sure he's a nice boy." I sensed 
the disdain in his voice. 

"What's he like, son?" I asked. 

"Oh — I dunno — he's well, he's 
jus' diff'rent." 



We let it go at that. Betts would 
have carried the matter further, but. 
catching her eye, I shook my head. 
She desisted, smiling a little. 
* * * 

It was comfortable on the veranda. There was a little breeze 
blowing and I was sitting there, 
feet cocked up on the rail, half 
asleep, Betts came out and picked 
up a magazine. Only the slight 
sound of her flipping the pages disturbed the tranquility of a hot summer afternoon. 

"Hey ; Mom ! Where's the oil 
can?" 

Our small son came tearing 
around the side of the house, yelling 
his request in that impatient tone 
all small boys seem to have some 
sort of a proprietory interest in . 
He mounted the steps and asked 
again before we had had a chance 
to answer. 

"I think there's one in the cupboard under the kitchen sink," I 
supplied the information. 

"Gotta be thin oil," he stipulated. 



107 



IMAGINATION 



I grinned. "Three-in-one there. 
That thin enough?" 

He rumpled his hair with a grimy 
hand. T guess so. Dickie needs it."' 

Betts smiled. "What does Dickie 
need it for, dear?" she asked. 

"Don't call me 'dear'!" he scowled. -That's baby talk." 

"I'm sorry." She sounded hurt. 
"What do you need the oil for, 
Bobbie?" 

His voice came back to us as he 
vanished into the house. 

"It's for Dickie. He squeaks!" 

T frowned about the garage. I'd 
*■ got tired of sitting about, doing 
nothing, so I'd wandered down here 
to the combined garage and work 
shop, thinking maybe there might 
be something I could putter a little 
time away on. 

It was pretty messy. Various 
items that collect about any home, 
no matter how well managed, had 
collected in a hodgepodge that was 
without rhyme or reason. I thought 
I might tidy up a little. 

I was well into things, shirt 
sleeves rolled up, when I heard 
voices. Unconsciously, as one will 
do when busy, I listened . It was 
Bobby, and apparently he had 
brought the other boy with him. 

"Pop's got a bench back here. 
We can fix you there, maybe," I 
heard him say. 

I grinned, thinking how funny 
the ungrammatical speech errors of 
small children are at times. I won


dered, briefly, what might be broken that needed fixing. 

I had hung up a basket, and was 
bending down for a rake when a 
definite denial from the direction of 
the bench broke in on my wandering thoughts. 

"Heck, no," I heard this new 
voice exclaim. "Not that one. It's 
too large." 

"No it ain't," Bobby's voice replied. 

"It is, too. It'll stick way out 
and get in the way." 

"Pop uses bolts too long. He cuts 
'em off and polishes the end." 

' Well — maybe — all right. Be 
careful though. I won't be able to 
pick anything up if it isn't just 
right." 

Then I heard the various tiny 
clickings denoting tools in use, to 
be followed by the thin rasp of a 
hacksaw. 

Not believing in interfering with 
the activities of boys at play, I 
went on with my work and quicklv 
forgot the incident. 

HpHE roast certainly smelled good. 
*■ But then, Betts is a wonderful 
cook. She teased me sometimes about 
that being the only reason I married her. 

I helped her bring it in: she carried the platter, and I carried the 
carving utensils. 

"Where's Bobby?" she asked, 
setting it down. 

: 'Oh. somewhere about. Down in 



-PLAYMATE 



tog 



the basement, I think." 

"Will you call him, dear?" 

I did this and I could hear his 
footsteps and those of his new 
friend, clattering up the stairs. The 
faucet went on splattering]}-. 

"Get another towel, Bobby," 
Betts called. 

"Phooey!" Bobby answered. "Only need one. Dickie doesn't wash!" 

I almost laughed at the horrified 
look on my wife's face. I turned to 
the window, thrusting hands into 
pockets. Cleanliness is almost a fetish with her and I knew how Bobby's remark must have needled her. 
She marched, that is the only wrfrd, 
toward the kitchen. 

"Oh dear," I heard, a second 
later. 

When I turned, she was standing 
behind her chair at the table, a 
funny look on her face. It wasn't 
a frightened one. It was sort of, 
well, amazed, dumfounded. perhaps. I couldn't place it. and I 
can't yet when I think back. She 
looked at me, and gave the queerest little shrug, helpless like. 

Then Bobby and his friend came 

in. 

We all sat down and I had carved 
the roast and was passing the plates 
around before I got a chance to 
look at the new boy closely. I'd 
thought there was something a little out of the ordinary about him 
when he had come in. His walk 
had been rather stiff, as though his 
knees wouldn't bend properly. 



When I saw his face I was astounded. Never had I seen one like 
it before. 

It had human lines, yes. The 
texture of the skin, if skin it was, 
appeared normal, outside of a certain hard appearance, a harshness, 
that was altogether alien. That is 
the only term I can use — -alien. The 
mouth opened, but it wasn't pliaable like a human mouth. It 
was supposed to be that, I know, 
but it still was something else. 

«T watched him as we ate. He 
drank his milk as Bobby did, only 
differently. That is, he didn't seem 
to swallow it, he just appeared to 
pour it down. He'd place the glass 
to his lips, tip it, and the fluid 
would pour down, steadily, quickly, 
and the whole glassful would disappear in one smooth flow, without 
halt or apparent discomfort. 

Exactly as though he didn't have 
to swallow, but just poured it 
straight down, I thought to myself. 
As though he had no gullet! 

And the way he ate. This was 
something even stranger. He didn't 
place the food in his mouth and 
chew it, with pauses now and then. 
He fed himself like an automaton. 
Each piece was cut from the meat, 
each forkful of potatoes, each bite 
of bread, was an evenly spaced motion as though controlled by a 
mechanism. Each portion was of 
the same size. And this went on 
until his plate was empty, without 
the slightest sign of hesitation, except to take another glass of milk, 



I 10 



IMAGINATION 



which was poured down the same 
way as the first. 

T TE didn't chew his food, either, 
* * as far as I could see. I know 
it must sound as though I am a 
very imperfect host, to watch a 
guest in such a fashion. But I think 
that if you were in the same position, you would have done the 
same. As I have said, he didn't appear to chew his food. His mouth 
would open, receive the portion 
brought up by his fork, close — and 
that was all. Absolutely no motion 
of working jaws; no sign of swallowing. 

When the main courses were finished, we had ice cream, a favorite of Bobby's." This is something 
I have to eat with some circumspection, as it bothers my teeth at 
times. Betts can eat it without a 
thought in the world. But she still 
doesn't take it the way Dickie did. 
He shovelled it in the way I'd 
stoke my furnace on a cold night. 
[ could picture the inside of his 
mouth becoming iced up and needing some sort of defrosting. But it 
didn't seem to bother him a bit. He 
held out his plate for a second 
helping, which went the same way 
as its predecessor. 

Finally the meal was over. Bobby, as is his want, was impatient to 
get away. His friend seemed just 
as eager. As they left the room I 
again noted the stiff, rather awkward, yet albeit, somehow graceful, stride of his. 



I looked at Betts. She was staring at me with eyes big and round. 

"What's the matter, dear?" I 
asked. 

"That boy, AI. He isn't normal." 
That was an understatement, I 
told her. 

"Oh, I know what you mean. The 
way he eats. But that isn't all." 

I lifted my eyebrows. 

"When I went to the kitchen to 
see about him not washing, what 
do you think I saw?" 

I stuffed my pipe and eyed the 
bowl appreciatively. 

t*I saw him oiling himself!" 

I lit up. The pipe drew swell. 
After a full meal, the good rich 
tobacco tasted wonderful. 

"AI, did you hear me? I said he 
was oiling himself!" 

"Oh sure, he was oiling himself. 
What's wrong with that?" 

I got up, pushing the chair back 
with a muted rasp. I stretched. 
Feeling like a short siesta, I started for the front porch. Then it was 
that the intelligence of her words 
struck me. I did a quick doubletake. 

"He was doing— WHAT?" 

She smiled, smugly. "Oiling himself, AI." 

I leaned on the table. "Easy now, 
Betts, old girl. Easy now. Maybe 
you ate too much — maybe the 
heat — " 

"Heat nothing. He was leaning 
against the table and he had a can 



PLAYMATE 



1 1 1 



of oil and he was squirting it in 
His hands and rubbing it on his 
neck and wrists." 

I sat down. Looking at her, I 
wondered. 

"No, I'm not crazy," she said. 
"And I'm not cracking up. I'm 
just telling you what I saw." 

I thought it over. I was pretty 
sure she was mistaken. She had 
seen something, but to her it had 
looked entirely different. Betts is 
a highly imaginative person, what 
with reading those science fiction 
magazines and stuff. But I looked 
at her closely, as it still didn't sound 
like her. 

I rose. "C'mon. We'll look up 
Dickie and get to the bottom of 
this." 

THEY were building something 
in the back yard. It looked 
like a house, or maybe it was supposed to be a boat. They had two 
or three old piano crates, and with 
some scrap lumber from the loft 
over the garage, were nailing it all 
together. 

Bobby was busily banging away 
with a hammer. 1 imagined the 
nails he was using, with his habit 
of using ten where one or two 
would do. I could hear his friend 
hammering away on the other side, 
out of sight. 

"How ya doin', Dickie?" Bobby 
yelled as we came up. 

"Fine," Dickie replied. 

"Ya usin' the hammer?" 



"Nope. Do it faster without." 
"Don't it hurt your hand?" 
"Xaw." ? 

"I wisht I could drive nails with 
my hand. 1 ' 

"It's easy. Ya just double up 
your fist and give the nail a whack 
on the head — ■" 

We didn't hear the rest. We 
moved around the packing cases and 
stared. 

Dickie was standing there, nails 
sticking out of his mouth. He'd 
take one in his left hand, hold it 
to the wood, and bang! bring his 
fist down on it and drive it home. 
No hammer — no nothing. Just his 
bare hand, doubled into a fist, and 
he was driving those nails home 
with the regularity of a slow triphammer. 

Betts, fainting, knocked the pipe 
from my mouth. I carried her into 
the house and started fussing over 
her. 

* * * 

After she had recovered, we held 
a consultation. Then we went over 
to our new neighbor and rapped on 
the door. When it opened we faced, 
not some strange creature, as T 
think we half expected, but a perfectly normal woman, somewhat 
harrassed looking, wiping her hands 
on a flowered apron. 

"I'm Al Hason," I introduced 
myself. "We live next door — " 

"Oh!" She seemed to be expecting us, by the look on her face. 
"Please come in." 



I I 2 



IMAGINATION 



She ushered us into a nicely furnished parlor and called to someone named John. Her husband, I 
suspected. 

"This is Mr. Robeson." she introduced us. To her husband: "They 
live next door." 

He drew in his breath and lines 
of weariness grew about his mouth. 

"We've been sort of expecting 
you," he said, sitting down. "But 
not so soon." 

My eyebrows raised. 

"I guess," he patted his wife's 
hand where it rested on his shoulder. "I guess you've met our son." 

"Yes," Eetts answered. "Our little boy had him at our place for 
supper." 

Mrs. Robeson sat down and started to wring her hands. 

"Oh dear. So now you know! We 
have had to move so often— people 
just can't understand." 

T started feeling uncomfortable. I 
■*■ ran my finger around, inside my 
collar and wished we had left well 
enough alone. 

"Oh, I'm so sorry," Betts said. 
"But really, he seems such a nice 
boy. He is so quiet and well mannered. We — er — " she stumbled. 

"Yes, I know just what you mean, 
Mrs. Hason." Robeson rose to his 
feet, started pacing up and down 
the small room. "You can imagine 
what we feel like, living with him 
for almost seven years. We know 
even less about him than you do." 



"Perhaps a doctor — -" I muttered 
and was sorry immediately. He 
heard me. 

"A doctor?" He smiled slightly. 
"I had the same idea a long time 
ago. We took him to the best and 
found out nothing. After looking him 
over for a time, they wanted to 
put him on display before other 
men of science. They wanted to 
experiment on him. We couldn't allow that. After all, he is our son-." 

I agreed, mentally, and verbally. 

"He was born to us in a normal 
way, as far as we know, and as far 
as the records sh'ow," Mrs. Robeson took up. "He seems to grow 
but from what we were told, we 
cannot understand how. Nothing' 
seems to hurt him. He never gets 
cut, or has slivers, or gets colds. 
He's never been ill, and he eats 
anything he desires." 

Robeson laughed, somewhat bitterly, I thought. "Don't forget the 
oil, my dear." 

She smiled. "Oh yes, the oil. I 
forgot — if he doesn't oil himself 
quite frequently, especially during 
wet weather, he stiffens up so he 
can hardly move. He doesn't require 
as much as he used to, though." 

"No, not since he started eating 
more fats and oily foods," her husband added. 

"What did the doctor say?" I 
asked. 

"Oh. they used a lot of long 
words that meant nothing to us. 
What it all boiled down to, was 



PLAYMATE 



"3 



that they didn't know either. We 
were as much in the dark after leaving as we had been before." 

"But haven't you any kind of an 
idea of what he might — er— be, or 
what might be the matter with 
him?" 

He shook his head. "There is 
nothing wrong with him, Mr. Hason. He is just too perfect. Consider that he has never been ill. He 
never has a cold, or has any pains. 
He apparently can't be easily hurt. 
He can't be shocked, I know that. 
I've seen him do things around 
electricity that would kill an ordinary man. He doesn't even seem 
to feel the juice. If he does, he 
doesn't let on. He is strong. His 
flesh seems too hard to give. Why, 
I've seen him drive nails with his 
fists. He is smart. He's a regular 
prodigy. So you tell me what is 
wrong with him!" 

I didn't answer that. There wasn't any need. Any remark I might 
have made would have been superfluous to say the least. 

"Did you ever try other doctors?" I suggested. 

"No, and I'm not going to. And 
why? Because they'll be the same 
as the first. They wanted lo x-ray 
him, stick needles in him, even operate on him. I don't want that. 
After all, queer as he might be, 
he is our son. We can never have 
any more children, so he's all we 
got, and by God man, for better 
or worse, I'm going to keep him! 



"What will those men do? Put 
him on display like a freak, maybe. 
Take him all over for people to 
stare at. I won't have it. It wouldn't be fair to him. Maybe he is a 
genius. If he is they'll burn his 
brain out with questions and he'd 
be just another dumb guy like his 
old man. No sir, I'm going to give 
him his chance to grow up and 
then maybe he'll amount to something." 

He stopped. Running his fingers 
through his hair, he suddenly smiled. 

"I'm sorry. Guess you think I'm 
a little nuts. But we've had to 
move a lot of times just because 
people got nosy and started saying 
things. It gets under a man's skin 
after awhile." 

I figured it was time we were 
leaving and I suggested it to Betts, 
tactfully. 

"Don't worry about it," I said 
as I shook hands with him at the 
door. "We won't say anything. We 
have a son, too, you know, so we 
understand. Our boy seems to like 
him, and that's enough for us." 

npHAT night, before retiring. 
A Betts and I went in to say 
goodnight to Bobby, as was our 
rule. He was sitting up, looking 
out of the window at the moon, 
which, big and silvery, was just 
coming up out of the eastHe turned as we entered. 
"What are you thinking about, 
son?" I asked, mussing his hair. 



IMAGINATION 



Kids have the funniest, and sometimes the most astute, philosophies, 
and I never tire of hearing them. 

"I was just thinkin' 'bout Dickie, 
Pop." 

"And what about Dickie?" Betts 
asked. 

He looked at us, his eyes big, his 
face a little sad. 

"I was thinkin' how Dickie was 
so lucky. He can't ever get hurt, 
or be sick, 'n' he told me today he 
won't die for hunnerds V hunnerds 
;»f years 'cause he's not like us. He's 
got no tonsils to get sore and have 
jto be cut out, 'n' his teeth won't 
ever get bad, 'n' he knows millions 
and millions of things I don't know. 
Oh, he's awful lucky V awful 
' smart, Pop. I wisht I was like him." 

I looked at Betts. 
, "What is he like, Bobby?" I 
asked him. 

He looked thoughtful. "I guess I 
can tell you," he said. "He asked 
me not to tell people but I guess 
it's all right to tell you V Mom. 
It is all right, ain't it, Pop?" 

"If you think it is, son." I said. 
"If you say it's all right, then it's 
all right." 

He thought this over. His fingers 
picked at the bed clothes. Finally 
he sighed. 

"Well," he began, "Dickie hasn't 
got insides like us, Pop. He's diff'rent. He says he's got wires 'n' 
glass things 'n' — V water only it 
ain't water— 'n' it's all kinds of 
colors 'stead of blood. He don't have 
to eat but he says he likes to 



'cause he likes the taste of things." 

I felt Betts' hand close over mine 
and grip tight. Was this another 
childish game, another bit of makebelieve? 

"Dickie says he can tell only 
some kinds of kids 'bout him, 
'cause he says mos' kids are like 
grown ups: they won't believe, V 
they would only think he was crazy 
'n' try to shut him up. But he says 
some kids are diff'rent 'n' those he 
can tell. He says when they grow 
up they will be his friends 'n' then 
he won't be alone 'n' he can do 
things for people with their help." 

"Are there others like — well, like 
Dickie?" I heard Betts ask. 

"Oh yes. Dickie says there are 
lots more. He says he knows ten 
right in this city." 

"How did he meet them?" I 
asked. 

"He didn't meet them!" was the 
somewhat surprising r e s p o nse. 
"Dickie doesn't have to meet them. 
He says he jus' thinks — V one of 
them thinks back at him 'n' they 
talk- — inside here," he touched his 
foreheads. "He says when he gets 
bigger 'n' stronger he can think 
longer 'n' meet more like him. But 
he says he knows there are lots 
more like him 'cause sometimes he 
dreams 'bout them." 

He lay down. Facing the moon, 
he said, "I wish I was like Dickie, 
'cause then I could do all kinds of 
wonderful things. Dickie says when 
he gets big he will rule the world 



PLAYMATE 



"5 



V he 'n* his people will not let 
there be any more war or let 
people kill each other or be bad. 
Gee, pop, why can't I be like him?" 

His eyes closed. We waited for 
a few moments, then left the room 
and closed the door softly behind 
us. 

In the hall we stood silently, 
looking at each other. 

"What do you think, AI?" Betts 
asked. 

"I don't know, Betts. If it's all 
made up then the answer is simple. If he's right, then, somewhere, 
a new race is springing up. What 
is creating it I don't know, and 
whether it is good or bad is equally 



uncertain." 

She sighed. "I prefer to think 
it's just a game he is playing." 

... . But as I lay in bed that 
night I wondered. And in the many 
nights since then I've begun to 
worry. It's not that I'm afraid, or 
maybe I am. I don't know. It's 
the uncertainty. The dread of 
something you cannot understand — 
something you know you are powerless to stop. 

You see, the neighbor boy continues to play with Bobby. And 
just the other day I saw them by 
the garage. They were building 
something. And Bobby was pounding the nails in with his fist ... 



INTRODUCING THE AUTHOR St. k^jl 



(Concluded from Page 2) 



background is thusly: early years, 
Oz and Dr. Dolittle; later. Burroughs, Wells, Claudy; then Blackwood, James, Rohmer, Mundy, etc.; 
while in college. Unknown, FA (from 
the first issue), and all the other, 
mags in the field. I now have nearly 
iooo books of f&stf in my library 
and am obnoxiously proud of ! em. 

How do I write? With music always—chanties for sea stories. Wagner for battle scenes, Auber and Rossini for the short novel in this issue. 
Can't write twenty words without a 
pipe in my teeth either (four so far 
on this blasted thing). 

Why do I write? Because in all 



this world I've found nothing that's 
quite so much fun. Besides, I'm my 
own boss. Nobody tells me what to 
do (except Hamling) and if I want 
a day off, I can take it. I can also 
starve, but who cares? 
. . . me. 

Assets, one wife. Liabilities, one 
case of spring fever that's active from 
January through December. Ambition, to amuse and divert the readers 
of Madge for a long time to come. 

But never, please, never with another autobiography! 

Geoff (Robert W. Krepps) 
St. Reynard 



THE GIFT 

ff}e ft/in ^S/« (A 

As a boy, Carl Sloan began to perform 
miracles, healing the sick. But the world hated 
him— for being born a thousand years too soon . . . 



THE tenseness in the tiny court 
room was a live thing that you 
could feel clear down to your 
insoles. The thick silence was broken 
as the judge said solemnly: "Your 
objection will be taken under advisement by the court, Counselor. In 
what manner will the childhood of 
I he defendant be relevant to this 
case, Mr. Prosecutor?" 

"It is my purpose to show, your 
Honor, that the defendant has been 
of unsound mind since birth, and 
therefore has long been a public menace, not merely a victim of circumstance as the defense would have us 
believe." The prosecuting attorney 
nodded briefly in the direction of the 
table for the defense. 

'Objection overruled," the judge 
said. "You may call your witness." 

"Thank you, your Honor." The 
prosecutor helped the flighty woman 
into the witness box. 

"Will you please give the court 
your name?" 

The woman simpered. "Ida Mae 
Hoik. Mrs. Ida Mae Hoik." 

The prosecutor cleared his throat 
;tnd ruffled the papers in his hand. 
" How long have you known the 



defendant, Mrs. Hoik?" 

"Why, ever since he was about 
two years old. Him and his Ma came 
to Elmwood right after his Pa was 
killed in that big Oak Ridge explosion. He was born right there on 
the government project, you know. 
Never could understand why Mrs. 
Sloan, that was his Ma, never did 
get married again, her being so pretty and all, and any number of nice 
widowers just — " 

"Uh, yes, Mrs. Hoik," the prosecutor interrupted. "Was your acquaintance with the defendant continuous throughout his childhood?" 

"Well, it was until he was ten 
years old. They sent him away to 
that crazy house then." 

"I object to the term 'crazy house', 
your Honor," the public defender 
addressed the court. 

"I am sure that the witness meant 
to say the Rochelle School for Retarded Children," the prosecutor 
said mildly. "Didn't you, Mrs. 
Hoik?" 

"Well, I guess that is what they 
call it," she said grudgingly. "Anyway, they kept him there until be 
was eighteen. Then he came back 



117 



i iS 



IMAGINATION 



to Elmwood and I've known him 
ever since." 

"As a child, was the defendant 
er, ah, strange; that is, different 
from the other children?" 

"He certainly was." The woman 
drew herself up primly. "Why, the 
first time that I ever laid eyes on 
that boy I said to my neighbor 
'did you ever see a child with such 
a big head and such brooding eyes', 
why — " 

The public defender started to 
rise. 

"I don't mean physical characteristics, Mrs. Hoik," the prosecutor 
hurriedly interjected. "The court is 
interested only in facts that will 
prove relevant to the case at hand." 

"Oh." Mrs. Hoik seemed disappointed. "Well, he never played 
much with the other children because they made so much fun of 
him. Not that they didn't have a 
right to, the way he was always 
acting. Picking up stray dogs and 
cats, and everv thing else under the 
sun, and telling everybody that would 
listen how he cured their sores. It 
was enough to make a person sick. 
He even claimed that he could cure 
himself, and that was the reason 
that he was never sick! Hmmfp. 

"Of course, he wasn't ever sick. 
No sir. not a day in his life. Never 
had the measles or the mumps like 
my Sally, and even when that terrible flu epidemic hit town he was 
just as chipper as you please. If 
you want incidents, I can tell you a 
dozen . There was on« time when 



he was about five and I was over 
visiting with his ma. He came running into the house telling some big 
story about a bird with a busted 
wing that he had fixed up. Of course, 
his ma shut him up; she always was 
too easy on him. Another time — " 

npHE man with the too big head 
and the. serene features gazed 
softly at the witness stand. He 
remembered about the bird. He had 
been very young at the time and 
hadn't known, yet, that everyone, 
didn't have The Gift. 

He had found the little bird at the 
base of the old oak tree, scared and 
trembling from the dangers thatthreatened it out of its known element. He picked it up gently and 
felt the fluttering of its tiny heart 
in the palm of his hand. He saie* 
that its wing was injured, and, with 
a feeling of pity and kindness, he 
located and repaired the injury. The 
litle bird lay quietly in his hand, as 
if sensing a friend. Then it flew 
away into the blue sky. 

He ran into the house to tell his 
mother about the bird that he had 
found helpless in the yard and hcnv 
he had made it well so that it could 
fly again. 

"Yes darling" his mother smiled 
tolerantly. "I'm sure you were a 
good boy." 

He could see that she had a headache. He could see the pulse and 
flow of the waves of pain and he 
wondered why she didn't fix it. He\ 
was never sick. It was so easy to bei 



THE GIFT 



well . . . 

With the directness of the very 
young he asked her, "Mother, why 
don't you make your headache go 
away?*' 

His mother dropped to her knees 
in front of him. 

"Why you sweet boy," she said. 
"Always thinking of your mother. 
Here, kiss my head and the ache 
will go away." 

Gravely he looked at her. Grownups were a funny lot. He didn't have 
to kiss her head to make the headache go away; but she was his 
mother and he loved her. If she 
wanted to pretend, why, then he 
would also. So he kissed her head 
anal caused the ache and pain to 
recede and disappear. Laughing, his 
mother got to her feet, took two 
aspirin tablets, and shooed him out 
to play. Strange, that he couldn't 
remember Mrs. Hoik being there . . . 

"Thank you, Mrs. Hoik/' the prosecutor said. "That will be all for 
now unless the defense wishes to 
cross examine." 

"No questions." The public defender leaned toward his client. "Are 
you sure that you won't testify in 
your own behalf?" 

The man smiled and shook his 
head. 

"May I call the next witness, your 
Honor?" 

"Will you tell the court your name 
and position, please?" 

"My name is Sylvia Johnson, and 
T am floor superintendent at the 
Rochelle School." 



"Were you superintendent during 
the eight years that Carl Sloan was 
in commitment at that institution?" 

"I was." 

"Will you tell the court any pertinent facts concerning his behavior 
up to the time of his discharge?" 

She smoothed the hem of her dress 
and looked thoughtful for a moment. 

"At first Carl seemed to be the 
oddest of all of the children in the 
school. He seemed to think that he 
had some kind of miraculous healing powers and couldn't, or wouldn't, 
understand why the rest of us weren't 
similarly blessed." 

She waited for the small titter to 
subside and then continued. 

"However our rather necessarily 
stern measures soon cured him of 
his delusions, or, at least, so we 
thought at the time. After that, he 
didn't seem to be very much different from the others. A little more 
sullen, perhaps, and not quite as 
quick to learn the duties expected of 
him as some of the less handicapped 
children; but then, we can't work 
miracles at the school." 

She paused and those nearest the 
quiet defendant turned and stared 
at him. 

HE didn't even notice for he was 
once again ten years old and 
standing outside his cousin's bedroom 
window. He wasn't supposed to be 
there because Billy was sick with an 
odd virus and had been quarantined 
until the doctors had decided what 
ailed him. 



IMAGINATION 



"No," Billy said, in answer to his 
question. "Don't be silly. If I could 
get rid of this awful cough 1 would, 
wouldn't I?" 

"J can," Carl replied, his youthful 
voice confident. 

Of course Billy didn't believe him 
but Carl saw what was to be done 
and did it. Billy's dad, disturbed by 
the excited conversation, came and 
told Carl to go on home where he 
belonged; but Carl forgot his scooter 
and had to go back after it. He could 
hear Billy's parents talking in the 
living room. 

"Carl is a very strange boy," said 
Billy's mother. 

"If you ask me, he's half crazy. 
All of this wild talk about doctoring 
cats, and that dead frog that he said 
he brought back to life." 

{This was not quite true, Carl 
knew. The frog had not been dead, 
only sick. He had proudly told his 
uncle of the incident only a day or 
two before.) 

"I think that we should have a 
little talk with Jane. Surely, she can 
see that he is not normal. He 
should be in that school for abnormal children over in the valley." 
Billy's father said emphatically. 

The next day his aunt and uncle 
had talked to his mother and Carl 
listened at the window. He knew 
that he wasn't supposed to eavesdrop but he was puzzled, and scared. 
At first, his mother answered the 
proposal with a flat "no", but his 
uncle's persuasions won out in the 
end. Tearfully, she finally agreed 



that a year or two in the school 
might be of some help in correcting 
his too obvious imagination. The 
news spread rapidly and the tonguewaggers worked overtime. 

"Did you hear about the Sloan 
boy?'' one would ask. 

"Oh, yes," another would answer. 
"Crazy as a loon, quite." 

"I always knew that there was 
something wrong with that boy, him 
never getting sick and all that. His 
head always was too big for the 
rest of him. I knew all along that 
he was crazy, all right." 

"They're going to skip him off to 
school, I understand. Well, good 
riddance 1 say. Wouldn't want my 
Henry associating with a goofy kid." 

He didn't like to recall the school. 
It was dim and foreboding and the 
beds always seemed to be cold and 
dank. He learned quickly that none 
of the institutional authorities were 
interested in his Gift and after the 
first several rebuffs and their consequental punishments, he never 
again talked about it to anyone. He 
was, by force, a recluse; but he 
learned the lessons that they thought 
that he should learn, and, if they 
were much more simple than his intellect warranted, he didn't blame 
the teachers. 

As if he could feel the stares of 
the curious people, Carl raised his 
head. The prosecutor was still examining the superintendent. 

"Then he was released as fit to be 
assimilated by society when he was 
eighteen?" 



THE GIFT 



12 1 



The witness leaned forward in the 

box. 

Yes." she said intently. "The 
exact disposition of his case history 
was 'Simple minded, but perfectly 
harmless 1 ." 

Q/MPLE minded? Yes, if shyness 
^ and averseness to people constitute simple mindedness. He did 
odd jobs for the townspeople and 
they tolerated him. Gardening, 
fetching and carrying, sweeping out 
I he library. He read. Avidly he 
read everythng that he could find. 
He learned about Mendel and his 
pros, and he knew what he was. An 
ugly word, a Mutant. It made him 
different and gave him a Gift that 
no one believed that he had, or wanted him to exercise. 

That crazy Sloan, or that half 
wit Sloan, the townspeople called 
him, but he didn't rare. He had 
never had any friends or companions 
and therefore felt no need for any. 
The small animals were his friends, 
and the children. He was never too 
busy to make a kite, or mend a toy 
or a skinned knee. He never mentioned his Gift but silently, unnoticed, as he went his shy way around 
the town, performed the small services that he was able to, unknown 
to the recipients. Some little aid, 
snme little kindness every day. He 
it-'as happy. 

Then they brought Henry Jones, 
bitter and disillusioned, home from 
the hospital in the city. He had 
been kicked in the head by a horse 



while he was away at college, and 
would never see again. The doctors all agreed on that point. He 
was permanently blind. Carl was 
trimming the Jones' hedge the first 
day that they pushed Henry out 
for his daily airing in the sun. He 
saw the blood clot that blocked the 
nerves to the brain center and his 
powerful mind worked smoothly, efficiently. 

"Open yaur eyes," Carl said simply. "You can see." 

"It was a miracle/' everyone said. 
"A true miracle." 

The newspapers scented a lucky 
circumstance and whipped up a human interest story that was more 
fantasy than fact; the wire services 
carried the story and people flocked 
to see the person who had performed 
a miracle. By twos and threes they 
came. Then by scores. They came 
to see because they were curious, or 
to be healed of some real or imagined ill. By the hundreds, by the 
thousands, they came. The lame, 
the halt, and the blind. The doctors, lawyers, ministers, newspaper 
men, newsreel cameramen, zealots. 
Men, women and children; from 
near and afar. The religious, and 
the heretics. He couldn't begin to 
help all of those who came to him. 
Some, with missing organs or diseased in a manner impossible for 
him to aid, were turned away and 
added their cries to the pack who 
bitterly denounced him. For the 
most part his work was confined to 
the eyes of a few, but the numbers 



IMAGINATION 



122 

of those he helped without their 
knowledge he knew were legend. 

The crowd expected' to see miracles and they demanded to see 
them. His failure to perform according to their tastes set off disputes 
that swept across the country. Was 
he a healer or a charlatan? A wise 
man or a fool? A public benefactor 
or a fraud? 

"He has never healed anyone/' 
learned doctors gave statements to 
the papers. "It's all a matter of 
mass hypnosis. He tells the ignorant that they are cured and, for a 
short while they actually force themselves to believe that they are cured. 
A very simple matter, indeed." 

He went on ministering to the 
crowds that increased daily. He 
asked nothing for his work, and they 
gave nothing; but the popcorn vendors, the soda pop dispensers, the 
ice cream- wagons, had a field day. 
It was a circus and they assigned 
extra policemen to control the frenzied crowds. 

He remembered the day, finally, 
they brought a little girl, suffering 
from leukemia, from a distant city. 
The best doctors had given their 
best to save her, and they had failed. The distraught parents were 
grasping at the last straw. He knew 
that it was much, much too late for 
him to do anything to aid her, but 
he tried. She looked at him with 
her large, beautiful eyes, set so deep 
in her pale face, and arose from the 
ambulance couch and walked a few 
steps toward him. Then she col


lapsed and died. The eager crowd 
pushed forward to get a better view 
and some were trampled. Some 
were injured, and some, the weak 
and unlucky, were killed. The police, frightened and faced with an 
ugly situation for which they had 
no rules, arrested him and whisked 
him off to the county scat. The 
crowd slowly dispersed and soon the 
only evidence that they had ever 
been there was the mass of empty 
cartons, the soda bottles, and the 
damaged shrubbery in the town 
square . , . 

The judge leaned over from his 
tall bench. 

"Mr. Sloan," he said sonorously. 
"In view of the evidence presented 
by the people of this state this court 
has no recourse but to convict you 
for the deaths of seven people. The 
court finds you charged and adjudged guilty of five counts, four 
minor and one major. Perpetrator 
of an unlawful assembly, inciting a 
mob to violence — " the voice droned 
on and on until the sentence was 
pronounced. 

The flash bulbs popped and the 
crowd mumbled and whispered as 
he was led back to his cell. He 
had known from the beginning of 
the trial that there could be but 
one ending. He hadn't asked for the 
deaths of anyone but through him 
they had died and it was best 
that the sentence of the court be 
exacted and the Gift forever stilled. 
The world was not ready for a power 
such as this, he knew. *Not now, 



THE GIFT 



123 



not yet, perhaps not ever . . . 

HpHE wrought iron gates in the 
high stone wall clanged shut behind the official county car with a 
dismal finality. Later, he was taken 
to a small room and his clothes 
stripped from him, replaced with a 
simple two pieced garment. This, 
then, was to be the end of life, of 
awareness. No more to feel the 
warmth of the summer sun or the 
carressing coolness of the light spring 
wind. Yet, he felt no bitterness, no 
regrets, rather only a sense of vast 
loneliness in the knowledge that he 
would not be able to fulfill the 
promise of his life. 

Straps were placed around his ankles and secured so that the sudden 
shock wouldn't tear them loose. A 
strap around each leg, just above 
the knee. More, biting into his 
wrists, his upper arms, and, finally, 
the two plates. They were placed 
carefully, one just behind and above 
each ear. A last quiet check to 
see that the bindings were in their 



proper places. 

The plates held his head in a viselike grip and he couldn't turn it in 
any direction but he knew the time 
was at hand . . . 

There was a sharp pain, blinding 
and searing. Starting in his head, 
just behind his eyes, and then permeating throughout his muscles and 
body. He jerked spasmodically, but 
the strong bonds held him fast. For 
a long agonizing moment the pain 
persisted, and then the welcome 
blackness, nothing . . . 

The young interne smiled at the 
officiating doctor. 

c 'That was a very nice operation, 
sir. A wonderful discovery that electronically destroying a part of the 
brain will cure some forms of insanity. Of course, he won't have much 
of his ego left, but he will be able 
to obey simple orders and do menial 
tasks, and, at least he will be sane." 

"Yes," the doctor said cheerfully 
as he disconnected his apparatus, "at 
least he will be sane." 

THE END 



WATCH FOR THESE GREAT STORIES:
THE COSMIC BLUFF by Mack Reynolds 

★ ★ * 

YACHTING PARTY by Fox B. Holden 

★ ★ ★ 

THE MOST HORRIBLE STORY by John W. Jakes 

★ ★ ★ 

Only the best Science & Fantasy stories appear in IMAGINATION. 
Be sure and reserve your copy of the great January issue at 
your newsdealer now. On sole the first week in November. Or 
better yet — send in your subscription. See page 161 for details. 



THE OLD WM 

by MILTON LESSER 




A man could walk around the tiny asteroid 
in the space of a few hours. But Jerry had only 
minutes, to find and use — an invisible weapon! 



LIKK 1 expected, the lair-rounds 
were crowded with thousands 
of the drifter- families waiting tor the big blast-off tomorrow. 
They thronged about uncertainly, in 
anxious little knots. chattering 



friendly, meaningless things, making 
fast friend- who would be forgotten 
in the bustle and competition, after 
blast-off. 

(..ramps stood apart from all this, 
and when he saw me he came rim


124 



riing through the mob on spindly 
iegs ; waving his arm.-; frantically so 
that I wouldn't miss him. As if i 
'.•uuld. It there was anything mure incongruous here on the Martian land


scape, anything lhat seemed more 
out of place than did old tiramps, 1 
didn't see h. Twe, hundred years ago 
in another homestead rush, maybe 
he would have fit. The only thing 1 



126 



IMAGINATION 



know about that is what I read in 
books, but I could picture Gramps 
with his battered old corncob pipe 
and his wizened face, leading a team 
of mules or oxen or whatever animals they used. 

"Hey, Jerry," he called. "Hey, 
kid, I got it!" 

I'm no kid. I'm twenty-seven, six 
feet two, and I probably weigh twice 
as much as Gramps does, wringing 
wet. But that's the way he was. 

"Where's Clair?" I asked him. 
1 hadn't seen my wife in a month. 
She had gone to the Martian Fair 
with Gramps to put in a bid for one 
of the old derelict ships, and now I 
had come here to join them, with a 
dime, a quarter and a crumpled dollar bill hardly filling the emptiness 
of my jumper-pocket. 

"That girl!" He whistled. "She's 
back at the ship now, cleaning and 
polishing, putting everything together with spit and string so you 
wouldn't know the old Karden 
Cruiser." 

I felt something gnawing away, 
deep inside my stomach, and it 
wasn't just that I was hungry. "The 
what?" I demanded. 

GRAMPS smiled, and right then 
I could have seen him rocking 
on a chair on a little porch, with a 
garden full of rose bushes and crab 
grass. I could have seen him anyplace but here with Clair and me, on 
the eve of the great blast-off for 
the asteroid belt. "The what?" I 
said again. 

"The old Karden Cruiser, Jerry. 



Neat little job. And cheap — they 
almost gave it away. You shoulda 
seen those durned fools. No one else 
bid for it, I had it all to myself, 
first bid." 

I tried to be patient. "You didn't 
expect anyone else to bid for that, 
did you?" 

He had a hurt look on his face. 
"Why nor? A good ship, kid. When 
I was your age, younger, I went to 
Venus on one. I can Temember — " 

"That's it," I told him. "Fifty 
years ago the Karden might have 
been a good ship, but not now. Not 
now, Gramps. It's as obsolete as a 
pea-shooter. Will it run?" 

"You're durned tootin' it'll run. 
What do you think I paid? Go 
ahead, guess." 

Something was still gnawing at 
my stomach. Gramps had had three 
hundred dollars to purchase our ship 
and equipment. You could stretch 
three hundred dollars a long way if 
you bought wisely these days. "You 
tell me," T said. 

"Hundred and fifty. 'Nother hundred and a quarter for supplies — •" 

There's some old saying about 
letting old dogs lie or not crying 
over spilled milk or some such thing, 
but anyway, I reminded him, "For 
another twenty-five or thirty dollars 
you could have got a Wilson '13, 
maybe even a twelve - bank 
Carpenter." 

"Couldn't." Gramps said. "Kid, 
let me tell you, I saw the nicest 
gw/-tar. One of them old Martian 
types with eight strings, you know. 
Twenty-five bucks ..." 



THE OLD WAY 



127 



I looked at him a long time without saying anything. When you're 
down to just a few dollars in these 
depression years, everything counts, 
every last penny. But my folks had 
died in the panic and riots of '24 
and Gramps had reared me since almost before the time I could reach 
the wart on his knee. 

"Let's go look at our Karden," I 
said. 

RAMPS was beaming proudly. 
^— * "There she is," he told me. 
"Section G, Row 14, Ship 7. 
Beauty, eh?" 

As far as you looked, you couldn't 
see anything but the old ships, all 
lined up, row on row of them. Some 
glistening with new paint if they 
had been bought as early as yesterday and sprayed today, others still 
dull and cracked with caked jet-slag 
and the erosion of a» dozen atmospheres, all with people scurrying in 
and out of them, getting new faces 
and new entrails for blast-off tomorrow. 

The Karden squatted in row 14, 
a short, stubby grub-like boat whose 
jet-slag completely hid the original 
paint job. But I didn't want to say 
another thing about it. I just hoped 
the Karden could get us where we 
were going, even if it burped and 
hiccupped like a drunken driver 
all the way. 

Clair opened the lock and I saw 
her red hair framed against the 
dark interior of the ship, and I 
hardly remembered Gramps was 
there. We'd been married two 



months, and separated for half that 
time, with me getting my last 
month's pavcheck in New York so 
I'd have money for the liner-fair to 
Canal City. 

Clair cried, "Welcome aboard ship. 
Captain Brooks, wel . . . Umm-m, 
Captain, that was nice . . . Umm-m,' 
again ..." 

Gramps coughed. "You two gon-j 
na stand there mooning over each 
Other all afternoon, or do we get. 
some work done?" ! 

"It's just about all finished." 1 
Clair told him. She snuggled up 
close once more and then skipped ' 
out of my arms, leading us through 1 
the lock and into the Karden. 

It looked more like the inside of 
a packing crate than a spaceship. 
Ideally, the old Kardens were twoman cruisers, at a time when yo 1 
strapped yourself into a bunk an-' 
just about remained there until you 
hit atmosphere. Now Clair had 
readied three makeshift bunks, and 
our supplies stood piled tight against the bulkheads and as high 
as the ceiling in several places. I had 
to take Clair's word that the ship's 
old hull was sealed and could be 
pressurized — there wasn't enough 
space for me to see for myself. 

The trip had left me a bit bleary, 
and Clair, who had worked all day. 
yawned a little while she opened a 
can of beans and- bacon for suppe: . 
We sat around against the pack in 
cases and we smoked. Then i 
checked a few things which remained to be checked, and I suggested we turn in. Clair nodded, but 



128 



IMAGINATION 



G ramps said no, he had a little unfinished business yet. 

I needed sleep, every bit of it I 
could get, for the grueling run tomorrow. I leaned back and stretched 
out, with my feet sticking out a 
good half a foot beyond the edge 
of the bunk, and then I heard 
Cramp's unfinished business. 

The nasal twang of the eightstringed Martian guitar blended with 
the dubious qualities of Cramp's 
voice: 

He'll hug and he'll kiss you 
And tell you more lies 
Than the cross ties on the railroad 
Or the stars in the sky . . . 

A T an hour before sunrise we 
tuned in our radio and heard 
Governor Eddington's voice cut 
through the static. "Ladies and 
gentlemen," he said, "it is now exactly fifty-nine minutes and thirtyseven seconds until blast-off. Let 
me review the rules for you, to avoid 
any unpleasantness later. 

"One. No ship is to leave before 
the signal. Any ship which does so 
is automatically disqualified, and 
your claim will not be recognized. 

"Two. Any asteroid is fair prey, 
but the government strongly recommends that you consider two items. 
First, those asteroids which lie within the belt itself and which do not 
have overly eccentric orbits are preferable since the government supply 
ships will visit them much more 
frequently. Second, you will benefit by selecting an asteroid with one 
or more of the old abandoned min


ing domes, for two reasons. With 
slight repairs you can live within 
the domes, and also their existence 
assures you of profitable mineral 
material. 

"Three. Vesta, the government 
base within the Belt, is nat to be 
landed upon. 

"Four. Each ship is restricted to 
one asteroid, and once your selection is made it must be a permanent 
one. 

"Five. No more than one ship can 
claim a given asteroid, and the automatic chronometer within each ship 
will radio the moment of landing to 
Vesta, thus taking care of any 
priority claims. 

"Six. Claim jumping will be considered by the Federal Worlds Government as an act of piracy and will 
be punished accordingly. 

"Seven. In the event that an 
asteroid is abandoned for any reason, 
a new ship may claim it at once, and 
the departing ship can claim no 
other asteroid. 

"If you have any questions, relay 
them to your Section Official in the 
fifty-five minutes which remain. 
Good luck to all of you ..." 

The rules were thorough, all right. 
This could turn out to be a two-way 
proposition which would help both 
the Government and the families, 
and the Government wanted it to be 
a rousing success. In the first place, 
there were literally thousands of 
families, all waiting tensely for blastoff. None of them had been earning sufficient income, thanks to the 
depression following the final East


THE OLD WAY 



1 29 



West war on Earth, and now it was 
hoped that they could earn their 
keep by mining the asteroids. 

Further, I knew that the Government had been forced to abandon 
its mineral deposits on all the asteroids except Vesta, and now it could 
use the extra wealth from the silent 
mines which waited on a thousand 
little worlds in deep space between 
Mars and Jupiter. 

T sat smoking cigarette after cigarette, until Clair reminded me 
that the supply wasn't infinite. She 
poured over our charts, studying 
the three or four asteroids which 
had seemed most promising, looking 
up with a smile now and then to 
watch Gramps strum his guitar and 
sing about a fly with a blue tail. 

The radio barked, "Three minutes 
to blast-off!" 

Outside, I could hear the roar of a 
thousand rocket engines tuning up, 
and a shroud of smoke and fire 
blanketed the field. 

"Two minutes! " 

"Hey, Gramps," I said. "Put 
down that banjo- and strap yourself 
into a bunk. We're set to go — " 

"It's a guitar," he told me. "A guitar. Okay, kid, plenty of time." 

I stood up and helped Clair into 
her bunk, kissing her lightly on the 
lips. "I'm a little scared," she said. 

"Don't be silly. Nothing to be 
afraid of, honey." I was glad she 
couldn't feel me trembling. 

Gramps was next, and I saw to it 
that his straps were fastened properly, then I sat down again in the pilot


chair, buckling a heavy leather belt 
across my thighs. 

"Thirty seconds! " 

I remember wondering vaguely if 
the Karden could get us to the Belt 
in one piece, and not hours behind 
every other ship. Then a shrill 
whistle outside was going "beepbeep-beep!" and 1 pulled the firing 
lever back all the way. 

T grinned at Clair. "How do you 
*■ like weighing exactly nothing?" 

"You always told me I was a 
little too skinnv, Captain Brooks, 
sir!" 

Gramps scowled darkly. "Aw, you 
two kids are just making fun of the 
Karden, that's all. So what if we 
ain't got any gravity to speak of?" 

The Karden had been built before 
each ship had its own little gravity 
unit, and no one had ever bothered 
to refit her. Clair had set up the 
guide-ropes right after acceleration, 
and now we floated around the crammed little cabin of the ship if we 
weren't careful. 1 had to admit 
Gramps was right, however. A little 
inconvenience like this didn't really 
matter, and the important thing was 
the fact that I could look out the 
port and see all the little motes of 
the thousand other ships gleaming 
in the sunlight like tiny space-born 
fireflies. The Karden was definitely 
holding its own. 

"She's built for speed," Gramps 
told us. "In the old days there was 
no such thing as gravity-equalizers 
anyhow. This soft new generation 



130 



IMAGINATION 



I winked at Clair and said, "Go 
on. Go play your fiddle, Gramps, 
and leave astrogation to the soft 
new generation." 

"It's a banjo," he said. "I mean 
a gwi-tar!" 

Througn the fore-port there was 
a haze of milky white which in a 
few hours would separate out into 
the thousands of little planetoids, 
each a tiny mote following its predestined course around the sun. 
Actually, some weren't so small. 
There was the big bulk of Ceres, 
with a diameter close to five hundred 
miles, Vesta, and some of the other 
big babies, but for the most part the 
asteroids were tiny cosmic specks, 
less than a mile across. 

"Okay," Clair said, "which one?" 

That was a good question. You 
had to consider several things. First, 
some ships sped through space faster 
than our Karden, and they'd claim 
the really first-rate asteroids before 
we even reached the Belt. Of the 
second-raters, you had to consider 
what sort of mineral deposits they 
had, which would be the simplest to 
mine, and so forth. 

"How's about 4270?" I said. 

She checked the charts. '■Umm-m. 
Diameter, half a mile. Eccentricity 
of orbit, .17. Tilted to the eccliptic, 
.08. Two deserted mining domes, 
excellent condition. High-grade copper ore, no power tools needed. 
Sounds swell, Jerry." 

Gramps stopped tuning his guitar. 
"Copper? Did I hear you say copper?" He snorted. "In my day men 
went prospecting for diamonds and 



other precious stones. Or for gold 
or pitchblend ..." 

"Ever find any?" I wanted to 
know. 

"Well, no. But that doesn't mean 
I couldn't have. I was just too busy 
with the women on the outworlds — " 

T looked at Clair and Clair looked 
*■ at me. "4270," we said together, 
and when Clair checked the charts 
again she found that its present orbital position was just a few degrees 
off to the left. 

"Two hours," I grunted. "Maybe 
three. If we're lucky, she'll be deserted ..." 

Clair smiled. "Two domes there, 
Jerry. Hah — a winter home and a 
summer home." 

"Ain't no seasons on an asteroid," 
Gramps said very seriously. "Of 
course, if you two kids want, you 
can have one dome and I can have 
the other. Might be a good idea at 
that." 

Clair told him not to be silly, that 
we couldn't get along without his 
guitar playing anyway, and then I 
was busy turning us the few degrees 
which would bring us into orbital 
conjunction with 42 70. Ahead and 
all around us the little sparks which 
were spaceships fanned out in all 
directions, hurtling for their homesteads out here beyond Mars. It was 
nice to know that in just a few hours 
— if luck held — we'd be setting up 
home, living in our own place instead of the crowded barracks they 
set up for transient workers back on 
Earth. Nice? Hell, that's all we'd 



THE O 

been thinking about since the announcement came through six months 
ago. 

You really feel a small turn in an 
old Karden Cruiser rocketing outward at top speed. I could feel the 
gravity slamming me back down against the right-hand cushions of the 
pilot chair, and I heard G ramps muttering something under his breath. 
With Clair, he had remained out of 
his bunk so that he could watch us 
blast in toward the asteroid, and 
now I could picture each of them 
grasping stanchions for all they were 
worth, peering out of the port. 

I couldn't turn around to watch, 
of course. This landing on a tiny 
asteroid is tricky business. You can't 
just come in and set her down as 
easy as all that, floating in on the 
cushion of a five-hundred mile atmosphere. 

The Karden came in slowly, at 
tight angles to the orbit, and I saw 
that 4270 was an amorphous hunk of 
greenish rock, craggy and mountainous, if you call a ponderously turning rough-hewn slab of stone less 
than three thousand feet across 
mountainous. 

T worked the studs slowly, feeling 
the breath go out of my lungs 
with each one, and soon we had executed a turn of almost ninety degrees, with 4270 tumbling along parallel to us now, just a few miles off 
in the void. You could feel its weak 
gravity, tugging like a child's fingers might tug at your overcoat as 
you ran in another direction. 



D WAY i 5 i 

I pulled up all the studs together, 
and I could breathe again. For a 
■moment it seemed that 4270 
wouldn't be strong enough to grab 
us and hold us, to reel us in slowly 
like a fisherman with a whopper at 
the end of his line. But her distance 
didn't increase, either — and we went 
spinning along through the void with 
her like a lopsided dumbbell, the 
tiny planetoid and the smaller 
Karden. 

Soon 4270 grew in the fore-port, 
and quite suddenly she wasn't alongside us any longer, but down below. 
Every time you come in for planetfall you get that sensation, but it 
never ceases to be strange — one moment you're heading toward something which is in front of you, the 
next you're hurtling down upon it. 
headfirst. 

Only with 4270's light gravity, we 
didn't exactly hurtle. It was more 
like floating, slowly at first and 
then faster, and then I decided I'd 
better give one short blast from our 
forerockets to brake the fall. I 
pressed the stud and waited. There 
was nothing. Momentarily, the foretubes had jammed. Of all the 
times . . . 

I heard Clair- calling my name, 
"Jerry, Jerry!" and then 4270's jagged tumbling surface expanded up all 
around us and the planetoid didn't 
look so small any more. It looked 
huge, it could have been Jupiter. 
There came a grinding bump, and I 
thought I could hear my safety 
strap snapping. The black-light dials 
of the instrument panel zoomed up 



I 3 2 



IMAGINATION 



at me from someplace far beyond 
4270, it seemed, and I met them 
head first with a hundred rocket 
tubes snorting inside my skull. 

"/^OOD morning," Clair, said 
cheerfully. 
"Good what?" I answered, not so 
cheerful. 

''You slept for twelve hours, so 
now it's morning." 

"And durn you," Gramps chimed 
in. "You made one hell of a mess 
out of that instrument board. Why 
don't you be a mite careful ..." 

"Hey!" I sat up suddenly,, and 
the pinwheels began to go around in 
my head like at the Martian Fair. 
Only bigger. Brighter. "After that 
crash, did the chronometer radio 
our landing here to Vesta?" 

Clair nodded. "I thought of thatI radioed Vesta for confirmation, and 
it came. But right after that the 
radio went blooie, so now any music 
we hear will have to come from 
Gramps." 

"I can oblige," Gramps said, running for his guitar, but I shook my 
head. 

"Hold it! We've got a lot of work 
to do." 

"Yeah, sure," said Gramps. "Only 
what did you think we was doing 
while you slept peaceful like a 
baby? We wasn't playing or singing, I'll tell you that." 

Clair explained, "We were exploring, Jerry, after we made sure 
you were all right. We're less than 
a hundred yards from one of the 
domes here, and it looks darned 



good. Of course, I don't know yet 
if it can be pressurized or if there'll 
be any leaks, but I think we can 
answer yes to the first question and 
no to the second." 

"What about the second dome?" 

"Just about like this one, half 
mile around the planet. Living quarters in both, plenty of abandoned 
equipment. You also can do open 
pit mining until you burrow clean 
through the planet. Rich lode, too, 
I'd say." 

"Good," I told her, and I stood 
up a bit shakily and took her in my 
arms. I kissed her soundly. 

"Jerry. Come on, stop. How can 
we get any work done this way, 
Jerry? .... Ooo, Jerry ..." 

A few moments later, we all donned our spacesuits. 

EFFORTLESSLY, we carried 
great stacks of supplies across 
42 7o's crumbled, broken surface. 
The light gravity seemed hardly to 
exist at all, and I think I could 
have lifted the Karden Cruiser bodily if I desired. We made exactly 
two trips from the ship to the 
dome's airlock, our' grav-plates 
clomping up and down soundlessly 
under the space-boots — ordinarily 
it'd have taken us a whole day to 
unload the Karden. 

The horizon was a crazy distorted 
thing no more than three hundred 
feet away, where the planetoid's 
surface bent away almost at right 
angles, and right on the crest against 
the blackness of the sky rested our I 
Karden. It looked pretty good on a j 



THE OLD WAV 



*33 



place which Gramps told me Clair 
had called ghastly when they first 
stepped outside to explore, but the 
dome looked even better. 

We stood within the lock now, 
and with a little squeal of delight 
which I picked up over our suit 
intercoms, Clair ran for one of the 
dull metal structures. 

"Look in here," she called back 
over her shoulder, and I entered 
through the doorway just in time 
to see her unscrewing her helmet. 

I yelled something loud over the 
intercom, I don't remember what, 
and then I flicked off the grav-plate 
button in the glove of my left hand 
and dove at Clair. 

I caught her just above the midsection and we went down in a 
heap. 1 switched on my grav-plates 
again. 

"Just to show me how strong you 
are," she pouted, "you don't have to 
come flying through the air and 
landing on my belly. Lucky you 
weigh less than a pound without 
the grav plates. Only quit trying to 
be funny." 

"Who's trying to be funny? ■ 
There's only two things wrong with 
taking your helmet off now. First, 
we haven't warmed this place, and 
you'd have frozen your pretty little 
head off in half a minute. Second, 
there's less air here than in a vacuum 
tube, and even after we turn on the 
air generators I want to examine the 
dome for possible leaks before you 
go around taking off your helmet. 
See?" 

"Y-yes." She suddenly looked 



frightened. "It's just that the place 
looks so warm and homey, Jerry." 

It did. We were standing in a 
foyer and 1 could see a couple of 
bedrooms off on the left, comfortable, all metal and metal fibre construction. Further down the hall 
there was a pantry and when Clair 
opened the door we found" it to be 
full of canned goods, all glued to 
the shelf lightly against the tricks 
which could be played by the negligible gravity. Beyond that, we found 
a first-class, compact kitchen unit, 
and you should have seen Clair's eyes 
light up. If there's anything that 
makes a girl sparkle all over, it's 
the first sight of a good kitchen over 
which she's to have domain. You 
can be anywhere — New York or 
here on 4270 or out on Pluto, it 
wouldn't matter. She hardly heard 
a word I said for the next ten minutes, as I patiently lined up the 
things we must do first. Three things, 
primarily. We had to start the heating units within the dome, do the 
same for the air generators, and 
check the dome itsel f for any 
leakage. 

GRAMPS took care of items one 
and two, and I felt an urge 
to take off my helmet without 
checking further. But that was silly. 
We had played the game right thus 
far, and it would be pointless to get 
into serious trouble over a thing 
like that. 

So for the next fifteen minutes, 
Clair and I just knocked off our 
grav-plates and swarmed all over the 



"34 



IMAGINATION 



inside of the dome like a couple of 
trained houseflies. From this height 
I could see almost half way around 
my side of the little planet, and 
Clair's line of vision probably came 
close to meeting mine someplace 
around the equator. And after a 
time I was satisfied that my side of 
the dome" couldn't lose as much as a 
molecule of air. 

"Tight as a thermos bottle," I 
called over the intercom. "How's 
yours, Clair?" 

Her answer was a scream. It jarred 
me from my precarious hold on the 
under surface of the dome, and I 
went floating to the ground as light 
as a feather. 

Clair still clung up on top yelling 
so loud that the intercom only reproduced the sound as garbled 
noise and static. And I couldn't do 
anything but float down slowly, with 
Gramps motioning me down with his 
arms, as if I could do anything to 
hurry. 

Clair scrambled down her side of 
the dome and waited there next to 
Gramps, hands on hips, looking up 
at me like a vexed mistress might 
look at her lap dog when he didn't 
come to her call soon enough. But 
she looked more composed now, and 
she took off her helmet. The air situation, then, was all right, and I unscrewed my own fishbowl and let it 
float down beside me. 

The air was a bit musty, but 
otherwise good, and I judged the 
temperature to be about fifty degrees 
now. Ever strip in mid air? I peeled 
off my spacesuit and watched it 



float down too, agonizingly slow, 
and finally I alighted in my leather 
jumper. 

Clair said, "It's a — " 

CHE never finished the sentence. 
^ Something jarred the ground 
under me like a miniature earthquake, and I sat down hard. 

"A ship," Gramps said. "Clair 
saw a ship coming in on the other 
side! " 

"Now it's landed," Clair told us. 
It wasn't necessary. That jar could 
only have been produced by a ship 
or. a man-sized meteor. 

"So what?" I wanted to know. 
"So someone made a mistake and 
landed here. Our claim's already in. 
When their claim goes through, 
Vesta'll tell them." 

•'Sure," Gramps brightened. 

Clair smiled too, as if to say, 
you're right, so what are we worrying about? 

Only my enthusiasm didn't last 
long. My reasoning was tilted. It 
was warped. Crazy. "Uh-uh," I shook 
my head. "It isn't as simple as that. 
First place, Vesta was supposed to 
beam a broadcast all over the Belt, 
telling who landed where." 

"Hmm-m," Gramps mumbled. 

"Maybe," Clair said. "Maybe. 
And that ship, Jerry, it was too big. 
Much too big to be one of the family 
ships. One of those long, tapering, 
narrow-finned cruisers, brand new." 

I was trying to digest this latest 
bit of information, when Clair popped her helmet back on her head 
and ran for the airlock. I called to 



THE OLD WAY 



135 



her, but she couldn't hear me — she 
was going to see just who our visitors were. 

"Fiery young thing! " Gramps 
snorted, but I hardly heard him. I 
zipped myself inside my suit as 
fast as I could and started to run 
for the lock. Only 1 didn't. I flew. 
I had forgotten to snap on the gravplates, and once again I had that 
agonizing sensation of floating 
groundward. 

I made it, cursing, then I tore 
through the lock, in record time. 
When I reached the Karden, Clair 
came darting around its other side 
and ran toward me. out of breath, 
half stumbling. We got back inside 
the dome, and I said: 

L 'Well?" 

■•Oh, Jerry. Jerry!" 

''What is it, hon?"" Clair got excited easily, but not this way. 

"Some men were out of the ship 
and I hailed them. Someone shot at 
me — -" 

"What?" 

"Yes! He didn't say a word. He 
just lifted an ugly-looking gun and 
fired. A big column of rock disappeared right next to me, Jerry. Just 
like this." She snapped her fingers. 
He shot at me with a disintegrator. 
A disintegrator, Jerry ..." 

T gulped. How would you feel 
being trapped on a rock less than 
half a mile across, without any 
weapons, with your radio shot to 
hell, without enough fuel in your 
ship to get you half way to any 
other asteroid, when you knew that 
around on the night side were may


be a dozen armed men, claim jumpers, read\' to kill you on sight? 
I gulped again. 

"HpAKE it easy,'- Gramps advised us. "Now, just you 
both relax. There has to be a way 
outa this, only we ain't found it 
yet.'" 

The only part of his statement I 
could agree with was the very last, 
only 1 had to admit he had a point 
there. Just wasn't any use, as 
Gramps would say. for Clair and 
me to go running around like a 
couple of chickens without their 
heads, the way we'd been doing for 
the past few hours. 

u Okay/' I said. "Let's look at 
this thing. Let's see exactly where 
we stand." 

"More like it," Gramps nodded 
his head. 

Clair said, "Whoever they are, 
they landed here illegally. And 
they want our copper ..." 

I brightened, but only for a moment. •Xo, 1 think you're off the 
beam, honey. If it's our claim alone 
they're after, why just this stinking 
little asteroid? There are lots bigger 
and lots richer, yet they chose this 
one. They want something else. But 
what?" * 

Clair said we'd come back to that 
later. ""First," she said, "'just what 
can we expect them to do? I mean 
now, or in the immediate future." 

I considered. "Well, temporarily 
at least, they probably won't do a 
thing. Or will they?" 

"You're durned right they won't," 



*3 6 



IMAGINATION 



Gramps said. "They won't bust this 
dome up right away to get at us, 
nossir. First they'll see if they can 
get us without,^ oing that.'' 

It made good sense. Whatever 
their purpose, both domes could be 
a valuable asset, and maybe they'd 
play with us, cat and mouse, before 
they applied the disintegrators to 
our dome. 

"Sure," said Gramps. "Just like 
the old days of the East-West war 
when it spread out to the planets. 
An army can't be everyplace at 
once:, 'specially not all over the 
System. Right?" 

"Right," Clair said, and I nodded. 

"Hey," Gramps suggested, "you 
don't suppose they are Ruskies, do 
you?" 

"No," I said, smiling. I reminded him that the war had been over 
before I was born. 

"Hmm-m, yes. Did I ever tell you 
the time I was fighting near Gossena 
on Ganymede? I was a foot-soldier, 
y'know." 

HE had told us many times and 
I said so, but he didn't bat 
an eyelash. "Anyway," he said, "it 
was a war of nerves. We tried to 
scare them, and they tried to scare 
us, one way or another, and the side 
that did the most scaring won. Us." 

Clair wanted to know what all that 
had to do with this. 

"Easy, kid. Just hold your horses. 
These guys on the other side of 427° 
will be using a war of nerves with 
us, a real simple one. They know 
it'll be maybe a month before the 



government ship comes — " 

"What about the radio?" I said. 
"Won't they think we called for 
help?" 

"Nossirree. Not if they're smart. 
If we did call for help they could 
hightail it out of here, pronto. The 
way Clair describes that ship, they 
could beat anything the Government 
has in the Belt, anything short of a 
battle-cruiser, and there ain't none 
out beyond Mars. No, if they're 
smart they'll have to figure that 
something went wrong with our 
radio, or we'd a called for help right 
away. It's an easy gamble for them* 
to take — they can always zoom away." 

Everything Gramps had said was 
beginning to make a lot of good 
sense, and I motioned him to continue. 

"Sooo, their war of nerves is easy. 
They just wait for us to make the 
first wrong move, and then they get 
us. Blop! Real simple with a disintegrator." 

He wasn't kidding. All you had to 
do was disintegrate a person, his ship, 
his belongings, and you'd have committed a pretty air-tight murder. Of 
course, the old legality about a 
corpse had been chucked out the window years ago when the first disintegrators were developed, but in a 
case like this, the only thing the 
government would have to go on 
was the fact that our landing here 
on 4270 had been recorded. Not 
much. Pitifully inadequate. .And I 
told them that now. 

"Swell," Clair said. "Only please, 



THE OLD WAY 



U7 



Jerry, cut it out. You sound like 
you're crying at your own funeral. 
I'm scared . , , " 

"Sure," said Gramps, "we ain't 
licked. We'll just have to figure out 
a war of nerves just a bit better 
than theirs. War of nerves, that's it. 
I can remember, outside Gossena . . . 
The Ruskies employed Martian mercenaries, y'know ..." 

"That won't be easy," Clair reminded him. "Especially since we 
don't even know why that ship came 
here. We can't even find out." 

I grinned. "Who says we can't?" 
I picked up my fishbowl helmet and 
plopped it ungently over my head. 

"What the heck are you doing?" 
("lair asked me. 

My voice must have sounded muffled from under the helmet as I 
said: "Simple. Our intercom can 
pick up theirs. As soon as some of 
them pop outside their dome and 
start talking, we'll know." 

That much was true. The intercom could pick up any similar conversation on the entire tiny planet. 
It could do that, but it wasn't directional. In other words, you'd hear 
voices, all right, only you wouldn'* 
know where they were coming from. 
One trouble, however, marred the 
idea: you couldn't tell how long it 
would be before some of our visitors 
decided to lift themselves up and 
venture outside the dome. Might be 
any time now, or it might not be for 
days, or it might be just once, and 
then briefly, for as long as it would 
take them to stroll to our dome, disintegrate the lock, march through, 



and turn us into three specks of 
molecular dust. 

I sat grimly with the helmet over 
my head, waiting. All I got was 
static. 

TlfE TOOK TURNS, and our 
* ' hopes for a happy home life 
out here on 4270 were shot to hell. 
One of us would sit listening, head 
buried in his helmet, another would 
bustle about, keeping the functions 
of the dome in order, and the third 
would sleep. 

It w*as my turn to sleep, and I 
can remember the beginning of what 
would have been a corker of a dream. 
The visitors in the other spaceship 
weren't men at all. but hideous monsters from some nameless extra-Solar 
place, trying to decide where in the 
Solar System they'd like to live. 
They , seemed ornery enough to decide on crowded Earth. 

I never knew for sure. One of 
them was breathing down my neck, 
then poking me, and I sat up fast. It 
was Gramps. and he was scowling at 
me frantically inside his fishbowl 
helmet. 

I didn't have to be told. My own 
helmet sat securely on my shoulders 
in a matter of seconds, and I listened. You could hardly tell the voices 
apart, but from the conversation you 
knew that there were two of them. 

"... all over this planetoid. Aw. 
what's the use? The boss just had 
a wrong notion, that's all." 

"I dunno. Can't be sure. This is a 
small place, yeah: but there's 
enough wrinkles and folds to keep 



38 



IMAGINATION 



you looking for months. We ain't 
covered nothing yet. Also, how's aabout inside the other dome. It 
could be there, eh?" 

"Well, it better not be. If those 
guys in there find it before us . . ." 
I didn't know what "it" was but I' 
liked this voice better. It was pessimistic, and the more pessimistic our 
visitors were, the better I'd like it. 
' "No, it ain't in the other dome." 
The rat, I thought. "It wouldn't be 
in either dome, stupid, or the miners 
here before the depression woulda 
found it. I was wrong — it's- outside 
somewhere, all right." 

Clair sat with us now. hunched 
over elbows on knees, listening 
through her own helmet. 

"So we just march around this 
lousy rock until we find it." 

"Yeah. Rut take it easy, stupid. 
It'll be worth it. A weapon like that, 
what power ..." 

"I don't know. We better find it 
soon. The wife's in Chawka City on 
Io, and there's a damn saloon-keeper there—" 

"Haw, haw, haw! A family man, 
a regular family man, that's what 
we got with us. But don't worry, 
we'll find it. The Ruskies left that 
thing here someplace, and don't 
worry, we'll get it. The boss ain ! t 
no dodo ..." 

"Well, I'd feel a lot better if we 
got rid of those guys in the other 
dome. It'd be a lot safer." 

"Just shut up. When the boss 
tells us to do something, we'll do it. 
Otherwise, stop yammering." 

So our pessimistic friend wanted 



us dead too? I hoped that his wife 
would commit the unpardonable 
crime with every man-jack in 
Chawka City. It would serve the 
rat right. 

Then there was a lot of garbled 
static and no more talking. Evidently the two men had entered their 
dome again and had removed their 
helmets. Xo more talking, exactly as 
if they had ceased to exist. And after the one way contact had been 
established, it was almost eerie. 




RAMPS was jubilant. "There 
y'are, kids. Simple as that." 



"As what?" I said. ■ 
"Kid, don't you read your history?" 

"He goes in for lurid novels," 
Clair said. 

"Waal, it's like this. Right at the 
end of the war it was rumored the 
Ruskies developed a super-duper 
weapon. Something really hot, that 
would make the atom-bomb look 
like a kid's squirt gun. They didn't 
have a chance to use it, and when 
the war was over they hid it out 
here in the Belt somewheres, thinking maybe they'd get another chance. 
So them guys think this is the place. 
Hmm-m, maybe they're right, and 
if we could find that weapon before 
them ... Oh boy!" 

I shook my head. It was a pretty 
little story, with one major flaw. 
"There's no such weapon," I said. 
"I remember the history part of it, 
all right. But I also remember what 
followed. Government sent out hun


THE OLD WAY 



139 



dreds of ships, in ten years they 
combed the Belt. No secret asteroid. 
No Rusky cache. No weapon. No 
nothing." 

"Well, these guys are looking — " 

I told him, "On Earth, people still 
look for Captain Kid's treasure, and 
for sea serpents, too. They just won't 
find either. There aren't any. Nope, 
Gramps — there's just a lot of copper on this asteroid, that's all. If 
we could convince our visitors of 
that, they'd get out quick." 

"Well, we can't," Clair said. 
"You heard those two guys.. Their 
boss is as sure of finding that weapon 
here as he's sure of anything." 

I began to smile, and I think I 
even laughed a little, because they 
both looked at me queerly. "That's 
it," I said. 

"That's what?" Evidently, my enthusiasm had not carried to Clair. 

"The way we'll do it. We'll use 
Gramps' idea, the war of nerves . . " 

"Hot dog! " Gramps purred like 
an impossibly ancient kitten. 

"We'll agree with them. Okay, 
there's a weapon here, a pretty awful thing. We'll talk over our intercom and let them know we know it 
too." ' 

"Uhuh," said Clair, definitely interested. "They'll probably be listening, just like us. Go on, Jerry, let's 
hear more." 

"Sure. And we'll go a step further." 

"T g°t you!" Gramps cried. "We'll 
■*■ really find the weapon." 
There just was no convincing a die


hard romantic who had fought in 
the last war. 

"Yes and no," I said. "There is 
no weapon, none here and none anyplace else in the Belt. Only we'll 
make believe that we find one. A 
war of nerves, Gramps. Maybe we 
can scare them the hell off this 
planet." 

"Hmm-m," said Gramps. "I knew 
you'd come around to my way of 
thinking." 

Because we all liked the idea, we 
continued to speak of it for hours, 
and this is the way things boiled 
down. 

Item. It had to be an awful 
weapon, something that would 
frighten a man and make the little 
hackles stand up on the back of his 
neck, and something which apparently could be applied most readily 
here on 4270. They were convinced 
that a weapon did exist, good: they'd 
believe almost anything we could 
concoct. 

Item. This one I didn't like. 
Since our two talkative friends had 
intimated that their boss knew the 
weapon couldn't be within our dome, 
we'd have to go outside for the 
weapon and let them catch a glimpse 
or two of us prowling about. That 
could be dangerous, because they 
could pop us off with their disintegrators any time they got the urge. 
Which would probably be as soon 
as they saw something tangible at 
which to fire. We'd have to flit 
about like shadows. Less than 
shadows. 

Item. We'd start "broadcasting" 



40 



IMAGINATION 



to them, and we'd pretend we didn't 
know we were doing it. The bigger 
the lie the better it would sound, 
and we'd have to start almost at 
once. This could be fun. 

Item. We had nothing concretely 
in mind beyond that. But the important thing, as Gramps put it, 
was this: we'd be in the driver's 
seat, conducting the war exactly 
how we wanted, and they'd have to 
sit around guessing. 

Gramps was chipper enough to 
strum a few notes on his guitar. 

T^OR three Earth days by the 
clock in our living quarters, 
we managed to stay out of trouble. 
And I think we were getting somewhere, too. Gramps would go outside with Clair, poking around amid 
the rubble, talking about how close 
they were coming. Then they'd let 
themselves be seen, just for the 
briefest moment, and they'd scoot 
back inside our dome, fast. 

Probably, it was pretty safe at 
that. We could tell from what they 
said via intercom that our visitors 
were interested. And, if they thought 
we knew something, they'd be in no 
hurry to kill us. At the most, they'd 
want to take us alive and see what 
they could learn. 

Gramps and Clair were outside, 
talking, and as I listened, I got an 
idea. If I went outside, too, our enemy would be confused into believing there were more of us. I could 
invent a few new voices and a few 
names and they might be led to believe we had a whole army here with 



us. So what if our ship were small? 
This could have been the last of 
several trips . . . 

"Confuse 'em," Gramps had said 
once. "Get 'em on the ground and 
tramp all over 'em with a war of 
nerves. Bury 'em under a pack of 
terrible lies, that's what." I'd do it. 

I stood atop a pinnacle of rock 
and made myself look busy. If they 
had any lookouts perched high within their dome, they wouldn't miss 
seeing me, and I was gambling 
everything on the fact that they 
wouldn't shoot because they wanted 
to learn something from us. 

Then I popped behind my pinnacle 
of rock, out of their range of vision, 
and I hauled myself up the other 
side. F did this a few times, and they 
probably thought half a dozen of us 
swarmed all over the rock, exploring. 

I said, "If this ain't the place, I'll 
eat my hat." 

"Can't tell, George," I said in a 
higher voice. "Might be. Might not. 
But we're getting close, that's for 
sure. Good thing we found those old 
Rusky charts." 

Oh, I was having a glorious time. 
I said, for George, "We could blast 
those other guys out of their dome 
any time we want. So why are we 
waiting?" 

I was getting cocky, and I used a 
deep bass this time. "You know the 
chief wants to have some fun with 
that weapon. No place better to try 
it,' he told me, 'than on our friends 
over there.' Just wait." 



THE OLD WAY 



141 



\ N inspiration hit me. all at 
once. I had our weapon. "Yeah," 
this was my George voice again, 
"but what an awful way to die. T 
wonder if those charts are really 
true; you press a button, and anyone around who happens to be in 
contact with iron or steel just gets 
broiled alive." 

I poured it on in my middle-sized 
voice. "That's it, okay. The charts 
wouldn't lie. Can you imagine what 
those Ruskies could have done with 
that in the War?" 

"Uh-huh. That woulda hit everyone. You carry a blaster, it's steel. 
Disintegrator, too. Wear a spacesuit, 
you also get broiled. Go near a 
radio, same thing. Man, it scares 
you: hope the chief knows what he's 
doing." 

"He knows," my good new friend 
George said, and because I figured 
they had heard enough for now of 
my terribly selective yet horribly 
universal weapon, I marched off my 
pinnacle and made my way back 
over the rubble toward our dome. I 
chuckled softly to myself. Clair and 
Gramps had doubtlessly heard of my 
new weapon via their intercoms, and 
I thought they'd be mightily pleased. 
It had infinite possibilities in this 
war of nerves. 

They were waiting for me outside 
the dome-lock, and I thought that 
was funny because I had expected 
to find them within the dome. 

And then I ran. One, two, three 
figures stood within the dome, staring out solemnly at Gramps and 
Clair. I reached them and I tried 



the lock. I didn't have to — I don't 
think I could have entered with a 
blow torch. 

I looked at Clair and Clair looked 
at me. and then we both looked at 
Gramps. He shrugged eloquently 
enough, and after taking one last 
angry look at the three men within 
our dome, we turned and walked 
away. The angry looks made them 
smile, as we left one of them even 
thumbed his nose at us. That gesture, too, was eloquent. It said. 
suckers! 

We retreated to the base of my 
pinnacle of rock, where we couldn't 
be seen from either dome. What had 
happened was simple. In my enthusiasm I had left our dome deserted, 
and apparently ^our trio of friends 
back there had found it that way. 
The dome-locks, of course, are manipulated from within, and there's 
no way to secure them from the outside. So the trio had walked in, closed 
the lock behind them, and we were 
stuck out on the cold, dark, airless 
surface of 4270. 

I tried to scratch my head and 
nearly succeeded in cracking my 
helmet with a leatheroid glove. 
Gramps and Clair had gone out 
before me: they had perhaps an 
hour's air supply left. Maybe I had 
three, with luck. 

The Karden didn't have enough 
air within its old hulk now to satisfy 
a lungfish in suspended animation, 
and by the time we could get its old 
generators working again, we'd be 
three asphyxiated corpses. 

So, we could do two things. We 



I 4 2 



IMAGINATION 



could wait out hi the open like sitting ducks and wait for the unknown 
enemy to take us. or we could just 
sit here near our pinnacle of rock 
and suffocate. 

I cursed myself soundly, but I 
stopped and tried to comfort her 
when I saw that Clair was crying. It 
isn't easy, not through a spacesuit 
and not when you think you'll be 
dead in not much more than 
minutes. 

Gramps felt the fear too, he was 
muttering to himself. Clair murmured. "Jerry . . . Oh. Jerry ... I 
don't want to die! " 

T had to think fast. I had to think 
faster than I ever thought in 
my life, and generally T like to 
explore my way around a problem, 
looking at it from all angles. But 
the air left for Gramps and Clair 
could be measured in minutes now, 
and mine wasn't much more. 

I said, "What are you worrying 
about? George and Harry and the 
other boys will have that thing 
rigged up in a couple of hours, sure. 
We'll give those guys in both domes 
a little bit of hell. Won't be a one 
left alive." I tried to make the butterflies remain in my stomach, to 
have them go amplace but in my 
voice. It almost didn't work. 

Clair and Gramps looked at me 
like I might be crazy or something, 
and I raised a gloved finger up and 
tried to line it up in front of my 
mouth to tell them to shut up. 

Gramps said, ''George and Harry?" 

"Of course. They found it half an 



hour ago, and now they're setting 
it up. Just a matter of time, so relax." 

I squatted down on my hands and 
knees, making the gesture for silence 
again. I found a jagged little rock 
and started to trace lines in the 
powdery pumice. It was messy, but 
they could understand it. I wrote: 
GO TO THEIR OLD DOME 
AND GIVE UP. YOUR AIR 
WON'T LAST. THEY WON'T 
KILL. SCARED. QUESTION 
YOU ABOUT WEAPON. REMEMBER WHAT GORGE & 
HARRY SAID ABOUT WEAPON BEFORE, BUT PLAY A 
LITTLE DUMB. LEAVE REST 
TO ME. 

I waited while I saw them reading 
it, then I rubbed it out. Clair shook 
her head. Her eyes told me plainly 
enough that she didn't want to die. 
but that she'd rather die out here 
with me than otherwise. 

Gramps looked like he would 
rather be sitting someplace comfortable with his guitar, but he was trying to smile a little. 

I crouched and wrote again, just 
three words: 

PLEASE GO. NOW. 

I erased the line with my boots 
and I waited, then I turned around 
for a long time and didn't look back 
at them. When I did, they were two 
tiny figures on the twisted, broken 
landscape, walking toward the second dome. 

T?OR a while I waited, and then I 
*■ swarmed all over my pinnacle 



THE OLD WAY 



14.3 



again, like George and Harry and 
anyone else who might have been 
around. They could come and get 
me, of course, but I figured they 
wouldn't. Then they might never 
find the weapon. That was their 
dilemma, not mine. Mine was to do 
something along the lines of Gramps' 
war of nerves, and do something 
good, before my air ran out. 

I said, "Watch it, George. Take 
it easy. Don't you think the chief 
ought to be around before you try 
anything?" 

I climbed off the pinnacle so no 
one could see me. "Naw," I made 
George say. "I know what I'm doing. F'r gosh sakes, what could happen? I got the charts right here. 
I wanta hurry and get back to the 
wife in Canal City. Some damn bus 
driver ..." I'd make it sound like 
their own story, and maybe they'd 
believe. 

"Well, okay," my Harry said dubiously. 

George sighed. "There. That does 
it. Now — watch." 

Silence. I watched thirty seconds 
tick off on my suit clock, then I 
made Harry scream : 

"George! Good God. George . . . 
Arrgh! " 

I hoped the scream was a good 
one. Honest, it almost scared me. 
Poor George and Harry: I had 
killed them off quick enough. Now 
I had to invent new characters. For 
a brief moment I wondered what 
had happened to Clair and Gramps, 
but then I pushed them out of my 
mind. I couldn't afford to think of 



that now. 

I let six minutes pass. It was agonizing, but I did it. Then I did my 
best to invent two new voices. 

"So, here's the spot, Mike. Funny, 
I don't see them." 

Mike had a high, squeaky voice. 
"Hah-iiah, don't worry, chief. They'll 
be around." 

"I don't find your humor amusing. So — Mike. Mike! Look . . . " 

I let my voice trail off. If this 
wasn't so damned serious, it could 
have been amusing. I was really 
living the part. 

Mike said: "God, chief, .both of 
'em. Shrivelled up like that, burned 
to a crisp. Chief — " 

"What can you do? I told them 
not to play games with it until I 
came, and they just didn't know how 
to work the damper. Fools, they 
could have killed us all. Well, suppose we take care of those people in 
the domes." 

"You mean like this, chief?" 

"Certainly, like this. No one asked 
them to butt in here." 

T didn't say anything else for a 
while. I could feel myself 
sweating under the helmet, and momentarily, at least, I had run out of 
things to say. 

Someone else came to my rescue. 
For the first time, one of the other 
party attempted direct -intercom 
communication. 

"Hey you out there," a voice said. 
"This is Reardon, in charge of this 
outfit." He sounded afraid. "Lay 
off or we'll blast these two prisoners 



U4 



IMAGINATION 



I got ..." 

''You're telling me to lay off?" I 
demanded, trying to think of something to say. "You're telling me to 
lay off? That's rich." 

''What do you mean?"' The voice 
was still frightened, and I began to 
feel a-little better. They had fallen 
for this so far all the way. 

"What do I care what you do to 
those two? They're a couple of homesteaders who happened to barge in 
here, an old man and a girl. Go 
ahead, kill 'em. What's the difference, you'll follow in a couple of 
minutes." 

That got him. "Wait," he said. 
■'Hold it, please." 

I yawned, loud enough for the 
intercom to pick it up. T hoped I 
wasn't overdoing it. "Mike," I 
drawled, "set that thing up so we 
can finish the job and get out of 
here, eh? Now, be careful. Connect 
that dampening rig like that, that's 
it. Careful. Just make sure the 
pole fits into that hole real snug. 
There you are. You did it . . . " 

"You sure you wanta use this 
thing on them, chief?" I had Mike 
say. 

"Why in hell not? Come on. 
Xow! " 

The voice over the intercom was 
almost a shriek. "Stop! For the love 
of heaven please stop! Cut it out, 
please. Don't roast us. We give 
up! We—" 

I said. "Who cares if you give up 
or not? I just want to try out my 
weapon. No one asked you to poke 
your nose in here like this. You hear 



him, Mike? He gives up. That's 
funny." 

Mike said, "It ain't so funny. If 
they give up, I say let 'em go. Hell, 
they won't give you any more trouble, chief." 

The frightened voice was pleading 
now. "Listen to him, friend. Go 
ahead, listen. We give up, see? We're 
harmless. We'll go away. Anything. 
The weapon's all vours ..." 

"Well — " 

"Go ahead, chief," Mike said. 

"Umm-m. Well, okay. Hey you 
guys! All of you get into one dome, 
fast, and throw every gun you have 
outside. Your spacesuits, too. You'd 
better, because I don't exactly trust 
you. I'm going to give you five minutes and then I'm going to turn this 
thing on. Anyone has an ounce of 
iron or steel on him, he'll be broiled." 

T WAITED, atop my pinnacle. I 
■*• saw three figures running from 
the direction of our original dome, 
heading for the other one. In a moment, the}' disappeared over the 
close, jagged horizon. I said: 

"That's about enough time, Mike. 
Turn it on." 

I swaggered across the rubblestrewn asteroid. As I approached 
the dome I began to feel nervous, 
but I didn't stop my swaggering. 
Outside was a great pile of disintegrators, blasters, and heaters, 
plus a dozen spacesuits, assorted 
knives, pens, pencils, coins, pots, 
pans, aashlights, all sorts of toolseven a heap of leatheroid jumpers, 



THE OLD WAV 



145 



because someone must have realized 
the stitching was of steelite fibre, 
which it was. 

I picked up a couple of the heaters and tried the enter air-lock door. 
It swung in easily. 

I stood inside the dome with my 
two heaters and the reaction set in. 
I started to laugh. A dozen big 
strong men sat about, half naked and 
afraid in their underwear, and over 
in a corner stood Gramps and 
Clair, also down to their scan ties. 

The biggest of the twelve men 
said, "I'm Reardon. Thank you. 
Thank you, sir . . . " 

"Shut up," I told him. I waved 
my heater and -he shut up. 

"We've had to do it, too," Clair 
said, running into my arms, pulling 
off my helmet and kissing me. I 
threw one of the heaters to Gramps, 
and Clair was speaking again, "I 
almost laughed and spoiled the 
whole thing, but Gramps and I took 
off our jumpers, too, to make it look 
good. In fact, Gramps gave them the 
idea." 

Good old Gramps . . . 

RAMPS donned his spaeesuit 
and so did Clair, and Reardon, 
still not comprehending, mumbled 
his thanks. I explored the inside of 
the dome thoroughly, making sure 
there were no hidden weapons. T-hen 
I stepped through the lock with Clair 
and Gramps, and I closed the outer 
door. T notc-hed my heater to low 
intensity and fused the door and the 
dome into one piece. They'd need a 
heater or a disintegrator to get out, 



and they didn't have either. 

Clair was smiling happily, -now. 
But Gramps had a frown on his face. 

"'So what do we do with 'em?" 

''Simple." I replied. "We wait for 
the government ship. It'll be here in 
a few weeks. They're not going anvwhere in the meantime." 

Gramps continued to frown. "You 
think we oughta report what they 
was lookin' for? The Ruskie weapon, 
I mean ..." 

I laughed. "That won't be necessary, Gramps. We'll do even better 
than that. We'll tell them what the 
weapoji is." 

Clair looked at me dumbfounded 
and I found myself grinning at both 
her and Gramps. 

"Jerry! You can't be serious— we 
didn't really find the weapon!" 

"We not only found it. we used it. 
hon," I told her. "I did some fast 
thinking while I was up on the rocks 
before. In a way I was in the same 
boat the Ruskies were when we 'beat 
them. I had to use desperate means 
—anything I could, and mainly 
something that would start fear, a 
panic ..." 

"But I don't see — " Clair was 
confused. 

"The Ruskies had a powerful 
weapon, all right." I replied. "The 
only trouble was they used it ton 
late. Fortunately for us we still had 
time — and our opponents weren't too 
bright mentally anyway. If they had 
been it might not have worked. Matter of fact, that's the big thing that 
licked the Ruskies. We wc »„ a bit 
too shrewd for them. Our military 



IMAGINATION 



146 

leaders saw right through their 
weapon." 

Gramps stamped his foot angrily. 
"Now look here, Jerry! Stop ramblin' around like that! Just what 
weapon you talkin' about?" 

"Propaganda, Gramps. Propagan


da, the greatest weapon in tihe universe — if used right. Now what do 
you say we get down to work and 
mine some copper?" 

We were all laughing as we made 
our way to the other dome. 
THE END 



(Continued from Page 5) 



"Rocket-ship X-M" hit the theaters 
I before "Destination Moon" which had 
l<iiite a bit of advance billing. X-M 
1 id a land-office business. "Destination Moon" did not apparently 
; thieve the heights of popularity 
■ Xpeeted. As far as we can see the 
reason for this was that DM concentrated too much on the technical 
side instead of the story side. Then 
suddenly along came "The Thing" 
and it sported as gripping a suspense 
story as you'll find anywhere. The 
theaters were packed and the queues 
in front of them were significant. 

SO we say let's get our collective 
noses out of the stratosphere. 
Science fiction was never meant to 
be an educational torn- de force The 
so-called adult story is nothing mure 
than an attempt to show the reader how dumb he is and how smart 
the editor is. We think the readers 
are a lot smarter than the critics 
give them credit for being. We might 
even say they're one hell of a lot 
smarter! The time has come to drop 
this snobbish attitude in science fiction. If it isn't dropped the public 
will turn away and go gack to westerns or detectives or anything else 
that appeals to escapist entertainment. 



FORTUNATELY other editors realize this too. Howard Browne, 
of AS & FA presented a good case 
of the subject in his August editorial. It is gratifying to know that 
his magazines, like IMAGINATION, 
will continue to cater to the readers 
of science fiction and not the clitics 
who remain loftily ensconed in their 
ivory towers. Ray Palmer of OW 
is another top editor who will slant 
his magazine toward the readers. 
These men know, from experience, as 
does your own editor, that entertainment is the one guarantee the reader expects for the purchase price he 
pays at the newsstand. 

SO we're going on record right now 
with IMAGINATION. We don't 
intend to force intellectual nonsense 
on you, our readers. We're convinced you can do your own thinking and 
further that it would be an insult to 
infer that you can't. Science fiction readers are mentally adult or 
they wouldn't be reading it! And 
that goes for the great new audience 
swinging into the field. It goes as well 
for the movies, radio and television. 
Let's take off the makeup and get to 
the real article — entertainment. A 
story may not have to be what the 
critics call "space opera" to be en


THE EDITORIAL 



147 



tertainment. We don't say that at 
all. But let's cut out the snooty disdain that currently exists in some 
minds for anything but a story that 
will show mankind the path to ultimate Utopia. What we need is a 
little relaxation. And entertaining 
reading is one way to get it. 

THE cover story this issue is a 
good example of what we mean. 
Geoff St. Reynard is one of the 
best writers in the field, not to mention the fact that his serious novels 
are brought out by Rinehart under 
his real name, Robert W Krepps. 
{The Field of Night, In The Courts 
of the Lion, etc.) Geoff knows how 
to write an entertaining story. He 
knows, how to put characterization, 
mood, action, and suspense into a 
well-built story that will leave, you 
calling for more. "Beware The 
Usurpers !" is the brilliant sequel 
to his now famed "The Usurpers" 
which we ran in FA when we edited 
that magazine early last year. Geoff 
asked us if we'd like to have him 
do a sequel to it for IMAGINATION. 
We told him to go ahead, and we 
think it's one of the finest stories 
we've ever read. Let us know how 
you like it. 

A WORD about our cover this issue. Ever since Malcolm Smith 
presented the photo-dyed cover on 
the April issue, which oddly enough 
was for another St. Reynard story, 
we've received requests for another 
photo cover. Here it is. We liked it 
so much we suggested to Malcolm 
that he enter it in the annual Art 
Directors' contest. We'll let you 
know when it wins first prize! 

NEXT issue we're presenting a 
terrific novel by Kris Neville, 
written especially for Madge. The 
title of the story is SPECIAL DE


LIVERY and it packs a wallop you 
will remember for a long time. When 
we say the suspense is terrific we 
mean it. The cover was painted 
from a symbolic idea behind the story and we're sure you'll like it too. 
It's the first cover, interior artist 
Bill Terry has done for any magazine, and we think Bill will be doing 
a lot of them from now on! 

WE'VE also found a terrific new 
writer. His name is Daniel 
F. Galouye and he has written a novel that is worthy of feature presentation in an early issue. Watcl; for 
the announcement on Tonight The 
Sky Will Fall . . . 

AND we can't forget our charming, 
dream-girl, Toffee! She, Marc 
Pillsworth, and the inimitable ghost, 
George, will be back shortly in a 
new novel length story. You'll hnve 
yourself a zany time, with more 
laughs than you can count! 

WHICH winds up shop for this 
issue. See you at the newsstands promptly the first week in 
November wlh 




"I had to spank him — -he was good today." 




donclucteJ htj ITjart mJoif 



LOTS of people are awfully hard 
to convert to science fiction 
and fantasy. Some of them may even be hopeless. Like a friend of 
mine who thinks that fans are crazy, 
stf writers are crazier still, and 
science fiction is "all about little 
pink people who do impossible 
things." I don't argue with him, as 
he doesn't like to read about people 
anyway. Only about horses. 

Of course, in time you can get a 
lot of your friends interested in science fiction. It's a simple process, 
really. You start in by leaving your 
copy of IMAGINATION lying out 
where a friend can see it, with 
guarded references to such-and-such 
a story, and pretty soon he will pick 
up the magazine to find out just 
what it's all about. And a little 
later he'll be raving about it as 
only a new fan can rave . . . 

But you don't have to wait until 
your friends are converted in order 
to have someone to talk about science fiction with. Maybe you don't 
know any other stf enthusiasts in 



your neighborhood, but there are 
probably quite a few of them. And 
probably they've organized some sort 
of fan club. 

The clubs vary, of course. Some 
consist of a half dozen fans meeting 
in each other's homes for coffee and 
cookies and a discussion of science 
fiction. Others are citywide affairs, 
with permanent club rooms and reg"ular meetings with parliamentary 
procedure and guest speakers. But 
east coast or west, city or small 
town, you'll find the same fan spirit. 

I've been to several different organizations, both on the Pacific 
Coast and here in New York, and 
I'd like to tell you a little about 
them, and what you'd find if you 
dropped in for a visit. 

I'll start with Los Angeles, as 
that's where I first met fandom. 
Besides, the LASFS, or Los Angeles 
Science Fantasy Society, is one of 
the largest and most active of local 
fan organizations. It has a permanent clubroom at 1305 West Ingraham Street, and holds meetings 



1 48 



FAX DORA'S BOX 



'49 



there every week, on Thursday night, 
unless the schedule has been changed since I left there last autumn. 

Meetings at LASFS are what you 
might call semi-formal. That is, 
the club has a director who presides 
over the meetings, a secretary and 
treasurer and other officers, and it 
holds regular business meetings at 
the start of its sessions. But it's 
not stiff by any means. There's a 
lot of group discussion and a lot of 
just plain visiting among fans who 
haven't seen each other all week. 

I'm not sure just what time the 
meetings start. I think it's eight 
o'clock, but it might be eight thirty. 
Anyway, we always went early so 
we'd have time for a little extra visiting. Allan Hershey was the director then, and invariably someone 
would buttonhole him and start a 
conversation that would carry over 
into official meeting hours. Then, if 
there was any business to conduct, 
it was quite a task to get everyone 
to sit still long enough to conduct 
it. It was the kind of meeting that 
was loads of fun, always. 

Sometimes there'd be a guest speaker, some writer or out of town fan, 
but a lot of times the club members 
themselves would put on skits or tell 
about non-fan activities. And once 
a month there were the coffee and 
doughnut sessions ... I wonder if 
they've kept those up? 

The LASFS has its own mimeograph and puts out its fanzine, Shangri-La, or Shaggy. A different group 
edits it each time. That way everyone gets in on the work and no one 
clique can take over and run the zine 
to suit itself. And since the club is 
a large one, with both senior and 
junior members, the rotating editorship keeps everyone interested and 
gives everyone a chance to try out his 
own ideas. 



SOME of the most prominent names 
in fandom— and among professional writers too — are either 
LASFS members or attend meetings there. There's Rick Sneary, 
leading fan and president of the 
NFFF — the National Fantasy 
Fan Federation, the largest of all 
fan groups. There's Forest J. Ackerman, an old time fan and now a 
writer's agent. There's E. E. Evans, 
who's a writer now and a fan still. 
There's Kris Neville. And of course, 
one of the old time LASFSers — Ray 
Bradbury. 

So if you're in the Los Angeles 
area and haven't been to a LASFS 
meeting, why not drop in some 
Thursday night? You can find out 
more about it by writing to Walter 
Daugherty at the club address, 1305 
West Ingraham, Los Angeles 14. 

Of course, if you're in the Los 
Angeles area you'll undoubtedly 
hear a lot about the Outlanders. I 
could write a whole column about 
the club, of which I'm a member, 
but I won't, since we're not exactly 
a regular fan club. We're a small 
social group, who spend a good deal 
of our time writing letters to each 
other and meet whenever possible in 
each other's homes for a visit. We 
usually don't spend much time talking about science fiction,- since we 
all belong to other fan organizations. 
Right now, the Outlanders are quite 
scattered. I guess I'm still the 
farthest from home, though. 

Here in the New York area there 
are two main fan groups — the ESFA, 
or Eastern Science Fiction Association, in Newark, and the Queens 
Science Fiction League in New York 
City. Their membership doesn't overlap. Rog and I have attended 
meetings at both clubs. I don't know 
if they were typical meetings, but I 
enjoyed them both thoroughly. Maybe because the guest speaker at each 



1 



IMAGINATION" 



150 

one was Hog- Phillips . . . 

ESFA members come from all 
over the New York metropolitan 
area, though most of them are New 
Jersey residents. The meetings are 
formal. They're held once a month 
and usually have guest speakers from 
among the New York writers and 
editors. They're held on Sunday afternoon — I think -it's the first Sunday of the month, but I'm not sure. 

The day we went it was raining 
hard, but even so quite a group had 
turned out. It started off with a 
business meeting and ended with 
Rog's speech — which wasn't a speech, 
really. I love Rog's talks. He gets 
up and says, "Any questions?", and 
spends the next hour answering all 
sorts of. queries about science fiction and writing in general. 

After the meeting the club officers took us to dinner and we all 
talked some more. I met so many 
people that afternoon that I can't 
get them all straight. Anyway, they 
were all fans and you'd like them. 

I couldn't tell you how to get 
there, either. I've never yet learned 
to find my way around Long Island, 
and New Jersey is even worse. Here 
in Flushing the sun and moon rise 
in the north — you just come out and 
take a look! Anyhow, if you're in the 
Metropolitan area and would like to 
find out more about ESFA I'd suggest you write to Jimmy Taurasi of 
Fantasy-Times at 137-03 32nd. Ave., 
Flushing, Long Island, New York. 
He's an ESFA member and can tell 
you all about it. 

We hadn't been here in Flushing 
very long when we were invited 
down to the Queens Science Fiction 
League. Rog answered some questions there, too. It's a smaller 
group, meeting in the home of Mr. 
and Mrs. Will Sykora in Long Island City. Will Sykora is an old 
time fan who has gathered together 



quite a grcwp of young fans who 
hold regular meetings and have a lot 
of fun. And after the meetings Mrs. 
Sykora serves a big spaghetti dinner for those who want to stay and 
chat on into the evening. The day 
we were there Rog talked and Frank 
Belknap Long dropped in and talked 
also and then after the meeting we 
all ate and kept right on talking 
way into the nig-ht. 

The QSFL has its own mimeograph machine and the members run 
off their fan sheets there. Quite a 
few of them write. They take their 
writing seriously and really work at 
it — and they turn out some very 
good stories, too. 

If you're interested in the QSFL 
I'd suggest you write Will Sykora 
at P. O. Box 4, Steinway Station, 
Long Island City, New York. 

There are lots of other fan clubs. 
You'll find them in just about every 
city, and in a lot of small towns 
also. If yon don't have one where 
you live, and wish you did, you could 
always start one. It's easy. You just 
convert your friends to science fiction . . . 

Which brings me back where I 
started from. So it's a good time 
to go on to the fanzines for this 
Box . . . 

First there's the FAN DIRECTORY. This isn't a fanzine. It's 
just what it says — a listing, of as 
many known fans as could be located. It's arranged by states, so 
that to find out who the fans are 
in your area all you have to do is 
look under your state heading and 
— there you have them. Names and 
addresses, whether male or female, 
and what organizations they belong 
to. 

The Fan Directory is really valuable. I use mine all the time to 
check addresses. It's the work of a 



FAX DORA'S BOX 



couple of my fellow Outlanders, and 
it's an excellent job. The editor is 
Len Moffatt, who went to all the 
trouble of collecting and sorting out 
the names and setting up the directory. The publisher is Stan Woolston, who ran off the copies on his 
Lilliputian Press at Garden Grove, 
California. They really did an excellent job. 

It's something you should have. 
And it costs only 25c. You can send 
for your copy to Leonard J. Moffatt, 5969 Lanto St., Bell Gardens, 
California. 

The CINVENTION MEMORY 
BOOK — it's not a fanzine either. 
It's a big, 96-page, beautifully done 
book commemorating the 1949 World 
Science Fiction Convention at Cincinnati. It's a must for everyone 
who was there — and if you weren't 
there you'll still find it fascinating. 
Sort of a picture, in words, of what 
a science fiction convention really is. 

I didn't go to the Cinvention, but 
I've heard a lot about it. And now 
that I've been reading the Memory 
Book I feel that I was there, after 
all . . . 

Quite a few of the speeches at the 
Cinvention, made by guest writers 
and editors and publishers, were 
taken down on tape recorders and 
later typed up for publication here. 
And besides the speeches there are 
accounts of the Cinvention as it was 
actually experienced, day by day. 
The contents page reads like a page 
out of Who's Who in the stf world. 
Lloyd Eshbach, Lester del Key, Jack 
Williamson, E. E. Smith, Fritz Leiber, Bob Tucker, Ray Palmer, Rog 
Phillips (familiar name, that 
last...) and many, many more. 

Don Ford, Stan Skirvin, Roy Lavender, and Lou Tabakow put out the 
Memory Book, and they really did a 
wonderful job. It's a limited edi


tion— 500 copies. So if you want 
yours you'd best write ir right 
away for it. It's only a dollar, 
and more than worth it. 

Send for your copy to the publisher, Don Ford, Box 116, Sharonvillc, Ohio. 

* * * 

FANTASY-TIMES. The science 
fiction newszine published twice a 
month by Fandom House and edited 
by James Taurasi, 137-03 32nd. Ave., 
Flushing, Long Island, New York. 

Right now I'm looking at the second March issue, which carries, 
among other news items, the report 
that Rog Phillips' Time Trap is now 
running as a newspaper serial. We'll 
have to get hold of one of the papers 
and see how they cut it . . . 

There's lots of other news, as always 
in this newszine. Somehow Fantasy 
Times manages to keep up on just 
about everything everywhere that's 
of special interest to fantasy fans. 
If you want to find out what's new 
in the science fiction world now, send 
10c to James Taurasi. I'll bet you'll 
end as a regular subscriber. 

* * * 

Well, that seems to 1 scrape the 
bottom of the Box, so I guess I'll 
close it up for now. Remember, if 
you have a fanzine you'd like reviewed, or club activities you'd like 
to tell about, send the zine or information to the Box. It's Mari Wolf, 
FAN DORA'S BOX, c'o IMAGINATION, P. 0. Box 230, Evanston, 111. 
Please don't send them to Flushing, 
as we won't be here then. In fact, 
we'll be heading westward just a 
few days from the time I'm writing 
this, and who knows where we'll be 
by the time you read it? Well, we 
should be used by now to having our 
mail follow us hopefully around the 
country . . . 

See you next issue! 

— MARI WOLF 




A NEATER FORMAT 

Dear Mr. Hamling: 

I just want to say a few things 
about the June issue of IMAGINATION. I like the new format. It 
really looks swell. And for the first 
time I liked a Bok cover. 

Another thing, FANDORA'S BOX 
is a great idea! But make it a lot 
longer in future issues. 

As for the stories, I have read 
only' two of them so far. The only 
reason being that I haven't had 
time for much reading. 

BEYOND THE ULTRA-VIOLET 
by Frank M. Robinson is the best 
story in the issue — I know that without going any further! No one could 
top Robinson's story. Please get 
more yarns by Robinson. 

The other storv I read was James 
BHsh's THE VOID IS MY COFFIN. 
It was also a very good story. If the 
rest of the yarns in the issue are as 
good as these two you'll have a tough 
job bringing out a better issue than 
the June number. For that matter 
that goes for any other magazine 
on the market! 

How about putting a section in 
Madge for the biography of the author of the cover story each issue. 



Knowing about the author of the 
stories you read makes it more interesting. 

One more thing, I would like to 
see serials. 

Charles Nuetzel 
16452 Moorpark St. 

Encino, Cal. 
We're glad you like the new format ■ 
so well, Chuck. As to the biography 
idea — turn to page two wlh 

ONE MAN'S OPINION . . . 

Dear Mr. Hamling: 

I write you to voice my protest 
against your preposterous criticism 
of DESTINATION MOON in your 
reply to Mrs. Dorothy Hansen's letter in the June IMAGINATION. 

"The story was so incidental as 
to be non-existent . . . the characters 
. . . weren't people with problems 
you could sympathize with . . . (Hollywood should have provided) a good 
dramatic story ..." Good Lord, 
man, what kind of words are these 
to come from the editor of a science 
fiction magazine! But let's take up 
these pseudo critical commentaries 
one by one. 

1. The story. — The central conflict 
in the story of the film is, cf course 



152 



LETTERS FROM THE READERS 



the success or failure of the protagonists in their attempt to reach the 
Moon. The antagonist who opposes 
the "heroes" is nature herself. While 
tiie pitting of human protagonists 
against an impersonal antagonist is 
an unusual story device, it is certainly not unprecedented in good literature and drama. Melville's Moby 
Dick is an example; most of H. G. 
Wells' science fiction stories (immeasureably superior to the trash 
published currently under the misleading title of science fiction) use 
such a plot; Karel Capek's War With 
the Newts, a novel of real literary 
merit, is analagous to DESTINATION MOON in plot. 

To those of us who are truly interested in the coming, conquest of 
space (among . us there are firstrate scientists such as We r her von 
Braun and Wolfgang Steurer, who 
are actually attempting to implement the Earth-Satellite program of 
our government) the conflict of man 
with space is an exciting and fascinating prospect. Far more exciting 
than a trite boy-meets-girl tale or 
a neurotic-finds-himself -through-trial 
narrative or a moralistic be-good-oryou'll - be - like - the - Martians someday yarn. 

2. Dramatic Interest. — If the conquest of space doesn't have dramatic 
interest, what has? The first trip to 
the Moon certainly has as much dramatic interest as Columbus' initial 
voyage to America, which as you 
know, has been the subject of innumerable works of historical fiction. 

The sort of attitude toward science fiction that is reflected in your 
criticism of DESTINATION MOON 
Is, in my opinion/largely responsible 
for the watered-down pap that has 
been foisted on readers under the 
guise of stf lately. The formula for 
this second-rate trash seems to be 
take a conventional boy-meets-girl 



story written for the Ladies' Home 
Journal in the 1920s; change the locale from Podunk, Iowa, to Mars; 
change the hero's convertible into a 
space ship; dress all characters in 
space suits ; publish in any science 
fiction magazine, along with comments from a proud editor as to how 
he avoids bug-eyed monsters, lack of 
conventional human-interest, and, 
indeed, anything else traditionally accepted in good science fiction. 

In closing, if this letter gets published, I wonder what kind of a flippant title you'll put on it. "If you 
haven't got a case, call your opponent 
names." 

John M. Sharp 
Dept. of Modern Languages 
Texas Western College 
El Paso, Texas 
You kit it on the head when you 
speak of a lack of human interest — 
that's exactly what we meant by 
saying DM lacked a good dramatic 
sto?-y. It is 07tr opinion, and we 
stand on it, that a story may concern an Earth-shaking idea or impending calamity, or challenge, etc. 
But if the story lacks human interest then it no longer serves the purpose it intended to— that of a STORY. 
We want to get in there and root and 
cheer for the hero and heroine 
against the villain and the odds on the 
villain's side. While the old gal Nature can be a villain at times, she's 
one we can't see, understand, or catagorize in the realm of human emotion. Your interpretation of a dramatic story is different than ours. 
Ok, you're entitled to that opinion, 
just as we are entitled to ours. One 
thing though, the results of DM's 
box-office success would tend to indicate that we are right. 

As to the merit of science fiction 
stories today, read the editorial in 
this issue. 

Name calling? You've got the 



'54 



IMAGINATION 



■wrong editor and the wrong magazine — we're all friends here — even 
if we do disagree wlh 

NEW TO SCIENCE-FANTASY 

Dear Mr. Hamling: 

Greetings and salutations to you 
from a new reader. I purchased my 
first copy (June issue) of IMAGINATION three days ago, and just finished reading the issue. I want to 
say right now that it is a good magazine and the stories are certainly 
what the title suggests. I am becoming interested in science-fantasy as a 
result of an interest in things occult 
and supernatural. Of course it is 
highly possible that my interest in 
science-fantasy might fade out later. 
Do you have any comments on this 
possibility ? 

I enjoyed the stories in the June 
issue. For example, I think that 
THE MARTIANS. AND THE COYS 
was a very good humorous yarn. 
HELL'S ANGEL is an excellent 
piece of imagination and the ending 
was unexpected. 

I'm looking forward to the next 
issue. Hope it's as good. 

Wilbur Hune 
417 6th Ave. 
Palmetto, Fla 
So you wonder if your interest in 
science-fantasy will fade? We'll 
bet you'll be joining a fan club — 
and maybe even contributing to fanzines. Science- fantasy may not be 
a drug—but it really "hooks" you- — ■ 
and that's good! wlh 

DIANETICS WORKS . . . 

Dear Ed: 

Whoever wrote the article on Dianetics in your June issue has evidently not tried Dianetics. Or perhaps there is another reason. 

Hubbard made one mistake in his 



book. He should have used capital 
Letters, underscored, when he said, 
". . . any intelligent person can, with 
study successfully use dianetic methods". So far as I have been able 
to observe, all of the so-called failures, of dianetics are brought about 
by very incompetent and even idiotic, 
auditing. 

The stuff works when applied as 
directed. 

Robert Howard 
2615 Perkins Lane 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
We commented on dianetics and its 
"auditors" in the letter section of 
the September issue ...... .wlh 

FOR SALE, ONE WIFE . . .? 

Dear Mr. Hamling: 

Where are the Canadian readers? 
Do you get mail from them? All I 
know is that stf and fantasy mags 
are always being gobbled up at the 
newsstands and yet I never see a 
letter from Canada? 

There are lots of second-hand book 
and magazine stores up here. But 
when I visit them I find the stf mags 
gone. They disappear as fast as they 
arrive. Could it be that some Americans come up here and get them? 

I buy all the stf & fantasy mags 
that come out here. The way the 
new books appear I'll soon go broke. 
I've got an enormous stack of mags 
all kinds old and new and my wife is 
raising the roof, although I must say 
the magazines are giving her good 
competition. Those interested in 
buying or exchanging, let me know. 

June issue at hand, and I must say 
I totally disagree with J. F. Streinz. 
Especially his reference to "Galaxy". 
As far as I am concerned there is no 
comparison. Galaxy's editorial policy 
is too stiff and formal. No letters, 
etc. But enough of them! 

I felt that DOUBLE IDENTITY 



LETTERS FROM THE READERS 



1 55 



was the best story in the June issue. 
I find that too many of your yarns 
are humorous. Humor is good, but 
there is a limit. What we need is the 
occasional serious blood-and-thunder 
stuff. I like your advertising policy 
of advertising only products having 
to do with science-fantasy. I don't 
like magazines that tell me to go buy 
a truss or some such thing. 

I would like to give you my sincere 
wishes for a very successful future. 
You've got a darn good magazine! 
Al Rosen 

4255 Maplewood Ave. 
Montreal, Quebec 
Canada 

How about the scarcity of Canadian 
readers-letters — we know you're tip 
there, gang! . . . .As to your wife — 
why not get her reading those stf 
magazines. She doesn't know what 
she's missing! wlh 

GET THAT DICTIONARY! 

Dear Ed: 

Hooray for Mrs. Hansen! She 
really has an idea there in a dictionary of stf terms. It would truly he 
a boon to science fiction. It's a good 
opportunity for someone. 

While I'm at it I'll comment on 
some of the June issue. The cover 
was great, but then Bok always is. 

HELL'S ANGEL — not the greatest 
story ever told but one well worth 
reading. 

THE MARTIANS AND THE 
COYS— ok by me! Kind of off the 
subject but humorous. 

DOUBLE IDENTITY — a new 
twist and really good ! 

I guess I'm one of those readers 
who like more humorous stories. 
That's one reason I got a kick out 
of Mack Reynolds' tale. In referring to Superman, the Lone Ranger, 
etc., it might at first seem silly and 
childish, but to a Martian it would 



not be funny. 

Well, guess I'll get back to reading 
the rest of Madge! 

Gerald Hibbs 
Detroit Lakes, Minn. 
That science- fiction dictionary was 
reported on more fully in the. September issue wlh 

SHADES OF AMAZING, YET! 

Dear Ed: 

I have just finished reading the 
June issue of IMAGINATION, and 
except for the nice Bok cover and the 
digest size of the book I thought it 
smacked somewhat of AMAZING 
STORIES. Isn't that blasphemous? 
It's true, though. Look for yourself? 
— -The illos and story headings, etc. 
But maybe it's complimentary to say 
Madge bears a superficial resemblance to good old AMAZING. Anyway, I like Madge so I guess it has 
succeeded in its intent, if it proposed 
to snare me as a steady reader! 

The cover was very good. I have 
always liked Bok. And the story, 
HELL'S ANGEL . . . Robert Bloch 
can certainly turn in a nice job. The 
other stories were all familiarly 
average, nothing brilliant, nothing 
conspicuously a flop, just comfortable 
reading. Charles Myers turned out 
the possible exception. 

Maybe Myers should stop wasting 
his talents on those vapid "Toffee" 
yarns. Shades of Thorne Smith ! 
Look at all the people I've angered 
. . . But when you've read one "Toffee" story you've read them all, 
haven't you ? But I guess repetition 
pays off. Look at Autry and Hopalong! 

How much further can this business go of making our stf magazines 
look like the Render's Digest? I suppose they are more dignified. Whatever that is! All this flurry about 
a mag a man doesn't have to hide out 



IMAGINATION 



with! If I ever get a PhD and still 
haven't learned not to be ashamed to 
be seen in company with a magazine 
with ragged edges and a nude fern on 
the cover I'll think I'm the victim of 
a hoax instead of an education. So 
if you can make Madge sit on the 
Look shelf it's still ok with me. If 
I like it I'll buy it anyway. 

Ivan H. Copas 

R.F.D. No. 3 

Peebles, Ohio 
Nope we aren't instilled to be compared with AS, or especially FA for 
that matter. After editing those 
hooks for five years we're more than 
a bit fond of them! . . . Vapid "Toffee" stories, yon say? By the hounds 
of Pluto, it's atom blasters at dawn, 
sir! And what's all this fuss about 
nudes, ragged edges, etc.? The neat, 
attractive appearance of Madge is 
not meant to be smug or snooty in 
tone. Maybe some other mags make 
those claims — we just happen to like 
this format. And as to ferns on the 
cover, sure you'll see them here occasionally' But at the same time 
we'll try and give you some nice 
"different" cover presentations. Like 
this issue, for instance. A photo-dyed 
print. Like it? wlh 

SILENT NO LONGER! 

Dear Ed: 

So far I have been a silent, but 
appreciative fan, but Madge is such 
a fine magazine that I've got to tell 
you about it. 

As near as any mag could be, I'll 
say it's perfect. I only sec lacking 
the supernatural terror of H.P. Lovecraft. Even so, Madge is the T-O-P 
mag in science fiction. Keep it as 
such! . . . You know, IMAGINATION is the one magazine I can fee] 
safe in buying without looking for 
your authors' names. 

In the June issue 1 rate HELL'S 



ANGEL and DOUBLE IDENTITY 
as a tie. It's always a pleasure to 
see Mvers. In 3rd place I put MARTIANS AND THE COYS. Really 
clever. The rest of the stories I'd 
group into 4th position. 

FANDORA'S BOX and The Editorial are always interesting. Departments I usually skip in any other 
magazine. 

Your covers are good, even this 
month's although I don't favor 
cheesecake on an angel. You might 
pass along to Bok that angels, contrary to common belief, are not deceased humans and are referred to 
in the Bible as being of male gender. 

I agree with Jan Romanoff that 
the short factual features are entirely unnecessary. I'd also like to 
echo Mrs. Hansen's plea for an stf 
dictionary. Excellent idea. 

Now I'll light a cigar and settle 
down to some excellent re-reading. 
Maybe soon we'll be reading more of 
Myers and Annas? Huh? 

M. C. Pichlesimer, Jr. 
Pfc — USAF 
4012 A&EM Sqdrn 
Biggs AFB, Texas 
You've just given us two of the 
biggest compliments a science-fantasy 
editor can get. You know the contents will be good, regardless of the 
author's name, and you re-read the 
issue. They say only officers rate a 
salute — but here's one, from us to 
you! wlh 

IT WAS A GREAT DAY! 

Dear Ed: 

IMAGINATION is like "The 
Thing" from another planet! It is 
different, amazing, and holds your 
interest. The stories are superb and 
I must say that your covers strike 
the eye. What a great day it was 
when IMAGINATION hit the newsstands! It will go down as an event 



LETTERS FROM THE READERS 



157 



in science fiction annals. It is worth 
much more than the cover price. 

Bless you for leaving out the type 
of advertising so many other magazines cater to . . . 

In the June issue HELL'S ANGEL 
was A-l with me. Keep printing 
good stories like that. The letter 
from J. P. Streinz of Atlanta, Georgia, was very un-called for. People 
have the right to express their opinions, but he better take another look 
at IMAGINATION. I read Galaxy 
too, but it certainly does not surpass 
Madge. Galaxy has no Reader's Page 
or any departments such as our outstanding Madga! Galaxy also runs 
serials which ar*e definitely off my 
list. A person's interest in a story 
lessens when he has to wait for another chapter or part. A good feature in Madge is that the stories are 
all complete. Keep serials out of the 
magazine ! 

I have been a science fiction fan 
for several years and I am also interested in astronomy. Would appreciate getting in touch with any person 
who also has a tape-recorder as I 
record all stf dramatized on the 
radio. I'd like to exchange tapes by 
mail. 

In conclusion may I say, Mr. Hamling, that you should be proud of 
your magazine. Here's hoping for 
the day it will go monthly! 

Al K. lender 
P.O. Box 241 
Bridgeport 1, Conn. 
Proud of Madge, Al? All we know 
is we have to wear sweaters instead 
of shirts — the darned buttons keep 
popping off wlh 

BLESS THAT NEIGHBOR! 

Dear Mr. Hamling: 

This is my first attempt at a fan 
letter of any kind, so forgive me if 
I ramble a bit. 



First, congratulations on the new 
format of your very interesting and 
entertaining magazine. My first experience with Madge was the February issue and I didn't particularly 
care for the cover format then. Of 
course, I'm not a qualified critic, but 
you wanted reactions to the new 
format, and I'm in favor of it. 

I notice that one of the readers in 
the letter department suggests cutting down on the fact articles. I 
take exception to this. The fact articles are a very important part of 
science fiction reading, to me. They 
tend to keep the reader abreast of 
current developments in the various 
fields of research and often show 
practical applications of. things that 
have been predicted in a science fiction story. I say keep them up, and 
especially to the standard you showed 
in the June issue. 

I might add here that my husband 
scoffs at science fiction, he being a 
very hard-headed realist. I tell him 
he'll be surprised when space flight 
and telephonivision are actualities. 

Charles F. Myers does bid fair to 
fill the shoes of the master, Thome 
Smith. His "Toffee" series and 
DOUBLE IDENTITY in the June 
issue are wonderful. Here's wishing 
him a long and profitable career. 

As to what one reader says about 
looking to Galaxy, well, I read Galaxy too, and enjoy it very much. 
Both the monthly issue and the bimonthly novel. I'm saving every 
copy, both of your magazine and 
Galaxy, and I hope someday to have 
a complete and informative library of 
them. Is there any better recommendation for a magazine of any kind? 

Your discussion of the reaction to 
DESTINATION MOON I found very 
enjoyable. I noticed the same thing 
when I saw the picture. It seems 
that some people are so shallow they 
cannot appreciate the drama of hu


<5S 



IMAGINATION 



man endeavor and experience. 

I seem to have covered just about 
everything I had in mind. Again, 
congratulations on the fine job you 
are doing with Madge. I've been 
reading science fiction for almost 
four years after being introduced to 
it by a neighbor, and I'll be reading 
IMAGINATION as long as the magazine is worth it— which I'm sure 
will be for a long time. 

Mrs. Frances Rand 
General Delivery 
Harrisburg, Pa. 
We're glad you like the fact articles. 
We also feel they have their place 
in a good science fiction magazine. 
And say, get that husband of yours 
to read an issue of Madge — we'll 
bet he'll be pleasantly surprised with, 
science fiction. Let him read the 
cover story this issue, for a start. 
And write again wlfl 

A PLEASANT DISCOVERY 

Dear Mr. Hamling: 

—A first letter-to -the -editor from 
an ardent stf fan of a year's standing. 

Please accept my sincere congratulations and my real gratitude for 
imagination. Your magazine (my 
magazine!) presents a refreshing 
contrast to the jaded content offered 
by the better portion of your competitors. 

You have added maturity and 
freshness, depth and truly adult entertainment. Thank you for thoughtprovoking stories and articles ; for 
craftsmanlike editing. Special congratulations for the absence of routine space-opera with its pitiable immature plot and lamentable jargon. 
Conspicuous by omission are potboilers by "famous" names in the 
field. 

I discovered Madge only last 
month, but miniature masterpieces 



like HUNGRY HOUSE and BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 
kept me on tenterhooks for June's 
issue. I was not disappointed. 

Your title is evidently your editorial creed — here's to you and your 
IMAGINATION! 

Gerald Whalen 
617 East Front St. 
Traverse City, Mich, 
Here's to future issues, Gerald, and 
we promise you they'll be even better! wlh 

AND HE LOOKED AND LOOKED 

Dear Bill: 

The renovation of Madge came as 
a pleasant surprise and shock. After 
looking high and low for the "old" 
Madge, I had just about given up 
when the newsdealer said: "One of 
your magazines came in today." He 
then handed me the June issue of 
Madge. Wiping the shocked look off 
my face I paid him and went home 
to read it. I arrived at the following conclusions. 

The Bok cover was excellent. 

So far I've read only the two 
long stories. Bloch's short novel 
came out on top. He isn't prolific, 
but when he does write one, you can 
be sure the fans will like it. Myers' 
was quite good. However, he seems 
to be at his best when doing a "Toffee." (Hint!) 

Increased length of the Reader's 
Page noted and approved. Several 
comment provoking letters therein. 

To J. F. Streinz: At least you are 
unique. Didn't like "Toffee" eh? 
Boy, are you lonely ! As to your 
closing comment, "Take a good look 
at Galaxy," there are two sides to 
that. While Galaxy is without a 
doubt one of the leading, if not the 
leading magazine in the field, it still 
has certain barriers to overcome. For 
(Continued on Page 160) 



3 NEW Classics For Your Science-Fiction Library 
THE GREEN HILLS OF EARTH 

By ROBERT A. HEINLE1N 

Originally published in the Saturday Evening Post . . . plus nine other 
great classics of science-fiction by this master craftsman! Dust jacket 
in full color by celebrated artist, Hubert Rogers. 256 pages. $3.00. 

SPACE ON MY HANDS 

By FREDRIC BROWN ' 

Nine thrilling tales of science-fiction by one of the country's leading 
detective novelists. You'll want to read every story — again and again! 
224 pages. $2.50. 

BEYOND THESE WALLS 

By REN A M. VALE 

Sparkling talent! A brilliant, work by a gifted new novelist, destined 
to rank as one of the all-time classics of modern science-fiction. Over 
100,000 words — close to 400 pages! $3.50. 



IMAGINATION. P.O. Box 230, Evanston, Illinois 

Gentlemen: I enclose $ check money order 

cash for book(s) checked below: 

□ THE GREEN HILLS OF EARTH By Robert A. Heinlein. 53.00. 

□ SPACE ON MY HANDS By Fredric Brown. S2.50. 

□ BEYOND THESE WAILS By Rena M. Vale. $3.50. 

NAME 

ADDRESS 

CITY ZONE STATE 



159 



6o 



IMAGINATION 



(Continued from Page 158) 
instance, Gold's insufferable bragging. He's constantly throwing at 
you the fact that Galaxy is so good. 
This is the type of thing that can 
cost a magazine readers. 

Now a kick to you, Bill. In answering Esther Davis' letter, or 
rather, complaint, on REVOLT OF 
THE DEVIL STAR, you said "we'll 
watch that sort of thing in the future." First, I. think most of the 
readers understood it. Just because 
Esther Davis didn't is no reason to 
bar future stories of this type. In 
fact, it would be going against your 
own policy of giving the readers 
what they want. I hope you will 
revise that statement or at least clear 
it up. 

Jan Romanoff 
26601 S. Western, Apt. 341 
Lomita, Cal. 

We stand revised wlh 

A TERRIFYING TALE 

Dear Bill: 

The ending to the Robinson story 
in the June issue was the most terrifying I've ever read in any sciencefantasy magazine. The other stories 
will be adequately commented on by 
other readers so I'll refrain' from any 
further comment. 

But I absolutely, definitely, certainly do NOT like the new cover 
policy. The sooner you get back to 
the more artistic old style, the happier I'll be. Making the magazine 
easier to find is no good excuse, 
either. After all, isn't Madge worth 
hunting for? 

James Lynch 
2630 Penn Ave., N. 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
We're glad you liked the Robinson 
story. We thought it was a very 
good story too. As to the cover 
format, aw, come on, isn't it really 



better, now that you've seen it for a 
few issues? wlh 

WANTS BETTER MOVIES 

Dear Mr. Hamling: 

The June issue of IMAGINATION 
was very good. Especially liked the 
new cover design and the better grade 
of paper inside the book. The Bok 
cover painting was swell. Let's have 
more by him. 

HELL'S ANGEL was amusing. I 
especially liked the way Bloch wrote 
it. DOUBLE IDENTITY was a fine 
idea, well written too. The rest of 
the stories were ok, but I liked the 
above two the best. 

I agree with you about DESTINATION MOON. I'm afraid I'm one 
of those people who rather sneered 
at it. It was nice to look at, and 
was, as far as I know, scientifically 
accurate. But it was no more than 
a Popular Science thing as far as the 
story went. If Hollywood keeps 
making science fiction movies like 
that I'll continue to prefer pictures 
like KIM, TREASURE ISLAND, 
DOWN TO THE SEA IN SHIPS, 
etc. The trouble with Weird Tales 
is, as you say, that they published 
good stories in the years gone by. 
I think the mag is in a rut today. 
J. T. Oliver 
315 27th St. 
Columbus, Ga. 
Speaking of movies, have you seen 
THE THING yet? Now there's an 
example of what Hollywood can 
really do with science fiction. For 
our money THE THING is the best 
science fiction film ever made. The 
suspense in that film is terrific. 
We were on the edge of our seat 
every moment. And the story that 
went with the suspense was very 
good. The characterization was 
above reproach. And all in all it was 
(Continued on Page 162) 



'NOTHING BUT THE BEST' 

SPECIAL DELIVERY! by Kris Neville 

NO TIME FOR TOFFEE! by Charles F. Myers 

DARK DESTINY! by Dwight V. Swain 

TONIGHT THE SKY WILL FALL! by Daniel F. Galouye 

Yes, these are only some of the GHEAT novels that are coming up in 
future issues of IMAGINATION. Novels by the top names in the field! 
You'll be reading Kris Neville's great new classic, SPECIAL DELIVERY 
next issue, and others in forthcoming issues. Which brings us to the 
big point: why not make sure you receive your copy — many of our 
readers complain, that their newsstand is sold out by the time they get 
there. You can eliminate this possibility and at the same time receive 
your copy promptly by subscribing. Don't miss an issue! 

MAIL YOUR REMITTANCE TO 

IMAGINATION, P.O. Box 230, Evanston, Illinois 



NAME 

ADDRE5S 
ZONE STATE 

□ 12 issues □ 24 issues 

$3.00 $6.00 
Enclosed is □ cash □ check □ money order for $....„,„„„... 

Begin my subscription with the issue. 

All conntrien other than U.S.A.. $3.50 12 iesnes, J7.00 24 iesoes 



161 



IMAGINATION 



(Continued from Page 160) 

and is a fine contribution to science 
fiction . . . And of course the proof 
is in the pudding and that film is 
playing to packed houses everywhere. 
If you missed it, dash, to the nearest 
theater still playing it. 

We also are anxiously awaiting the 
new science fiction film's opening 
here, WHEN WORLDS COLLIDE. 
We understand that it is a really 
terrific film. From all indications, 
Hollywood is finally putting some 
first-class effort into stf productions wlh 

CAN'T PUT MADGE DOWN! 

Dear Ed: 

I missed the February issue of 
IMAGINATION, but I've read every 
other issue this year and to say 
that I've enjoyed each and every one 
would be a m'ld understatement. 

I am a firm believer in space 
travel. I've seen DESTINATION 
MOON & ROCKETSHIP XM. Also, 
THE THING. Personally, I believe 
that by the movie companies makingpictures such as these there will be 
a great many more people who will 
begin to think that space travel is 
not only possible — but probable! 

I read every one of Thome Smith's 
novels and I'm really sorry I missed 
Charles F. Myers' "Toffee" story in 
the February issue. I was wondering if you could possibly send me 
that back issue in which Toffee appeared. 

I want to thank you for a very 
pleasant evening's entertainment — 
for I always finish IMAGINATION 
in one night. Who could put it down 
once it was picked up? 

Natalie Palombo 
18 Washington Ave. 
Lake Hiawatha, N. J. 
We agree with you about Hollywood, 
Natalie. The big thing of course is 



that more and more people will become science fiction conscious. As 
to the February issue containing THE 
VENGEANCE OF TOFFEE, ifs on 
the way to you rigkt now! Let us 
know how you liked it. And watch 
for the new Toffee novel coming up 
soon wlh 

COVER NOT TOO HOT . . .? 

Dear wlh : 

This is my first letter to any 
science fiction magazine. It concerns 
two recent issues of IMAGINATION. 

First off, the April issue. What 
a beautiful cover! Malcolm Smith 
has done the best covers of all on 
Madge — and Other Worlds. As far 
as the stories go, all were good. But 
special thanks for publishing something by Ray Bradbury in April. His 
stuff is becoming more and more 
scarce. 

DRINK MY RED BLOOD by 
Richard Matheson was unusual to 
say the least. More! 

June Issue: This is an improvement in cover design? Frankly I like 
the cover layout formerly much better. About that Hannes Bok painting 
for HELL'S ANGEL. I don't see 
what's so hot about Bok. He's definitely not realistic. The guy at the 
controls looks like' a ventriloquist's 
dum'my. 

IMAGINATION was just as easy 
to find at the newsstands before you 
splashed the name all the way across 
the cover. The new paper is nice 
though. How about changing the 
outside and keeping the inside? 

Oh yes, FANDORA'S BOX is 
great ! 

Jim Parry 

R.F.D. No. 1 Taft Rd. 
East Syracuse, N. Y. 
How do you like Malcolm Smith's 

cover this issue? wlh 

PRINTED IN U.S.A. 



SECRETS ENTRUSTED TO A FEW 




7he 
llnpuSecded 




THERE ARE some things that can not be generally told— things you 
ought to know. Great truths are dangerous to some — but factors for 
personal power and accomplishment in the hands of those who understand them. Behind the tales of the miracles and mysteries of the 
ancients, lie centuries of their secret probing into nature's laws — their 
amazing discoveries of the hidden processes ol man's mind, and the 
mastery of life's problems. Once shrouded in mystery to avoid their 
destruction by mass fear and ignorance, these facts remain a useful 
heritage for the thousands of men and women who privately use them 
in their homes today. 

THIS FREE BOOK 

The Rosicrucians (not a religious organization), an age-old brotherhood of learning, 
have, preserved this secret wisdom in their archives for centuries. They now invite 
you to share the practical helpfulness of their teachings. Write today for a free ccpy 
of the book, "The Mastery of Life." Within its pages may lie a new life of opportunity for you. Address: Scribe J3.E.X. 



3JJe ROSICRUCIANS 



(AMORC) 



SAN JOSE 



CALIFORNIA 



U. S. A. 



r 1 

Scribe: B.E.X. The Rosicrucians (AMORC) 
San Jose, California, U. S. A. 

Please send copy of sealed booklet, "The Mastery of Life," which 
I shall read as directed. 



Name 



Adeln u 



City 



