MARS CHILD BY CYRIL JUDD 



CHAPTER NINE 

TONY got four hours' sleep 
before Tad Campbell came 
banging on his door at 3:15 
A. M. The boy's enthusiasm was 
more than Tony could f ace; it 
would be easier to carry his own 
equipment than to answer questions 
while he was dressing. He sent Tad. 
to wait at the plane and put some 
"coffee" on to brew, then did a last 
quick check of his portable health 
lab, making sure that there was 
nothing overlooked in the hasty 
preparations after the news about 
the Earth ship. 

Gulping down the hot brew, he 
reviewed the instructions he had 
given Anna : f cedings for Sunny 
Kandro; bacitracin for Dorothy; 
ointment and dressings for Joan, 
another injection if she needed it; 
and under no circumstances sedative 
fur Mrs. Beyles. 

He couldn't think of anything 
predictable he had failed to provide 
for. He folded the lab to make a 
large carrying case and lugged his 
burden up the gentle slope that led 



MARS CHILD 



97 



to the landing field where Lazy 
Girl, the Colony's transport plane, 
waited. 

Bea Juarez was warming the icy 
motors with a blowtorch. Lttzy 
Girl's motors were absurdly small; 
their shafts spun on zero-friction 
air bearings. Air-bearings dated 
from the guided missiles of 1950, 
but their expensively precise machining ruled them out for Earth. 
Shipping space to Mars was high 
enough to override the high manufacturing cost. Air-bearing motors 
were small and light; therefore virtually everything on Mars that 
turned or slid, turned and slid on 
molecules of gas instead" of oily 

films. 

The bearings improved the appc.ir.uice not only of machinery but 
of mechanics. Bea looked tired, 
cold, and unhappy; but she lacked 
the grease-smeared dinginess that 
would have marked her on Earth. 
The girl nodded to him, ran a hand 
over the moisture condensing on the 
metallic surface, and applied the 
torch to a new spot. 

She shook her head doubtfully. 
"Don't blame me if she falls apart 
in mid-air after we take off. I put 
her together with spit overnight, 
Tony. She was scattered all over 
the field for a hundred-hour check. 
You'd think they'd let you 
know . . ." she grumbled, then 
broke off and grinned. "What the 
hell, if we blow up halfway between here and there, we don't 
have to worry about marcainc any 



more ! Climb aboard, Doc." She 
snapped off the torch. "Hey, Tad! 
The doc needs a hand with his contraption." 

/TTONY felt a. twinge of conX science as Tad hopped out of 
the plane and ran to take the big 
box. It must have been a blow to 
the boy, to be deprived of carrying 
the heavy equipment from the hospital. 

"How's it going?" Tony asked 
genially, "You seem to be getting 
along fine without your tail bone." 

"Okay," the boy grunted. 

He eased the box into the cabin, 
pulled it out of the way, and 
reached down a condescend ing 
hand to help Tony. "It don't seem 
to matter," he added, when the 
doctor was inside. "You'd never 
know it wasn't there." 

Tad was the recent victim of an 
unhappily humorous accident. Butted in the seat by an angry goal, 
he'd had his coccyx severely fractured, and the doctor had had to 
remove the caudal vertebrae. It 
probably qualified, Tony thought, 
as another of those history-making 
occasions — the Colony's first spinal, 
if you want to stretch the term, 
operation. Historic or not, it was 
a permanent bond between the boy 
and the doctor — the only one who 
had been able to take it seriously. 

Tony padded a couple of spare 
parkas into a comfortable couch on 
the cabin floor and stretched out. 
The plane had no seats. Coming 



98 




 



Kick, they'd sit on the bare floor, 
and the parkas would have another 
use. The ship was unheated and 
the newcomers weren't likely to 
have warm clothes unpacked. 

Lazy Girl was short on comfort 
and speed cannibalized on Mars 
from the scrapped remains of obsolete models discarded by wealthier 
colonies. Tony, who didn't fly himself, had been told that she handled 
easily and flew an immense payload without complaining. 

Tad had built himself a luxurious 
nest of parkas. He pulled the last 
one up around his shivering shoulders, leaned back, and examined 
the interior of the plane with a 
good imitation of a practiced appraisal. 

"Nice job," he pronounced 
finally. "You don't get them like 
this back on Earth." 

"You sure don't," Bca agreed 
ironically from the pilot's seat. 
"Hold on to your hat. Here we 
go!" 

Say what you like about Mars, 
about the Colony, about the poor 
old relic of a plane, Tony thought, 
when you took a look at the kids 
you began to understand what it 
was all about. A year ago, Tad had 
been a thoroughly obnoxious brat. 
But how could he be anything else 
on Earth? 

THEY were all that way. You 
got born into a hate-thy-neighbor, en vy-thy- neighbor, murder-thyneighbor culture. In your infancy 



your overworked and underfc 
mother's breast was always withdrawn too soon and you were filled 
again and again, day after day, 
-with blind and squalling Cage. You 
were a toddler and you snatched at 
another one's bit of candy; you 
were hungry and you hated him; 
yon fought him. You learped big 
boys' games — Killakraut, Wackawop,~ Nigger inna Graveyard, 
Chinks an' Good Guys. Stcrmation 
Camp, Loot the City. The odds 
were you were hungry, always hungryNaked dictatorship and leader 
worship, oligarchy and dollar-worship; sometimes one was worse, 
sometimes the other. The forms 
didn't matter; the facts Hid. Too 
many mouths, not enough topsoil. 
Middle classes with their relatively 
stable, relatively sane families were 
growing smaller and being ground 
out of existence as still more black 
dirt washed into the ocean and still 
more hungry mouths were horn and 
prices went higher and higher — 
how long, in God's name, could it 
go on ? How long before it blew 
up, and not figuratively speaking 
either? 

The Panamerican World Federation, first with the most, refused to 
tolerate the production of mass-destruction weapons anywhere else in 
the world. Long calloused to foreign mutterings, the Western 
colossus would at irregular intervals fire off a guided missile on the 
advice of one of its swarm of in


MARS CHILD 



Eelligence agents. In Tartary or 
Trance or Zanzibar, then, an innocent-looking structure would go up 
in a smoke mushroom. But they 
never stopped trying, and some day 
Tartary or France or Zanzibar 
would launch a missile of its own 
and it would mean nothing less 
than the end of the world in fire 
and plague as the rocket trails laced 
continents together and the bombers rained botulisn, radiocobalt and 
flasks of tritium with bikinis in 
their cores. 

THE damned, poverty-ridden, 
swarming Earth ! Short of 
food, short of soil, short of water, 
short of metals- — short of everything 
except vicious, universal resentments and aggressions bred by the 
other shortages. 

That's what they were running 
from, the new arrivals he was going to meet today. He hoped there 

wouldn't he any more communicable disease carriers to quarantine 
at Marsport and fire back on the 
return trip without even a took 
around. There were supposed to be 
six medical examinations between 
the first application filed at the Sun 
Lake Society office in New York, 
and . embarcation. But things must 
have got appreciably worse on Earth 
since — he started a little at the 
thought — "since his time." It 
seemed that now anybody could be 
reached. They used to say everybody had his price. Maybe it was 
true. He'd never had a chance to 



turn down at really big bribe, so be 
couldn't say. But if six boards of 
doctors could all be fixed, everybody's price must have taken a 
drastic slump. 

Tad, sound asleep, rolled onto 
his stomach and humped up his 
behind., scene of the history-making operation, in a brief reversion 
to infancy. 

"How come the rocket's getting 
in early?" Bea called back. "I 
didn't even have time to ask Harvc 
about it last night, with the Girl 
spread out all over the field." 

"Something about the throat 
liner. They have a new remote control servicing apparatus on Earth," 
Tony said. "Gets the liner out and 
cleaned and in faster. We save two 
weeks on each trip, and get an 

extra trip — what is it? every two 

years?"' 

"Year and a half," iBca corrected. She was silent a moment, then 
snorted, "Rockets !" 

"At least," Tony dead-panned, 
"rockets give you a smooth ride. 
Fat chance of getting any sleep in 
this pile . . ." 

"The Girl never gave you a 
rough trip in your life!" she interrupted angrily. She pulled on the 
stick and swung the Girl into a 
downwind. 

The doctor drowsily studied her, 
silhouetted against the stars through 
the windshield. She was attached to 
the old crate- — ought to find herself 
a husband. It had looked like her 
and Flexner for a while, but then 



100 




 



tlic chemist had paired off with 
Vcrna Blau. As tlie motor warmed 
up, Bca unzipped her parka and 
shrugged out of it. Definitely, Tony 
decided, the best shape in Sun Lake. 
Trim, lined-down, athletic, but no 
doubt at all, from this angle, that 
the figure was feminine — even under the bulky sweater she still wore. 

HE LAY back on his improvised 
couch and reflected on how 
pleasant it would be- to stand behind her and run his hands down 
over her shoulders — infinitely pleasant just to stand behind her while 
she flew the ship. Pleasant but impractical. Play hell with her Estimated Time of Arrival at Marsport, for one thing, and, to take a 
longer view, he probably would 
end up by marrying her her and 
Lrizy Girl: the two went together. 

Tony stirred uncomfortably. 
While he was thinking idly goatish 
thoughts about Bca, Anna had 
turned up in his mind, with a halfsmile on her face. It was typical, 
he thought, puzzled ; Anna never 
in traded until the moment you 

wanted her . . . if you wanted her, 
he added unhappily, giving the 
verb a new meaning. Anna's smile 
was a tingling mystery; her dark 
eyes were wells of warmth in which 
a man could lose himself; but after 
all these months, he wasn't sure, of 
their color. And even when she 
crept into his mind, it was only 
from the neck up that he visualized 
her. 



That wasn't the way he saw Bca. 
Tony shook himself, stretched out 
and let his eyes linger on the girl 
in the pilot's scat until he fell 

asleep. 

ii 

THE sun was up when Bea cased 
the Freighter in among more 
planes than they had ever seen before on Arrival Day. They recognized the elegant staff -carrier from 
Sun Lake's neighbor, Pittco Three, 
but didn't know the other twelve 
that were pa rked . 

"Swell ride, Bca," said the doctor. "Now what is this dress parade 
all about . . .? Oh, sure. Douglas 
Graham is going to gunth Mars. 
These should be the bigshots from 
the commercial colonies." 

"1 hate these damned superficial 
gunthers," Bea said fiercely. "Is he 
going to bother Sun Lake?" 

"Nick thinks he might zip 
through at the end of his tour, if 
he lias time." He hopped to the 
ground. Tad following with the 
boxed lab. "You've got the shopping list, Bea?" the doctor asked. 
"I have to go over to the Ad Building. Don't think I'll have time for 
anything else. Can you get all the 
stuff?" 

"Sure, ' ' she said easil y. ' ' We' re 
not buying much this time." 

Tony ignored the bitter significance of the remark. "We'll see you 
later, then. I hope this red-carpet 
business for Graham doesn't slow 



MARS CHILD 



101 



things up too much. I'd like to get 
back before lunch." 

Tad was fidgeting next to him, 
waiting for a chance to break in. 

A year ago, the boy had spent 
two days in Marsport, when he 
arrived with his family and the 
other founding members of the 
Colony. Then he had nothing more 
than a pitying sneer for the village 
of 600 people; now it was a place 
of wonder. 

"Dr. Tony," he asked eagerly, 
"can we go to the Arcade?" 

"We can go through it," Tony 
decided. 

The Arcade was Aladdin's cave 
to Tad. To the Planetary Affairs 
Commission, which rented out 
booth space in the ramshackle 
building, it was a source of revenue. To Tony it was the stronghold 
of the irrepressible small retailer, 
who found his way even to Mars 
With articles he could buy cheap 
and sell dear ... a reminder of the 
extent to which Mars was already 
taking over the social and economic 
patterns of Earth. 

Booths at the Arcade did not display radiation counters, hand tools, 
welders, rope, radio, aluminum 
I-beams, airplane parts or halftracks. Those you bought at the 
P. A. C. Stores, which were reliable, conservative and dull. 

At the Arcade there was one 
booth which sold nothing but coffee in the cup: MARTIAN $2.00; 
EARTHS.IDE $15.00 (WITH 
SUGAR $25.00). Tony knew the 



privateer who ran this concession 
might be ruined by another arrival 
aboard today's racket, landing in 
paper-light clothes with his garment and personal luggage allowance taken up by bricks of 
Earthside coffee and sugar, burning 
to undercut the highwayman who 
had beaten him to the happy hunting grounds of Mars. 

At another booth the most beautiful collie, boxer and English shepherd pups were for sale at the 
astounding price of only twenty 
dollars each. The catch was that 
the proprietor of this booth was 
the only merchant on Mars with 
a stock of dog food. 

AT ANOTHER booth Tad's jaw 
dropped with perplexity. "Dr. 
Tony, what are those?" he asked. 
"Underwear, Tad. For women." 
"But don't they get cold in those 
things ?" 

"Well, 'they would if they went 
out and worked like Our women. 
But — well, for instance in'Pittco, 
over the Rim rock Hills from us, 
there are some ladies who only 
work indoors, where it's heated." 

"All heated? Not just beam heat 
on the beds and things?" 

"I'm afraid I don't really know. 
Say! Look at those boots there — 
aren't they something?" 

"Boy!" The boots were mirrorshiny zipper j obs. * 'What I 
wouldn't give for a pair of those! 
Put 'em on when new kids come 
in, and then watch them try to walk 



102 




 



around in Earth sandals, and get a 
load of that sand." 

Here on Mars, the price put the 
boots infinitely far out of reach for 
a boy like Tad, even if Sun Lake's 
policies did not prevent the purchase of such an item. Some supervisor in an industrial colony, Tony 
thought, would eventually acquire 
them as illusion of escape from the 
sands of Mars. 

And that reminded him. He 
turned to Tad. 

"By the way, what do you know 
about kids going barefoot around 
the colony? When did that start?" 

Baref oot ? ' ' Tad looked outraged. "What do you think we are 
—dopes?" 

"1 think," Tony answered drily, 
"that anybody who'd go strolling 
around the Rimrock caves without 
boots on is about as much of a 
jackass as he can be." 

"In the caves?'' This time Tony 
thought he detected a note of more 
honest horror. All the kids went 
barefoot sometimes in the experimental fields; everybody knew about 
it and pretended not to. The kids 
were pretty careful about not stepping on marked planted rows, and 
the fields had been processed to remove native poison-salts from the 
soil. 

"Listen, Dr. Tony," Tad said 
earnestly, "if any of the kids arcdoing that, I'll put a stop to it! 
They ought to know better! You 
remember that time you had to fix 
my hand, before the- — ufa — other 



thing, when I just thought I'd pick 
up a piece of rock and it practically 
sliced my finger off! They shouldn't 
be walking barefoot around there." 

"I remember." Tony smiled. 
" 'Sliced your finger off is a slight 
exaggeration, but I wouldn't like 
to have to handle a mess of feet likethat. If you know who's doing it, 
you tell them I said to cut it out 
... or they may not be walking at 
all after a while." 

"I'll let them know." Tad walked 
along silently, ignoring the bright 
displays as they passed, and Tony 
seized the chance to direct their 
footsteps out of the Arcade. "Dr. 
Tony," the boy said finally, "you 
didn't mean for me to tell you who 
it was in case I knew, did you?" 

"Lord, no !" The doctor had 
been hoping to find out. But he 
realized now what an error he'd 
almost made. 

A year ago, Tad had been as 
miserable a little snitch and talcbearer as Earth could produce. "I 
just want it stopped, that's all." 

"Okay, then." Tad's face relaxed 
into a friendly grin. "It will be." 

We've got to kee p got tig, t he 
doctor thought. For hi mself , f or 
the other adults, it didn't matter so 
much. But for the kids . . . 

iii 

TONY had absolutely no respect 
for Nowton, the P.A.C. medical 
officer, because Nowton was stupid. 
Fortunately Nowton was so stupid 



MARS CHILD 



103 



that he didn't realize this and 
greeted the Sua Lake medic joyfully. 

"Hear you ,bcen up to* tricks, 
boy! Why didn't you come to me 
instead? I got ways to get marcainc !" 

"Glad to hear it, and I'll bet you 
do. While we were stealing that 
marcaine, we also had a baby. Got 
a form?" 

"Corporal!" yelled Nowton. 
"Birth form!" A noncom produced 
the piece of official paper and Tony 
filled it in, checking weight and 
other data with notes in his pocket. 

"That hot pilot of yours still 
around?" asked Nowton. 

"Bea Juarez ? Sure. Interested ? 
Just tell her that her plane's a disgusting old wreck and you'H get 
her a new one. She always falls foe 
that line." 

"No kidding?" 

"Who'd kid you, Nowton? Say, 
is Ed Nealey anywhere?" 

"In the signal room. Where's 
Juarez, did you say?" 

"I'll see you, Nowton." Tony 
hurried off. 

HE FOUND the lieutenant reading a medical journal which 
had passed through his own hands 
months earlier, on its way around 
the joint subscription club of which 
both men were members. The club 
made it possible for them, in common with twenty-odd fellow-members on Mars, to keep up with 
technical and scientific publications 



without paying ruinous amounts in 
interplanetary postage. 
"Hello, Ed." 

Nealey put out his hand. "I 
didn't know whether you'd still be 
talking to me, Tony." 

"Hell, you don't give the orders. 
You have to play it the way Bell 
calls it. Ed, off the record — you're 
pretty sure it was one of our people?" 

"All I'm sure of, it wasn't a 
phony. To qualify with the Bloodhound on Earth, we had to follow 
made trails — where they dragged 
bags of an i s eed over the spoor. 
You can tell the difference. This 
one f aded and wobbled like the 
real thing. And we iost it not more 
than a couple of miles out of your 
place, head ed straight your way. 
Tony, have you searched?" 

"Some. We're not done yet." 
The doctor lowered his voice. 
"What's the matter with Commissioner Bell, Ed? Does he have anything special against us?" 

The lieutenant jerked his chin a 
little at a Pfc sitting with ea'rphones 
on his head, reading a comic book, 
and led the doctor into the corridor. 

"God, what a post!" he said. 
"Tony, all I know is that Bell's a 
lost soul outside the Insurantist 
Party's inner circle. He had fifteen 
years of being looked up to as the 
Grand Old Man of the Mexicaliforniarizonan Insurantists, and 
now he's been booted to Mars. 
He'd do anything, I believe, to get 




 



back into Hie party. And don't forget that Brenner's been a heavy 
contributor to the Insurantist campaign funds during the last three 
elections. You know I'm professional military and I'm not supposed to and don't want to have 
anything to do with politics — " 

Commissioner Bell came stumping down the corridor. "Lieutenant 
Ncaley,"*he interrupted. 

Nealcy came to as casual an attitude of attention as his years of 
drilling would allow. 

"Surely you have better things 
to do with your time than palavering with persons suspected of harboring criminals." 

"Dr. Hellman is my friend, sir!" 

"Very interesting. I suggest you 
go on about your duties and pick 
your friends more discriminatingly." 

"Whatever you say, sit." With 
slow deliberation, the lieutenant 
turned and shook Tony's hand. 
"I'm on duty now," he said tightly. 
"I'll see you around. So long, kid." 
He put his hand on Tad's shoulder, 
wheeled about smartly, and turned 
back into the signal room. 

"Come on, Tad," said the doctor. 
"WV'iv all done here. We might as 
well get out to the rocket field." 

CHAPTER TEN 

THEY were approaching the 
rocket field and what was, for 
Mars, an immense crowd — some 
five hundred people behind a broad 



while deadline marked on the 

tamped dirt of the field. It was an 
odd-looking crowd because it was 
not jammed into the smallest possible space, body to body, Earthfashion. The people stood separately, like forest trees, with a good 
square meter around each of them. 
It was a Mars crowd, made up of 
people with lots of room. Tony 
stopped well away from the fringe 
of the group. 

"This looks like a good spot," he, 
decided. "Put the box down there; 
we can start setting things up." 

"Doctor Hellman — hello!" A 
tall man, fully dressed in Earths iafl 
business clothes, strolled over. Tony 
had seen him only once before, 
when he had appeared at the Lab 
with Bell to make his monstrous accusation of theft. But Hugo Brenner was not an easy man to forget. 

"Hello," Tony said shortly, and 
turned back to his box. 

"Thought you might be here loday." Brenner ignored the doctor's 
movement away from him, and 
went on smoothly. "I want to tell 
you how sorry I am about what 
happened, Frankly, if I'd known 
the trail would lead to your place, I 
might have thought twice before \ 
called copper — but you understand, 
it's not the first time. I've let it go 
before. This time they took so 
much I couldn't very well overlook 
it." 

"I u ndcrstand perfectly," Tony 
assured him. "We disapprove of 
theft at Sun Lake too." 



MARS CHILD 



105 



"Well, I'm glad to hear you 
don't take it personally. Doctor. As 
a matter of fact, I'm almost glad it 
happened. I've heard a lot about 

you and the kind of job you've 
been doing over there. I wish we 
could have mot under more pleasant circum — " 

"It's very kind of you to say so," 
Tony interrupted, deliberately misunderstanding. "I didn't think a 
man in your position would be 
much impressed by what we're 
doing at Sun Lake." 

Brenner smiled. "I think Sun 
Lake is a very interesting experiment," he said in a monotone that 
clearly expressed his lack of interest. "What I had in mind . . ," 

"Of course, Mr. Brenner." Whatever the drug man had to say to 
him personally, the doctor did not 
wish to hear it. "Wc realize your 
only interest is in the recovery of 
your stolen goods. We're doing our 
best to find the thief . . . // he 
really is a member of our Colony, 
that is." 

"Please, Doctor, don't put words 
in my mouth. Naturally I'm interested in recovering my goods, but 
I'm not worried about it. I'm quite 
sure your people will turn up the 
guilty party." Again his voice carried a flat lack of conviction. 

"Commissioner Bell has seen to 
it that we turn up a. guilty party," 
Tony retorted. 

"I think the Commissioner was 
unnecessarily harsh." Hugo Brenner 
shrugged it off. "If it had been up 



to me . . . well, that's Bell's job; I 
suppose he has to handle it his own 
way. Let's quit beating around the 
bush, Doctor. I came over here to 
offer you a job, not to talk . . ." 
"No." 

"Suppose you listen to my offer 
first." 

"Nor 

"All right, then. Name your own 
terms. I'll meet your price: I need a 
doctor. A good one." 

"I don't want to work for you at 
any price." 

Brenner's mouth turned up at 
the corners. Obviously he enjoyed 
the game, and equally obviously he 
thought he was going to win. 

<*T ET mc mention a figure." He 
1—J moved closer. "One million 
dollars a year." 

Well, thought the doctor, now 
he had a clearer idea of what his 
own price was; now he knew it 
wasn't a million dollars. Ten times 
what he made in a peak year on 
Earth. He looked full into Brenner's smirking face, and knew 
something else: he hadn't been so 
clear-through boiling mad in a long 
time; and he was fed up with diplomacy. Deliberately, he raised his 
voice: "Didn't you hear me before, 
Brenner ? Or didn't you understand ?" 

He found it was gratifying to notice people turning his way, edging 
in to listen. 

"Lei me make myself absolutely 
clear," he went on loudly. "I don't 




 



want to work for you. I don't tike 
the business you're in. I know what 
you Deed a doctor for, and so does 
everyone else on Mars. If your boys 
over at Hop Heaven can't keep 
their noses out of your marcaine, 
that's not my worry. I don't want 
to be resident physician in a nart tit its factory. Stay away from me!" 

The smirk had left Brenner's 
face; it was ugly, contorted, and 
much too close. Tony realized, too 
late, that Brenner's fist was even 
closer. Abruptly, he stopped feeling 
like a hero and began to feel like a 
fool. 

'Then, quite suddenly, Brenner's 
fist was no longer approaching, and 
Brenner was flat on the ground. 
Tony tried to figure out what had 
happened. It didn't make sense. He 
became aware of a ring of grinning 
congratulatory faces surrounding 
him, and of Tad next "to him, giggling gleefully. He called to the 
boy curtly, turned on his heel, and 
walked back the few steps to his 
portable lab. 

Nobody helped Brenner to his 
feet. He must have got up by himself, because when Tony looked 
back, out of the corner of his eye, 
Brenner was gone. 

A short man bustled up. "I heard 
that. Dr. Hellman. I didn't see you 
hit him, but I heard you tell him 
off." He pumped Tony's hand delightedly. 

"Hello, Chabricr." That makes 
two of us, Tony thought — I didn't 
see myself hit him either. "Look, I 



know it's no use asking you not to 
■talk about it, but go easy, will you? 
Don't blow it up too much when 
you tell it." 

"It needs no amplification. You 
slap his face in challenge. He 
reaches for a weapon. You knock 
him unconscious with a single 
blow! You tell him: 'Hugo Brenner, there is not gold enough — 

"Knock off, will you?" begged 
the doctor. "He wanted me to work 
over at his place by Syrtis Major — 
Brenner Pharmaceuticals Corporation, whatever he calls it. You know 
all his people get a marcaine craving from the stuff that leaks out 6f 
his lousy machinery. He wanted me 
there to keep giving his boys cures. 
I said no and he offered me a lot of 
money and I got sore. I shot off my 
mouth. He started to sock me 
and — " 

And what? Tony still hadn't figured that out. He turned hack lu 
the box, still only half set up. 

Chabricr said thoughtfully: "So 
you know that much, eh? Then you 
know it's nothing new, this business of missing marcaine?" 

TONY abruptly turned back to 
him, no longer uninterested. 
"Brenner said something about previous thefts. What's it all about?" 

"Only what you said yourself." 
Chabrier shrugged. "What did he 
offer you ? Three hundred thousand? Four?" He paused, and when 
Tony made no reply, went on : 
"You can get better than that. It 



MARS CHILD 



107 



would be cheaper than junking his 
plant and building a new one." 

"I know I can pet better than 
that," the doctor said impassively. 
"What do you know about the 
missing marcaine, Chabricr?" 

"XTOTH1NG all of Marsport 
J*. 1 doesn't know. Was it in the 
neighborhood of half a million? 
That would be much less than the 
freight rates for new machines. 
He's used to freight being only a 
small part of his overhead. He ships 
a concentrated product." Chabricr 
chuckled happily. "How it must 
hurt when he thinks of importing 
plate and tubes and even, God forbid, cast iv gs. I tell you, a man 
doesn't know what freight can 
mean until he's handled liquor. 
Bulk is bad. Even just running the 
bulk licjuor jnto the glass-lined 
tanks of the rocket ships as bad. It 
means that Mars ships water to 
Earth! Actually! But the foolish 
laws say we cannot dehydrate, let 
the water be added on Earth, and 
still label it Mars licjuor." 

"Please," said Tony wryly. 
"Please, Chabrier!" 

The man shrugged. "So we take 
a little of the water out— fifty per 
cent, say. Water is water, they poirr 
it in on Earth, nobody knows, nobody cares. Bulk shipment is still 
bad, very bad. But bottles T Dr. 
Hellman, there is no known way of 
dehydrating a glass bottle. We ship 
them in, we fill them, we ship them 
back. They break, people steal them 



here and aboard ship, and at the 
Earth rocket port. All so the label 
can say 'Bottled on Mars' !'* 

"Muffle your sobs, Chabricr. I 
happen to know that people pay for 
Mars licjuor and pay a great deal 
for bottlcd-on-Mars. At least, you're 
legal, and I understand you makegood stuff." 

"I drink it myself," said Chabrier righteously. 

"To save the freight on Earthside rye?" Tony grinned, then 
asked seriously, "Listen, Chabricr, 
if you know anything about this 
marcaine business that wc don't, 
for God's sake, spill it! Wc ... I 
don't have to tell you how hard this 
thing is hitting us out at Sun Lake. 
What does all of Marsport know?" 

Was i t p erhap s s even - f i f t y ? ' ' 
■the oilier man asked blandly. 

Fair exchange, Tony decided. "A 
million," he said. 

"So? This I do not understand! 
Why so much for a doctor, if he is 
to have a new plant V* t .liabrkr 
shook his head, shrugged, and went 
on more briskly: "I have told you 
already, if you understand: Brenner 
needs a new plant. His machines 
are no good. They leak. His men 
inhale the micron dust, they get the 1 
craving, and they start to steal the 
product. Soon they arc no good for 
the work, and he sends them back 
to Earth. You see today how many 
new men he brings in? Then one 
day there is more marcaine missing. He . . ," 

"One minute, Chabrier. ' ' Tony 



108 




 



turned and signaled Tad to take a 
break, then moved off a few steps, 
and motioned to the other man to 
follow h im. ' 'You think it's a 
frameup?" he demanded in a low, 
intense voice. 

"You would have me speak 
against our Commissioner Bell?" 
Chabricr asked with only the faintest trace of sarcasm showing. "Such 
a thing i will not do, but I beg of 
you to consider, if Sun Lake Colony 
should be bankrupt, their Laboratory must be sold at auction by the 
Commissioner, and such a plant 
would suit Mr. Brenner very well 
indeed. They say here in Marsport 
the machinery in this Laboratory is 
adaptable to many kinds of production. They say it is good, tight, 
well-built equipment, it will not 
leak. Till now it seemed quite 
clear.** The little man shook his 
head doubtfully. "Now I do not 
know. A plant? Yes. A doctor ? 
Yes. But both . . . and he offered a 
million ! This I do not understand, 
unless he plans to work both plants. 
There is a rumor which has some 
currency today . . 

THE deep bass booming of the 
warning horn cut him off. People began edging away from the 
center of the field, terminating conversations, i ej oining their own 
groups. . 

' 'You will excuse me now ? I 
must go," Chabrier said, when the 
horn died down enough to permit 
conversation again. "I have my 



place reserved, -■but they will not 
hold it . . V 

"Place?" Tony, still trying to 
catch up with the implications of 
the' other man's news, didn't follow 
the quick shift. "What for? Oh, 
are you after Douglas Graham, 
too?" 

"Of course. I understand he is — 
let us say, a drinker. If I can reach 
him before any of these Other vultures . . . who knows? Maybe a 
whole chapter on Mars liquor!" He 
seized Tony's hand in a quick grasp 
of friendship. "Good luck, Doctor 
Hellman," he said, and dashed off, 
running ludicrously on his short 
legs to rejoin his own party before 
the landing. 

Tony searched the sky; the rocket 
was not yet in sight. He got back 
to work, swiftly now, setting up 
his equipment. Chabrier had mentioned a rumor. Never mind, there 
was enough to think about. 

The whole thing planned beforehand, to ruin Sun Lake. Maybe. 
Chabrier was notorious as a gossip 
and petty troublemaker. A frameup. 
Maybe. And how could they find 
out? Who was responsible? Who 
was innocent? Nealey, Nowton; 
Bell and Brenner; Chabricr with 
his fluid chatter and his shrewd 
little eyes. Nealey at least was a 
decent, competent man . . . Maybe. 
But how could you tell? How 
could you single them out? 

Parasites ! he thought bitterly, 
the cheerful Chabrier as much as 
the arrogant Brenner. Mars liquor 



MARS CHILD 



109 



brought fantastic prices because it 
was distilled from mashes of Martian plants containing carbohydrates, instead of being distilled 
from mashes of Earth plants containing carbohydrates. And the 
friendly, plump little man got 
plumper on the profits culled from 
Earth's neurotic needs. It wasn't 
really much of an improvement on 
Brenner's marcainc business. A 
minor difference in moral values, 
but all of them were parasites as 
long as they didn't devote their 
time to the terrible problem of freeing Mars from the shadow of 
Earth's dominance. 
• And what about our Lab? Unquestionably, it was better to concentrate radioactive methylene blue 
ior the- treatment of cancerous kidneys than it was to concentrate alkaloids for Earthside gow-heads, but 
that, too, was only a difference in 
moral values. Parasites, all . . . 
"The rockc-t!" yelled Tad. 

CHAPTER .ELEVEN 

IT LOOKED like a bit of the sun 
ai first ; that was its braking 
blasts seen from under. The monster settled -swiftly, roaring and 
flaring in a teasing mathematical 
progression of successively shorter 
blasts more closely spaced. When 
you could sec its silvery bulk in 
profile it was going pop-pop-poppop- pop, like a machine gun. It 
settled with a living splutter and 
stood on the field some two hun
110 





 



died meters from the crowd like a 
r e m cmbcrcd skysc raper. 

Trucks raced out to meet it. Inside, the doctor knew, crewmen 
were walking around capstans that 
fitted over and unscrewed ten kilogram hex-nuts. The trucks slowed 
and crawled between the fins on 
which the rocket stood, directly under its exhaust nozzle. Drivers cut 
and filled to precise positions; (lien 
platlorms jacked up from the crane 
trucks to receive the rim . of the 
roi kefs: throat. Men climbed the 
j.uks to fasten them. 

The captain must have radioed 
from inside the ship; the last of the 
first hex-nuts was off. Motor away! 
Slowly the platforms descended, 
taking the reaction engine with 
them. The crane trucks crawled off, 
two ants sharing an enormous burden. 



The crew inside was busy again, 
dismantling fuel tanks, while the 
Irikks moved to the inspcctiui-i>md 
repair shed off the field. A boom 
lifted off the motor, and the drivers scuttled back to receive the first 
installment of the fuel tanks, the 
second, the third and the last. 

"Now do the people come out?" 
asked Tad. 

"If the rocket hasn't got any 
more plumbing, they do," Tony 
told him. "Yes — here wc go." 
Down between the fins descended 
a simple elevator, the cargo hoist 
letting down a swaying railed platform on a cable. It was jammed 
with people. The waiting port officer waved them toward the Administration Building. The crowd, 
which had overflowed gently past 
the broad white line on the field, 
drifted that way, too. 




MARS CHILD 



"Stanchions! Get stanchions 
out!" the port officer yelled. Two 
field workers broke out posts and a 
rope that railed off the crowd from 
the successive hoist-loads of people 
herded into the Administration 
Building for processing. There was 
a big murmur at the third load— 
Gfaham ! The doctor was too far 
back to get a good look at the great 
man. 

The loudspeaker on top of the 
building began to talk in a brassy 
rasp: 

"Brenner Pharmaceuticals. Baroda, Schwartz, Hopkins, W. Smith, 
Avery fox Brenner Pharmaceuticals," it said. Brenner ducked under 
the rope to meet five men issuing 
from the building. He led them off 
the field, talking earnestly and with 
gestures. 

"Pittco! Miss Kearns for Pittco 
Three!" 

A pretty girl stepped through the 
door and looked about helplessly. A 
squat woman strode through the 
crowd, took the girl by the arm and 
led her off. 

Radiominerals Corporation got 
six replacements; Distillery Mars 
got a chemist and two laborers; 
Metro Films got a cameraman who 
would stay and a pair of actors who 
would be filmed against authentic 
backgrounds and leave next week 
with the prints. A squad of soldiers 
headed by a corporal appeared and 
. some of the field workers let out a 
cheer; they were next for rotation. 
Brenner got two more men; Kelly's 



Coffee Bar got Mrs. Kelly, bulging 
with bricks of coffee and sugar. 

"Sun Lake City Colony," said the 
loudspeaker. "W. Jenkins, A. Jenkins, R. Jenkins, L. Jenkins, for Sun 
Lake." •, 

"Watch the box," Tony called to 
Tad as he strode off. 

HE PICKED up the identification and authorization slips 
waiting for him at the front desk 
inside, and examined them curiously. Good, he thought, a family 
with kids. The loudspeaker was 
now running continuously. Two 
more for Chabrier, three engineers 
for Pittco Headquarters in Marsport. 

A uniformed stewardess came up 
to him. 

"Dr. Hellman ? From Sun Lake?" 
Her voice was professionally melodious, He nodded. "These are Mr. 
and Mrs. Jenkins." She turned to 
the family group behind her. "And 
Bobby and Louise Jenkins," she 
added, smiling. 

The kids were about seven and 
four years old respectively. Tony 
smiled down at them, shook hands 
with their parents, and presented 
his authorizations to the stewardess. 

" — Prentiss, Skelly and Zaretsky 
for Sun Lake," the loudspeaker 
called. 

"Excuse me, I'll be right back," 
Tony said and headed back to the 
desk. 

They gave him more authorization slips. He riffled through the 




 



papers quickly as he headed back to 
find the Jenkinses and wait for the 
newcomers. All different names. 
Only one family, the rest singles. 
Too bad. 

He hunted through his pockets 
and found two packets of peanuts, 
mutated beyond recognition into 
chewy objects with a flavor something like grape pop. 

By the time Bobby and Lou had 
overcome their shyness enough to 
accept the gifts, another stewardess 
was bringing up the rest of the 
group destined for Sun Lake. 

"Dr. Hellman?" Her voice was 
as much like the first stewardess' 
as her uniform, but according to 
ancient custom this one was blonde 
and the other brunette. "Miss 
Skelly, Miss Dantuono, Mr. Graham, Mr. Prentiss, Mr. Bond, Mr. 
Zarctsky," she said and vanished. 

Tony fibdded and shook hands 
all around. 

"Let's get out of here," he said. 
"It's quictei outside and I have to 
give you all a physical checkup, 
so — " 

"Again ?" one of the men 
groaned. "We just had one on 
board." 

"I think I've had a million different shots since I started all this,' ' 
the other girl put in. What was her 

name? LXintuono ? "Do we getmore needles?" 

"I'm afraid so. We have to be 
careful, you know." Some day he 
would meet a rocket, and nobody — 
but nobody— would make that par


ticular remark. Or perhaps that was 
too much to hope for. "Let's get 
out of here," Tony said again. Heoffered his hands to the children, 
and they started moving. 

BY THE time they reached Tad 
and the box that held the 
portable health lab, the crowd was 
already thinning out. 

"We'll get right to it," the- doctor addressed his group. "I'm sorry 
I can't examine you indoors under 
more comfortable circumstances, 
but I have to make a quick check before we can even let you on board 
the ship. It won't take long if we 
start right away." 

"Doesn't the port have facilities 
for this sort of thing?" someone 
asked. 

"Sure. They've got a* beautiful 
setup right inside the Ad Building. 
Anybody can use it. Sun Lake can't 
afford the price." 

He called them up one at a tunestarting with the Jenkinses, parents 
and then children, so the kids 
wouldn't have too much time to get 
apprehensive about the needles. His 
trained reflexes went through the 
business of blood and sputum 
tests, eye-ear-nosc-and-throat, fluoroscopy, and nervous-and-mental, 
while he concentrated on gelling 

acquainted. 

Names began to attach themselves to faces. He finished with the 
two single girls, and started on the 
men. The big, red-faced one was 
Zaretsky; skinny little bookkeeper 



MARS CHILD 



type was Prentiss, The talkative one 
was Graham. 

"First name?" Tony was filling 
in the reports while the samples 
went through analysis. 

"Douglas." 

"Drop-in or shares?" 

"Drop-in, I guess. On Earth we 
call it the working press." 

"Press?" Tony looked up sharply. 
"The Douglas Graham?" 

"The Tbh Is man. Didn't you 
know I was coming out?" Tony 
hesitated, and Graham asked quickly, "Your place is open to the press, 
isn't it?" 

"Oil, sure. We just — well, frankly, we didn't think you'd bother 
with us. Certainly didn't think 
you'd come to us first. We'd have 
rolled out the red carpet. " He 
grinned and pointed to the array of 
planes at the other end of the field; 
for the first time, he became aware 
of the curious and envious stares 
their small group was receiving 
from passersby. "Everybody else 
did. I guess we were about the only 
outfit on Mars that didn't at least 
hope to bring you back home today." He turned his attention to 
the checkup form. "Age?" 

"Thirty-two." 

FIOM appearance and general 
condition, Tony would have 
given the journalist ten more years; 
it was a shock to find that they 
were both the same age. He finished without further comment and 
went on to the next and last, a 



lanky blond youth named Bond. By 
the time he was done, the analyses 
and reaction tests were complete. 

The doctor checked them, over 
carefully. "You're all right," he announced to the group at large. "We 
can get started now." 

]t was a slow trip. None of the 
newcomers were accustomed to the 
low gravity; they were wearing 
heavy training boots acquired on 
board the rocket. And all of them 
were determined to see everything 
that was to be seen in Marsport before they took off. Tony led them 
across the spaceport field, and down 
the main street of Marsport, a 
mighty boulevard whose total 
length was something under five 
hundred yards, the distance from 
the space-port to the landing strip. 

He answered eager questions 
about the ownership and management of the hotels and office building that lined the block adjacent to 
the spaceport. These were mostly 
privately owned and privately built, 
constructed of glass brick. The native product had a sparkling multicolored sheen that created a fine 
illusion of wealth and high fashion 
— even when you knew that no 
building made of the stuff could 
possibly stand more than ten years ; 
the same slightly different chemical 
content of Martian potash that produced the lustrous coloration of the 
bricks made them particularly susceptible to -the damaging effects of 
wind and sand. Glass brick construction was, by far, more costly 



114 




 



than the rammcd-carth buildings at 
Sun Lake, or the scrap-shanties that 
characterized the PittCO camp across 
the Rimrock Hills from the Colony; 
but it was still much less expensive 
than the Earth-import steel and 
alumalloy used wherever strength 
and durability were important. 

THE Administration Building of 
the Planetary Affairs Commission, which occupied one entire side 
of the center block, was sheathed 
in .1 muted green alumalloy; the 
P.A.C Stores and official P.A.C. 
hotel, across the street, were respectively dull rose and dove gray. The 
doctor pointed out each building in 
turn to his wide-eyed group. The 
writer was as eager as any of the 
others, and asked as many questions. 
Tony was surprised; he had anticipated a bored sophistication. 

Graham responded equally unpredictably to the scries of interruptions they met with en route. 
Chabrier. was first, even before they 
had left the spaceport. He dashed 
up to pump Tony's hand and babble that he was delighted to see him 
again, and how well Tony looked 
despite his drab sojourn in the sodull Sun Lake where nothing ever 
happened. 

"But this is Mr. Graham, isn't 
it?" he exclaimed in delight. 
"Yeah," said the writer dryly. 
"How fortunate! Distillery Mars, 
my concern, small but interesting, 
happens to be preparing a new run 
of Mars liquor, 120 proof-— we 



should be so honored if you could 
make a point of sampling our little 
effort, shall we say this afternoon? 
I have comfortable — " a sidelong 
glance at Tonv — "transportation 
here." 

"Maybe later." 

"To a connoisseur of your eminence, of course, we should think it 
a privilege to offer you an honorarium — " 

"Maybe later, maybe not," 
grunted the writer. 

Chabri e r on! y sh rugged and 
smiled; the gunthcr could say no 
wrong. ' 'You will perhaps be 
pleased to accept a small sample of 
the product of Mars Distillery ?" 
The little man held up a gaudily 
wrapped package. He pressed the 
gift into Graham's indifferent grasp, 
wrung Tony's hand warmly, said 
heartily, "We will look forward to 
see you soon," and departed. 

HalHday of Mars Machine Tool 
was n ext. H i s man ner was more 
that of a man inviting a guest to 
his country club, but he did mention that MMT would, of course, 
expect to provide for a writer's 
necessary expenses. Graham cut off 
Halliday's bluff assurances as curtly 
as he had stopped Chabrier' s outpourings.- It was like that all the 
way. 

Everybody who was anybody 
on Mars was in town ithat day, and 
each of them managed to happen 
on the Sun Lake crowd somewhere 
along the road from the spaceport 
to the landing strip. 



MARS CHILD 



115 



THOSE who met Tony at any 
time in the past were all determined to stop him for a chat; then 
they noticed Graham, and extended 
a coincidental but warm invitation. 
Those who were unacquainted with 
Sun Lake's doctor were forced to 
be more direct, and the bribe was 
sometimes even more marked than 
Chabricr's or Halliday's offers. 

Graham was cold and even nasty 
to them. But once he took Tony's 
arm and said: "Wait. I see an old 
friend." Commissioner Bell was up 
ahead, striding toward the Administration Building. 

"Him?" asked Tony. 
"Yeah, Hey, Commish!" 
Bell stopped as if lie had been 
shot. He turned slowly toward Graham, and stood his ground as the 
writer approached. When he spoke, 
there was cold hatred in his voice. 
"Just the company I'd expect you to 
keep, Graham. Stay out of trouble. 
I'm the man in charge here, and 
don't think I'm afraid of you." 

"You weren't the last time," said 
Graham, "That was your big mistake — Commish." 

Bell walked away without another word. 

"You shot his blood pressure up 
about 20 millimeters," said Tony. 
"What's it all about?" 

"1 claim a little credit for sending Bell to Mars, Doc. I caught him 
with his fingers in the till up to his 
Shoulder, .it a time when his political fences were down, if you don't 
mind a mixed metaphor. I couldn't 



get him jailed, but I'll bet up here 
he sometimes wishes I had." 

A wild hope flared in Tony. Tiic 

This Is man was, sporad ically, 
known as a crusader. Perhaps Graham's annoyance at the crude plays 
for attention meant that an appeal 
could be made on the basis of decency and fair play. 

ii 

BY THE time they reached the 
plane, Tad was already on the 
spot with the portable health lab 
stowed away, and Bca was warming 
up the motors. 

"Hi!" she stuck jicr head out of 
the cockpit to grin at Tony. "Got 
everybody? Tad, hand out parkas to 
these people. Tony, they tell me 
you're a hero— had it out with big. 
bad Brenner in real style!" She 
didn't quite say: "I never thought 
you had it in you." 

"Things get around, don't they? 
Bca, this is Douglas Graham. He's 
coming out to have a look at Sun 
Lake for a book he's doing. This is 
Bea Juarez," he told the writer. 
"She's our pilot." 

Graham surveyed Bea. "I hope 
everything in the Colony looks as 
good." 

"We'll be extra-careful to show 
you only the best," she retorted. 
" I Icy, Tad, get that mink-lined 
parka, will you? We've got a guest 
to impress." 

Tony was delighted. If everyone 
else in the Colony could take the 



116 




 



Great Man in stride so easily, he 
would be pleased and very much 
surprised. 

Tad came running up -with a 
parka. "What kind did you say you 
wanted? This is the only one .left, 
except Dr. Tony's." 

The three adults burst into laughter, and Tad retreated, red-faced. 

Graham called him back. "I'm 
going to need that thing if the 
temperature in the cockpit doesn't 
go up." 

"You're going to need it anyhow," Tony assured him. "There's 
a lot to be said for Lazy Girl here, 
but she's not one hundred per cent 
airtight." 

"I get the idea," the journalist 
assured him. "You people don't 
throw heat around, do you?" 

"Not heat or anything else," replied Tony. "You'll see, if you can 
stick it out." 

"What the hell, I was a war correspondent in Asia!" 

■ "This isn't a war. There isn't 
anything exciting to make up for 
the discomfort- — except, say, when 
I baby gets born — " 

"No? I take it there was something going on just a little while 
ago. What were you saying about 
the doctor being a hero?" he called 
forward to Bea. 

She shrugged. "All I know is 
what I hear on the grapevine." 

Tony heaved a mental sigh of 
relief — too soon. 

"I was there." Tad had stuck 
right by them. "This man Mr. 



Brenner came over and asked Dr. 
Tony to come work for him, and 
he wouldn't, and he tried to get 
him with a whole lot of money, but 
he still wouldn't, and — " 

«TTOLD on," Graham inter XJL rupted. "First thing you 
have to learn if you're going to be 
a reporter is to get your pronouns 
straight. This Brenner was doing 
the offering, and Doc was refusing; 
that right?" 

"Sure. That was what I was saying—" 

"Look, Tad, we were only kidding about impressing Mr. Graham," Tony said quickly. "You 
don't have to make a hero out of 
me. I just had a disagreement with 
someone," he said to Graham, "and 
they're trying to make a good story 
out of it." 

"That's what J'm after," Graham 
came back, "a good story. Tell me 
everything that happened. Tad." 

The. boy looked doubtfully from 
the doctor to the guest and back 
again. 

"A^l right," Tony gave in. "But 
let's not make a 15 -round fight out 
of it, Tad. Tell it just the way it 
happened, if you've got to tell it." 

"Just exactly?" 

"Yes," the doctor said firmly, 
"just the way it happened." 

"Okay." Tad was far from disappointed. If anything, he was gleeful. "So this Mr. Brenner wanted 
Dr. Tony to come work at his place, 
curing people from drugs, and he 



MARS CHILD 



wouldn't, and Mr. Brenner kept 
pestering him till he, got mad, and 
lie said lie didn't like him and 
wouldn't work for him no matter 
what — I mean, Dr. Tony said that 
to Mr. Brenner — and Mr. Brenner 
'got real mad, and started to swing 
at him, and — " 

"Well, don't stop twiv," Graham 
said. "Who won?" 

"Well . . . then Mr. Brenner 
started swinging and— t stuck my 
foot out and tripped him, and Mr. 
Chabrier came over right away and 
said how wonderful it was the way 
Dr. Tony had socked Mr. Brenner, 
and I guess that's what everybody 
thought.'' He looked up at Tony's 
astonished face, and finished defensively, "Well, you said to tell it 
just the way it happened." 

CHAPTER TWELVE 

TONY fastened the hood of his 
parka more tightly around his 
head, as the chill air of flight crept 
into the cabin. Graham, beside him, 
was full of flip comment and curiosity, to which ordinary decency, let 
alone special diplomacy, denlanded 
reply. But Tony shifted position 
and let his eyelids drop closed. 

There was no mental eye to close 
and so thrust out the revised memory of the ridiculous incident with 
Brenner, nor any mental ear that 
could turn off the resounding echo 
of Bea Juarez' hilarity. 

You knew nil dlong you never 
bit Brenner, didn't you? he asked 



himself angrily. You tordd bate 
figured it out for yourself — // yon 
ttwited to! AH tight, /ben, don't 
think about that. 

The new colonists . . . he ought 
to do something about them, something to dispel the tense, apprehensive silence in the cabin. A 
speech of welcome, something like 
that. 

Thank them for coming? Welcome them to Sun Lake? With the 
threat that hung over them all, new 
members and -old, any speech like 
that would be ridiculous. Later in 
the day, they would be asked to 
sign final papers, turning over, once 
and for all, the funds they had 
already placed in the hands of the 
trustees on Earth, and receiving 
their full shares in the Colony. Before then they would learn the 
worst; they would be told about the 
»C< nation that might doom the 
Colony. But how could he tell them 
now, before they bad ever seen 
Sun Lalcc, before they had glimpsed 
the spellbinding stretches of LaCUS 
Solts, or had a chance to understand the promise implicit in the 
Lab's shining walls, in Joe Gracey's 
neatly laid out experimental fields? 

And in front of the gunthcr, too, 
how much could he say, how much 
did he dare to say? Graham could 
wreck their hopes with a word— or 
solve their problems as easily, jf he 
chose. Graham had exposed the 
Commissioner's corruptness once; 
he wasn't always just a gunthcr; hewas a part-time crusader. Possibly, 




 



he would understand Sun Lake's 
desperate necessity . . . possibly? 

"Oh, by the way," the writer was 
saying. "I've been wondering what 
kind of a checkup you have on 
these people for security." 

"Security?" For a minute the 
word didn't make sense; Tony realized suddenly that he hadn't even 
heard the word for a year; not, at 
least, with that sinister, special 
meaning. 

"Don't you investigate the newcomers' backgrounds?" 

"The Sun Lake Society — the recruiting office — checks on their 
employment records and . their 
schooling to see that we don't get 
any romantic phonies masquerading 
as engineers and agronomists. That 
and plenty of health checks afe all 
we need. The office wouldn't have 
time for more, anyway. It handles 
all the Earthsidc paperwork on our 
imports and exports, advertises, interviews, writes letters to the papers 
when that damn fool free-love story 
pops up again — " He gave Graham 
a look. 

"All right," laughed the writer. 
"I'll make a mental rioter Sun Lake 
doesn't believe in sex." 

TONY was ruefully aware that a 
comeback was expected of him, 
but he substituted a feebly appreciative smile and leaned back, tiredly letting his eyelids drop again, in 
an effort to simulate sleep. 

Through slitted eyes, he studied 
the new arrivals. They were 



crouched on the cabin floor, bundled into their parkas, talking only 
occasionally. Even Tad, at the far 
end of the cabin with the Jenkins' 
children, was low-voiced and restrained. Tony could see him pulling miraculous Martian treasures 
from, his pockets for display, then 
pouncing on the few Earth items 
the new children had to show in return, cautiously pulled forth from 
supposedly empty pockets, and held 
for view in a half-cupped hand. * 

Near them, Bessie Jenkins, the 
mother of the two youngsters, sat 
half watching them, half talking to 
the mousier of the two single girls 
. . . Dantuono? Rose Dantuono, 
■that was it." Anita Skelly, her v*ivid 
red hair concealed under the hood 
of her parka, was carrying on a 
conversation in monosyllables with 
Bob Prentiss; they seemed to be 
communicating a good deal more 
by hand pressure than by word of 
mouth. A shipboard romance,' Tony 
wondered, or had they known each 
other back on Earth ? 

He shifted his gaze to the other 
side of the cabin, where the remaining three men sat: Arnold 
Jenkins, the lanky Bond, and young 
Zarctsky. They were lined up in a 
silent row, leaning against the bulkhead, evidencing none of the interested enthusiasm one might have 
expected. His own depression, the 
doctor realized, was affecting everyone. 

What could he say to them ? 
Here they were, newly escaped 



MARS CHILD 



119 



from Earth, from a madhouse with 
a time bomb in the basement. It 
had cost each one of them more 
than he could estimate, in courage,, 
in money, in work, to make the 
escape — and what could he promise 
them now? 

With luck, with the help from 
Graham, with all the breaks, the 
best they could look forward to was 
the everyday life of the Colony: 
working like dogs, living like ants, 
because it was the only way to pull 
free of the doomed world from 
which they had fled. At worst, and 
the worst was imminent — back on 
the same rocket, or the next, or the 
one after that, back with all the 
others, destitute. Back to Earth, 
will* no money, no job, no place to 
live, and no hope at all. 
"Tony." 

It was Graham again. 
"Yes?" 

"It just occurred to me. Do you 
people charge for guest privileges? 
I'll be happy to shell out anything 
you think is reasonable. Sun Lake 
looks like a good story to me, and I 
want to stay on top of it." _ 

"It hasn't come up before," Tony 
told him. "That means we'll haveto vote on it. Personally, I'd vote 
for charging you." 

"That's the idea! If I roast you 
in the book, you can say I was sore 
because you soaked me. If I give 
you a good report, you can prove it 
wasn't bought and paid for. Right." 

"You're too shrewd for us Marti. in peasants, Graham. I was only 



thinking that we could use the 
money." 

"Doc!" Bca yelled back into the 
cabin. "Radio!" 

TONY got up and leaned over 
into the cockpit to accept the 
earphones Bca passed him. 

"I can only spark a message 
back," she told him. "We didn't 
load the voice transmitter this 
trip." 

He nodded. Through the phones 
a self-consciously important teenage voice was saying: "Sun Lake to 
Lazy Girl, Dr. Hellman. Sun Lake 
to Lazy Girl, Dr. Hellman. Sun 
Lake—" 

"Lazy Girl to Sun Lake, I read 
you, Hellman," he said and Bca's 
hand sputtered it out on the key. 

"Sun Lake to Lazy Girl, I read 
you — uh — seventy-two at Pittco, 
can Lazy Girl sixteen Pittco, over." 

"Dr. Tony to Jimmy Holloway," 
he dictated, "cut out the numbers 
game, Jimmy, and tell me what 
you want, over." 

The teen-age voice was hurt. 
"Sun Lake to Lazy Girl, medical 
emergency at Pittco Camp, can Lazy 
Girl change course and land at 
Pittco, over." 

"Lazy Girl to Sun Lake, wilco, 
Jimmy, but where's -O'Reilly, over." 

"Sun Lake to Lazy Girl, I don't 
know. Dr. Tony. They messaged us 
that O'Reilly wasn't due back from 
Marsport all day, over." 

''Lazy Girl to Sun Lake, we'll 
take care of' it, Jimmy, out." He 



1 20 




 



passed the phone back to Bea. 
"Somebody's sick or hurt at Pittco. 
Drop me off there and I'll get back 
on one of their half-tracks." 

"Right." Bea pulled out her map 
table. 

The doctor went to the rear of 
the cabin where Tad had stowed 
the portable lab. He came back 
with a box of OxEn pills, and 
stood in the doorway between the 
cabin and the cockpit, facing the 
assembled group. 

"These are the same pills you 
took on board, the rocket this morning," he told them. "1 don't think 
1 have to warn you always to keep a 
few with you. Wherever you go, 
whatever you do, as long as you're 
on Mars, don't forget that it's literally as much as your life is worth if 
you don't take one of these every 
twenty-jour hours." They all knew 
that, of course; but there was no 
harm in impressing them with it 
again. 

There was more he should say, 
but he didn't know what. He chose 
the next best alternative and sat 
down. 

"What's cooking ?'* demanded 
Graham. 

"Somebody sick or something at 
the Pittco outfit across the hills 
from our place. Their doctor's still 
in Marsport." 

"Mind if I stick with you? I'd 
like to have a look at the place anyhow — -when they're not ready for 
me." 

Tony considered a moment, and 



decided he liked the idea. "Sure. 
Come along." 

"I'd kind of like to see that girl 
who was for Pittco." 

"You met her -on the rocket?" 

"I met her, all right, but shegave me a faster freeze than your 
girl pilot here. What is she anyhow 
— -a lady engineer? All brains and 
no bounce ?" 

"Not exactly," Tony said. "I 
guess she figured she was on vacation. She's a new recruit for the 
company brothel. Those are the 
only women they've got at Pittco." 

"Well, I'll be damned!" Graham 
was silent a moment, then added 
thoughtfully, "No wonder she 
wasn't interested!" 

ii 

T AZY GIRL touched down at 
' Pittco near noon. The doctor 
and writer were met by Hackenberg, the mine boss, who drove out 
in a jeep as Bea zoomed her ship 
off over the hills to home. 

"I think you're too late, Doc," he 
said. 

"We'll see. Hack Hackenbcrg, 
Douglas Graham." They climbed in 
and the jeep rolled past the smokestacks of the refining plant, toward 
the huts of the settlement. 

"Hell of a thing," grumbled 
Hackenberg. "Nobody's here. Madame Rose, Doc O'Reilly, Mr. Reynolds, all off at Marsport. God 
knows when they're coming back. 
Douglas Graham, did you say? You 



MARS CHILD 



12T 



the reporter Mr. Reynolds was 
going to bring back? How'd you 
happen to come in with the doc?" 

"I'm the reporter," Graham said, 
"but it's the first I knew about coming lure with Reynolds. Did he tell 
you that?" 

"Maybe he just said he hoped 
you would. I don't know. I got my 
hands full as it is. 1 got a contract 
to be mine boss; everybody takes 
off and Big Ginny gets her chest 
busted up, the girls go nuts, and I 
take- the raj), What a life!" 

"Was there a brawl?" asked the 
doctor. 

"Nobody told me — they yanked 
me out of B plant. They found Big 
Ginny over by the hills. She was all 
messed up — you know what I mean, 
Doc, They thought she was raped. 
Rape Big Ginny, for God's sake! 
It ain't reasonable!" 

"They vioved her?" 

"They took her back to (Rose's. 
I tell them and tell them to leave 
'em lay, just get 'em warm, give 
plasma, and wait for a doctor. It 
dort't do any good. First thing they 
think of whenever anybody gets 
smashed up is he don't look -neat 
enough, so they yank him around to 
lie nice and straight and they yank 
him up so they can got a pillow 
under his head and then they haul 
him like a sack of meal to a bed. 
I hope to hell I never have a cavein here with these dummies. Back 
in Jo'burg it happened to inc. A 
timber fell and broke my leg nice 
and clean. By the time all my 



friends were through taking care of 
me and getting me comfortable, it 
was a compound complicated fracture with bone splinters from my 
ankles on up." 

The jeep, stopped in ^ront of a 
large house, .solidly constructed of 
the expensive native glass brick. 
Unlike most of the jerry-built 
shacks that Housed the temporary 
workers in the camp, it was one of 
the few buildings put up by the 
Company itself, and few expenses 
had been spared. 

The door opened hesitantly, and 
a girl peered out, then opened it all 
the way. "Hello, Hack. Is this the 
doctor?" . , 

She wa's dressed in neither the 
standard tunic of most Marswomen 
nor the gaudy clothes of her sisterhood on Earth; instead she wore 
tailored house-pajamas of Earthside 
synvclvet. She might have been any 
business woman or middle-class 
housewife answering her door back 
on Earth. 

"Hello, Maiy." Hackenberg 
turned to Tony. "Doc Hellman, 
this is Mary'Simms. She's in charge 
when Rose U out. Mary, this is 
Douglas Graham, the famous guffther." He stressed the last word 
only slightly. "You've heard of 
him?" 

"Oh, yes." : She was distantly polite. "How ■ (io you do, Doctor ? 
Won't. you come in?" 

"I'll have to take off now." Hackenberg shook Graham's hand vigorously. "Glad to have met you. 



122 




 




MARS CHILD 



123 



I'll pick you up later, Doc." He 
waved and headed back for the 
jeep. Tony and Graham followed 
Mary Simms indoors and pulled 
off their parkas. 




IHE whole house was heated, 
the doctor noticed. 



The girl led them through a 
large and rather formal parlor and 
into a smaller sitting room. She 
crossed the small room, and opened 
a door on the far side. 

"In here, Doctor," she said. 
Tony stepped into the small bedroom, and heard Graham 'right behind him. 

"How about me?" demanded the. 
writer. 

The girl's voice was icy. "Professional courtesy, I suppose; we tire 
in the same business, aren't we? By 
all means, come in." 

The doctor turned his smile in 
the other direction. A huge blonde 
lay on the bed between fresh sheets. 
She was in coma, or . . . 

"Out !" Tony said firmly, and 
closed the door on both of them. 

He lifted the sheet and swore 
under his breath. Big Ginny had 
been washed and dressed in a rosebud-trimmed pink niron nightgown. Few people 'with internal injuries could survive such first-aid. 
He opened his bag and began the 
examination. 

He stepped into the parlor. Mary 
rose from her chair to question 
him, but Tony forestalled her. 
"She's dead." He added in a puz
124 



zlcd voice, "Her chest was beaten 
in. Who found her?" 

"Two of the men. Shall I get 
them ?" 

"Please. And — was there anything they found nearby?" 

"Yes. I'll bring it." The girl 
went out. 

"How about the rape?" Graham 
asked. 

"She wasn't," Tony said. 

He dropped into a chair and 
tried to think it out. The woman 
had been pregnant, and there were 
signs of a fresh try -at abortion — the 
"rape." Was [he father known ? 
Had they tried to abort it? Had 
there been a scene and a fatal beating out there by the hills? How did 
you know who was the -father of a 
child conceived in a place like this? 
And who else would have any reason for the violence? 

Mary Simms came in and said, "I 
passed the word for the men." She 
moved coolly so that her body was 
between Graham and the doctor, 
and handed over something 
wrapped in a handkerchief. "They 
found this." 

"Did you know she was six 
months pregnant?" 

"Big Ginny?" she asked, amazed. 

"Why not?" 

"Why, I've seen her medical 
card, and she's been here two years. 
She was married a couple of times 
on Earth — " The girl was flustered. 

"Well?" 

"Well, it surprised me, that's 

231." 


 



He went into the small bedroom 
and unwrapped the object she had 
given him. It was a stained scrap of 
stout copper wire, about twentyfive centimeters long. Thai confirmed his diagnosis: attempted 
self -abortion, clumsy and dangerous 
because of the woman's bulk and 
probably hazy knowledge of anatomy. But the innumerable blows on 
her chest and back didn't make 
sense . . , 

BACK in the parlor, two men 
in miners' leathers were waiting. The writer was questioning 
them idly about living conditions 
in the camp. 

"I'm Dr. Hellman from Sun 
Lake," Tony said. "I want to ask 
you about finding Big Ginny." 

"Hell, Doc," said one of die 
■miners, "we just walked over that 
way and there she was. I said to 
Sam, It's Big Ginny] Jeez!' and he 
said, 'Some cheapskate musta hit 
her on the head,' and we tried to 
bring her around, but she wouldn't 
conic to, so we made her Comf ortable and wc went and told 
Mary and then we went back on 
shift." 

"That's all there is to it," said 
the other miner. "But it wasn't one 
of our boys. You ask me, it was one 
of those Communist crackpots from 
over your place, all the time reading- — it drives you nuts, did you 
know that? How is the old bag, 
Doc? Is she yelling for her money?" 

"She's dead," the doctor said 



shortly. "Thanks for the Information." 

"You ask me," the miner repeated stoutly, "it's one of those 
Communists did it." 

"Can you beat that?" the other 
one said softly. "What kind of guy 
would kill a dame like that?" They 
went out soberly. 

"Those guys were a little too innocent," said Graham suddenly. 
"Didn't you think so?" 

"I know what that's about," said 
Mary Simms. "They didn't mention 
why they happened to be out strolling on the desert. They're gowheads. They were picking up some 
marcaine. They have a deal worked 
out with one of the people from 
Brenner's Hop Heaven. He steals 
the stuff from Brenner and leaves 
it under a rock for Sam and Oscar. 
They leave money." 

"I knew something was sour 
about them," said Graham brood ingly. "What do we do now, 
Tony?" 

"I'm going to write a note to 
Dr. O'Reilly and see if I can get 
Hackenberg to drive us to Sun 
Lake." He sat down and took out 
his notebook and pen, found a 
blank page, and carefully recorded, 
what he had seen, without adding 
any of his conclusions. 

He signed his name, folded and 
handed the sheet to Mary Simms. 
"When you give the doctor diis," 
he said, "please tell him 1 was sorry 
I couldn't stay to see him. We're 
having big times over at our place. 



MARS CHILD 



125 



Ten new colonists." He smiled. 
"Nine immigrants and a new 
baby." 

"Boy or girl ?" she asked, with 
sudden interest. "How is it — all 
right? Was it hard?" 

"A boy. Condition fair. Normal 
delivery." 

"That's nice," she said, with a 
musing smile. Then she was all 
business again. "Thank you for 
coming, Doctor. I tan make some 
coffee for you while you're waiting 
for Mr. Hackenberg. We have real 
coffee, you know." 

"I didn't know," he told Jier. 
"I'll take two cups." 

iii 

DR. TONY filled Hackenberg 
in on the jeep ride to Sun 
Lake. The mine boss profanely said 
nothing like that had ever happened before and he'd get the nogood swamper that did it and swing 
him from the gantry if he had to 
beat up every leatherhead in camp. 
He told some grisly stories about 
how he had administered rough 
justice to native coal miners in Johannesburg. 

" 'Course," he admitted, "you 
can't do that to Panamericans." 

It's a good thing, thought Dr. 
Tony, that there wasn't any Martian 
animal life. An intelligent race 
capable of being sweated would 
really have got the works from 
Hackenberg, who could justify 
abominable cruelty to his brothers 



on the grounds that they'd been 
born in a different hemisphere of 
his own planet. God only knew 
what he would think justified by an 
extra eye or a set of tentacles. 

Hackenbcxg took the wide swing 
through the gap in the hills and 
highballed the dozen miles to Sun 
Lake City. He came to a cowboy 
stop in front of the Lab and declined their hospitality. 

"I have to get back before the 
big shots," he said. "Thanks, Doc. 
I'll see you around." 

CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

THE big main hall of the Lab 
was jammed with people, 
standing in earnest groups, strolling 
around, all talking at once. As the 
door slammed behind the doctor 
and the writer, <he hubbub quieted, 
and seventy-odd pairs of eyes 
turned on the newcomers. 

"Quite a delegation," Graham 
commented. "For me?" 

"I don't know," Tony confessed. 
He searched the room, and saw 
Harve Stillman break away from a 
small group and head their way. 

"Hi, Tony, did you bring a 
friend ?" 

He turned to find Mimi Jonathan 
it his elbow. 

"Oh, Mimi, this is Douglas Graham. Did Bea tell you he was coming? Graham, Mimi Jonathan. Mi 
— Mrs. Jonathan is the Lab Administrator, in charge Of making 
the wheels go round. And this is 



12« 




 



I Lirve Stillimn. Harvc used to 
be . . 

"... a newspaperman himself," 
Graham finished. 

"Nope," Harve grinned. "A 
radioteletype repairman with the 
LP." 

"What a switch!" Graham smiled 
back and shook the other man's 
hand. 

Tony turned from them to ask 
Mimi urgently: "How's it going? 
Did you finish up with the Lab 
search yet?" 

"Afraid so. It's the same as the 
huts. Nothing turned up," she said 
harshly. "We'll have to check the 
shipping crates." 

"Lord!" breathed Tony. 

"Maybe it won't be so bad," 
Stillman ventured. "I've just given 
this crowd a briefing on handling 
hot stuff. Mimi seems to think we 
can clear it up in a day or two if 
we all pitch in." 

"Provided," Mimi added, "we 
all work just a little harder than 
possible. I'm sorry you had to come 
to us at such a busy time, Mr. Graham. I hope you won't mind if we 
don't fuss over you too much. 
You're welcome to wander around 
and ask all the questions you want. 
Everyone will be glad to help you." 

"It will be a welcome change," 
he assured her. 

TONY waited very impatiently 
through a few more minutes 
of polite talk. As soon as Harve engaged the writer's attention again, 



the doctor turned back to Muni. 
"What's the plan?" he asked. 

"Five crews to get out about a 
kilometer into the desert, a halfkilometer apart. Everybody else 
brings them crates one at a time, 
they open and search, repack before 
the next one comes in. No conlamination from crates standing 
open. Through all this you and 
Harvc run back and forth checking 
the handling crews and the tote 
crews to see that they don't get 
danger doses and remove and treat 
them if they do. We figure four 
days to finish the job." 

"Harve, do you think you're 
good enough to monitor the un packing sites?" Tony asked. "Contamination from the native radioactives would be as bad as getting 
our own radiophosphorus into our 
radiomethyline blue." 

"I didn't want to go out and try 
it on my own. Do you think I can 
swing it?" 

"Sure. Go pick us five of the 
coolest spots on Mars." 

The technician headed for the 
racked counters. 

"Doc, can you let me in on that 
cryptic business?" demanded Graham. 

"In a minute," said Tony, his 
eyes wandering over the crowd. 
"Excuse me." He had spotted 
Anna and was starting her way 
when she turned, saw him and approached. 

"We tried another feeding with 
the Kandro baby," she began with


MARS CHILD 



127 



out a preamble, "but he didn't take 
to it — choked it up again like yesterday." 

Tony took out his pipe- and bit 
abstractedly on the scarred stem. 
"No difference ? No change at 
' all?" 

"Not that I could sec. Tony, 
what's wrong with that baby?" 

The doctor shook his head unhappily. "I don't know," he admitted. 

There was Something damnably 
wrong with the Kandro baby, something lie couldn't quite figure. 
There was a clue somewhere in the 
vividly remembered picture of the 
gasping, rcd-taced infant, choking 
and spluttering on a mouthful of 
milk. Should he have tried water 
instead of normal feeding to get 
those scrambled reflexes into order? 

"Doc — •' said Graham. 

"1*11 be with you in a minute." 

Anna went on Serenely: "No 
trouble with Joan. I gave her her 
regular shot and changed the bandages when Tad told mc you'd be 
late. She seemed fairly comfortable." 

"Good. Miscellaneous complaints ?" 

"Kroll in engineering had a 
headache. And there's Mrs. Series. 
Her husband came and asked if 
there was anything I could do— 
they had a quarrel and he thought 
she went into a fit. It was a temper 
tantrum; I know you said not to 
give her anything, but John was 



so upset I gave her sedation to 
quiet her." She turned to Graham. 
"Sorry to have to drag out our hospital horrors. I'm sure you understand." 

"Oh," said Tony, "I'm sorry. 
Douglas Graham, Anna Witleudorf. Excuse me a minute, will 
you?" Mimi was tapping her foot, 
waiting lor an opening. He told 
her: "I better get the afternoon 
.safety done right now, and I'm 
damned if I'm going to do it with 
the whole Colony lurching around 
the Lab. Get 'em out of here so I 
can go to work, will you? Graham. 
I can answer questions while I go 
through the Lab looking for overlevel radiation. If you want to comealong, you're welcome." 

He led the writer out of the 
office into the dressing room, as 
Mimi began to break up the knots 
of non-Lab personnel who had 
shown up to thrash out the search 
plan and learn their own parts in it. 

ii 

TONY helped Graham into the 
suit of protective armor. He 
didn't usually bother with it himself on the afternoon inspection, 
when other people were all over 
the Lab, unprotected. In the morning it was different; the elaborate 
precautions of the outer-door locker 
were necessary when a hot spot had, 
possibly, had time to chain overnight. But while work was actually 
going on, nothing very hot could 



128 




 



develop without being noticed. The 
late check was primarily for the 
purpose of insuring the absence of 
the hot spots that could develop 
overnight. 

The doctor started his meandering course through the Lab, with 
Graham in tow. 

"I'm making the second of our 
twice-a-day safety checks for excess 
radioactivity. It happens that we've 
got to unpack all our material 
scheduled for export, examine it 
and repack it in a hurry if we want 
to get it aboard the outgoing rocket 
in time to get credit to pay our 
bills." 

"Just routine, I suppose?" asked 
'Graham blandly. 

"I think you gathered that it certainly isn't. The fact is, your 
friend, Commissioner Bell, has accused us of harboring a thief and 
his loot — a hundred kilos of marcaine. We've searched everybody 
and everything so far except the 
export crates; now we've got to 
search them." 

"Why not tell the old windbag 
to go blow?" / 

"If we don't turn up the marcainc, he can seal us up for six 
months to conduct an inch-by-inch 
search." 

"What's so dreadful about mat?" 
Graham asked. 

"We're geared to two ships in 
six months now instead of one ship 
a year. If we missed two shipments, 
both incoming and outgoing, we'd 
be ruined." 



GRAHAM grunted thoughtfully, 
and Tony waited — and Waited 
— the grunt was all. He'd been 
half-hoping the writer would volunteer to help— perhaps by picking 
up his anti-Bell crusade or by promising to see his powerful friends, 
or by exposing the sorry mess to 
the public. But Graham, apparently forgetting the Bell business entirely, pitched the doctor a ferocious 
scries of questions that threatened 
to stretch out the inspection endlessly: 

"What's in this box? Why isn't 
this conveyor shielded? Where's 
the stock room ? What do you do 
here ? Is it technical or trade school 
stuff? Where did this soil come 
from? What did you pay for it? 
Tile on this floor, concrete on that 
— why?. Who's in charge here? 
How many hours does he work? 
That many? Why ? How many 
hours does he work?" 

As Tony paraded solemnly back 
and forth with the counter, checking off items on his report, he 
pressed a little on the writer. 

"This crate here," he said, "is 
a typical sale. Radiophosphorus for 
cancer research. It goes to the Leukemia Foundation in San Francisco. 
It's a tracclcss pure — better than 
nine-nines. We're in business because we can supply that kind of 
thing. On Earth they'd have to first 
make the traceless-pure phosphorus 
and then expose it to a reactor or 
a particle accelerator, and the extra 
step there usually means it gets con


MARS CHILD 



129 



Laminated and has to be refined 
again: Here we just produce phosphorus by the standard methods 
and it is radioactive because the 
whole planet's got it. Not enough 
to present a health problem any 
more than cosmic rays on Earth do, 
but damned convenient for Sun 
Lake." 

"Some crate," commented the 
writer. 

"Lead, air gaps, built-in counter 
with a loud alarm. It's the law. 
Normally, we have five per cent of 
our manpower working in the shipping department. Now we have to 
unpack and recratc all this stuff in 
less than four days." ^ 

"Yoo. people should have a 
lobby," suggested Graham. "If 
something like that was handicapping Pitted they'd get rid of it 
quick. Arc we just about through?" 

"Just about," said Tony flatly. 
So much for that, be thought; at 
least he'd given the writer an eyeful of the safety precautions they 
observed, and made him sweat a 
little under the heavy suit at the 
same time. 

In the cleanup room they stripped 
and showered, with Graham chortling suddenly: "O'Mally was a 
prophet ! My first city editor — he 
said when I got rich I'd install hot 
and cold running Scotch in my 
bathroom!" 

"Sorry we only have cold, and 
don't drink this stuff unless you 
want to go blind. It's methyl." 
"Can't be worse than the stuff I 



used to guzzle in Philly," Graham 
said blandly, but he stepped out 
quickly enough and followed the 
doctor's advice about a lanolin rubdown afterward. 

"Dinner time now," said Tony, 
buttoning on his tunic. "Mess 
hall's here in the Lab. Only building big enough." 

"Synthetics?" asked Graham. 

"No, that's not the Sun Lake 
ielea. We want to get on an agricultural cycle as fast as we can. Sun 
Lake has to be able to live on vegetables that grow naturally, without 
any fertilization except our own 
waste products. Naturally we're 
strong on beans, kudzu, yams, goobers — any of the n i t ro get) - fi xi n g 
plants that contain some natural 
protein. You'll see.-" 

GRAHAM saw, he tasted, he expectorated. Into the shocked 
silence of the half-dozen at the 
table, he muttered an embarrassed 
apology and manfully choked down 
almost half of his vegetable plateMars beans, barley, stewed greens 
and another kind of stewed greens. 

To Tony he muttered when conversation had sprung up again : 
"But why do they taste like a hospital smells? Do you have to disinfect them or something ?" 

Joe Gracey overheard it from the 
other side of the table. "That's my 
department," he said. "No, it isn't 
disinfectant. What you and most 
other people don't realize is that 
wc with our Lab are pikers com


130 




 



pared with the lowliest cabbage in 
synthesizing chemicals. We taste 
the chemicals in our Earth plants 
and we accept them as the way they 
ought to taste. These are unfamiliar 
because these are Mars plants modified so that their chemicals aren't 
poison to Earth animals, or Earth 
plants modified so that Mars soil 
isn't poison to them. We're still 
breeding on this barley, which is 
generating too much iodoform for 
me to be really happy. If I can 
knock one carbon out of the ring — 
but you don't care about that. Just 
be glad wc didn't try out the latest 
generation, of our cauliflower on 
you instead of our test mice. The 
cauliflower, I'm sorry to say, generates prussic acid." 

"Stick with those mice!" said 
Graham with a greenish smile. 

"Only guaranteed -Earth animals 
on Mars, including you," said 
Madge Cassidy, beside Graham. He 
watched her wonderingiy as she 
finished her barley with apparent 
enjoyment. 

"How was that again?" 

"My mice. The only animals on 
Mars guaranteed non-mutated. Wc 
have them behind tons of concrete 
and lead with remote feeding. It'd 
be no joke if some of the natural 
Mars . radioactivity or some of the 
stuff flying around the Lab mutated 
them so they'd gobble Mars food 
that was still poison to people." 

"You mean I might go back to 
Earth and have a two-headed 
baby?" 



"It's possible," said Madge, getting to work on variety number one 
of stewed greens. "Odds are somewhat higher than it happening from 
cosmic rays or industrial radioactivity on Earth. But mouse generations go by so fast that with them 
it's a risk we can't take. Some of 
the pork-and-beaners died very unpleasant deaths when they tried eating Mars plants as a last resort. It 
was the last resort, all right." 

"But isn't anything on Mars 
good to eat?" 

"A couple of items," Gracey told 
him. "Stuff that would probably be 
poisonous to any native animal life, 
if there was any. You find the same 
kind of thing on Earth— plants that 
don't seem to be good for anything 
in their native environment. My 
theory is that the ancestors of poison ivy and other such things aren't 
really Earth plants at all, but came 
to Earth, maybe as spores aboard 
meteorites. We need a broader explanation of the development of 
life than the current theories offer. 
We've grown a giant barley here, 
for instance, out of transplanted 
Earth stock, but it wouldn't be viable there. The gene was lethal on 
Earth. Here — " 

HE RATTLED on, to the accompaniment of Graham's nods 
of agreement, until Harvc Stillman 
broke in: "Hey, there was a rumor 
through the radio relay today. You 
know about it, Mr. Graham?" 
"Doug," the writer corrected. 



MARS CHILD 



131 



"Okay," Harve smiled. "About 
rnarcaine— no, not about us," he 
added hastily. "About rnarcaine being forbidden in Tartary. The Cham 
pronounced a. rescript or whatever 
it is, and according to the guys in 
Marsport that means the price goes 
up, and Brenner's business is doubled. Do you know anything about 
it, Doug?" 

The newsman looked surprised. 
"It was all over the ship," he told 
them. "-Everybody was talking 
about it. How come you don't get 
it till now? The radio op on board 
told me he spilled it in his first 
message to PAC." 

"It's true then?" Gracey asked 
sharply. 

"I wouldn't know. I'm only a 
reporter myself." He looked across 
to Tony. "Don't tell me Marsport 
wasn't buzzing with it. Brenner, 
knew, didn't he?" 

"No," the doctor said slowly. "I 
didn't hear anything about it 
there . . ." iBut he had heard of a 
rumor; who was it? Chabrier! Of 
course, that was Chabrier's rumor: 
rnarcaine prices going up, production will double, Brenner needs a 
new plant, needs a doctor, too . . . 
. Tony stood up abruptly. "Excuse 
me. Gracey, are you finished ? Want 
to come along?" 

The agronomist rose quickly, 
and the two left together. On the 
way to collect Nick and go over to 
the Jonathans', Tony explained the 
situation rapidly to Gracey. 

"I wanted to get the Council to


gether tonight anyhow," he finished 
up, "to tell you about my idiotic 
brawl with Brenner. I don't know 
what kind of jam lhai's going lo 
land lis in. Rut this business ties 
in with what Chabrier told me. 
Rocket to Bell and Bell to Brenner, 
and the rest of us can get the news 
whenever the Commissioner gets 
around to it!" 

"It makes a nasty picture," the 
agronomist agreed soberly. "Now 
what? Where do we go from 
here?" 

"Damned if I know. Maybe one 
of the others can figure it." He 
knocked sharply on Nick's door. 

CHAPTER FOURTEEN . 

«TT DOESN'T matter," Mimi 
X said firmly. "We still have to 
go through with the search." 

"That's how I see it, too," Tony 
admitted. "We can't bring any accusations until we know our own 
slate is clean." 

"If we could only get hold of 
the Bloodhound . . ." 

"Bell refused." 

"And that means no matter how 
carefully we search, he can still 
come in afterward and claim it 
wasn't done properly." 

"Could we rent one or buy it?" 
Gracey wanted to know. 

"Government property only," 
Mimi told him. "O'Donnell 
checked on that the other day." 

"Okay, so we have to do it 
without the Bloodhound." Nick 



132 




 



jumped up ami paced the length of 
the room restlessly. "I bet I could 
build one if wc only had a little 
time . . Well, wc have to go 
ahead, that's all. Where does Graham come in?" 

r I TONY realized they were waiting 
JL for an answer from him. "I 
don't know. He has no use for 
Roll, hut he doesn't exactly rise to 
the bait when I throw it at him 
cither. 1 think we better go slow 
and feel him out. tie didn't seem 
to go for the blunt approach when 
Chabrier and the others tried it." 

' 'Slow ?" Nick stormed. "Man, 
we've got six days ! Go slow?" 

"As fast as we can," Gracey put 
in. "Wc still have to get the search 
finished. I think we have to do that 
before we ask Graham anything. 
He has to have some facts to work 
with." 

"Right,'' Mimi agreed. "Now 
let's get our plans organized. If wc 
start at dawn, maybe we can do the 
whole unpacking operation tomorrow . . . then we can hit Graham. 
Means we'll have to leave crates 
open and repack them later, but I 
don't sec any alternative now. How 
long is Graham staying, Tony?" 

"He said maybe three days." 

"Okay, then that's how we've 
got to do it. Maybe by tomorrow 
night we'll know better how to get 
at the guy." 

They spent a busy ten minutes 
outlining the plan of operations, 
and then the three men went out, 



leaving the details for Mimi to 
settle. 

Tony walked down the settlement street slowly, trying to get his 
thoughts in order. It had been a 
long day — three-fifteen in the morning when Tad woke him, and now 
there was still work to do. 

Stopping in at the hospital to 
collect his bag, he found Graham 
kibitzing idly with Harvc in his 
living room. 

"Just waiting for you, Doc." 
Stillman stood up. "I have to get 
over to the radio shack. Tad's on 
the p.m. shift this week, but he 
fell asleep before supper, so I've 
got to take over tonight." 

Tony surveyed his guest uncomfortably. "Anything you'd like?" 
he asked. "I have to go out and sec 
a couple of patients. Won't be too 
long." 

"Could I go along?" Graham 
asked. "I'd like to, if it's all right 
with you." 

"Sure. I want you to sec the 
baby I was talking about anyhow. 
My other patient is pretty sick; you 
may have to wait while I look in 
on her." 

They stopped at the Radi. UfFs 
lirsl. but Joan was asleep and she 
usually got so little rest that Tony 
decided not to disturb her. Anna 
had said she'd had a fairly good 
day. He'd see her tomorrow. 

"Where is this infant?" Graham 
asked as they walked down the 
Colony street. 

"Here. This is the Kandros' 



MARS CHILD 



133 



place. Hello, Polly," Tony said .is 
the door opened, even before he 
knocked. "I brought Mr. Graham 
along to visit. I hope you don't 
mind." 

"I . . . no, of course not. How 
do you do? Come in, won't you?" 
Her manner was absurdly formal, 
and her appearance was alarming. 
Tony wondered when she had last 
slept. Her eyes were over alert, her 
lips too tight, her neck and shoulders stiff with tension. 

"How's Sunny?" He walked into 
the new room where the crib stood, 
and the others followed. He wished 
now that he hadn't brought Graham along. 

"The same," Polly told him. "I 
just tried. You see?" 

THE baby in its basket was sputtering feebly, its face flushed 
bright red. We're going to lose that 
youngster, thought the doctor grimly, unless 1 start intravenous feeding, and soon. 

"Tell me something, please, Doctor," she burst out, ignoring the 
reporter's presence. "Could it be 
my fault? I'm anxious — I know 
that. Could that be why Sunny 
doesn't eat right?" 

Tony considered. "Yes, to a degree, but it couldn't account for all 
the trouble. Are you really so tense? 
What's it all about?" 

"You know how it was with us," 
she said evasively. "We tried so 
many times on Earth. And then 
here we thought at first it'd be like 



all the other times, but, Tony, do 
you think — is Mars dangerous?" 

He saw she'd changed her mind 
in mid -confess ion and substituted 
the inane question for whatever she 
had started to ask. He intended to 
get to the bottom of it. 

Over the woman's shoulder, he 
looked meaningfully at Graham. 
The reporter grimaced, shrugged, 
and obligingly drifted back to the 
living room. 

Tony lowered his voice and told 
the woman: "Of course Mars is 
dangerous. It's dangerous now; it 
was dangerous before you had 
Sunny. I'm a little surprised at you, 
Polly. Some women think that having a baby ought to change the 
world into a pink spun-candy 
heaven. It doesn't. You've had 
Sunny; he's a small animal and you 
love him and he needs your care, 
but Mars is still what it always was. 
The terrain's rugged and some of 
the people aren't what they ought 
to be. But . . ." 

"Tell me about the murder," she 
said flatly. 

"Oh, is that what you're jumpy 
about ? I saw worse every night I 
rode the meat wag- rode the ambulance at Massachusetts General. 
What's that got to do with Sunny?" 

"I don't know. I'm afraid. Tell 
me about it, Doctor, please." 

He wondered what vague notion 
of terror she had got stuck in her 
head — and wondered whether it 
would come out. 

"You're the doctor," he said, 



134 




 



shrugging. "The girl who got killed 
was named Big Ginny, as you may 
have heard. If you'd been on the 
wagon with me in boston, you'd 
know there's nothing unusual about 
it. Women like that often get beaten 
up, sometimes beaten to death by 
their customers. The customers are 
usually drunk, sometimes full of 
dope; they get the idea that they're 
being cheated and they slug the 
girl. Another call for the wagon.*' 

"1 heard," she said, "thatshewas 
beaten to death with a lot of light 
blows. No man would do that. And 
I heard that Nick Cantrella saw 
footprints out by the caves — naked 
footprints. He thought they were 
children's." 

"Whose do you think they 
were?" he asked, though he had a 
sickly feeling that he knew what 
she'd say. 

POLLY moaned, "It was brownies ! I fold you I saw one and 
you didn't believe me! Now they've 
killed this woman and they're leaving footprints around and you still 
don't believe me! You think I'm 
crazy ! You all think I'm crazy ! 
They want my baby and you won't 
listen to me!" 

Tony thought he knew what was 
going on in her head and he didn't 
like it. She had seen the attention 
of the Colony shift from her baby 
to the rnarcaine search, and was 
determined to bring it back, even 
if it had to be by a ridiculous ruse. 
She'd heard all the foolish stories 



about the mythical brownies; she'd 
had a vivid anxiety dream — which, 
he reminded himself', she had finally 
admitted was only a dream—and 
now she was collecting "evidence" 
to build herself up as the interesting victim of a malignant persecution. 

"We've been over all this before," he told her wearily. "You 
agreed that you didn't really see 
anything. And you agreed that 
there couldn't be any brownies because no animal life has ever been 
found on Mars — no brownies, and 
nothing brownies could evolve 
from. Now . . ." 

"Doctor," she broke in, "I've got 
to show you something." She 
reached into the baby's basket and 
drew out something that glinted 
darkly in her hand. 

"Good Lord, what are you doing 
with a gun?" the doctor demanded. 

There was no more conflict on 
her face or hesitancy in her voice. 
"You can say I'm crazy, Tony, but 
I'm afraid. I think there could be 
such things as brownies. And I'm 
going to be ready for them if they 
come." She looked at the little 
weapon tensely and then put it back 
under the pad in the crib. 

Tony p romptl y d rew it out. 
"Now listen, Polly, if you want to 
believe in brownies or ghosts or 
Santa Claus, that's your business. 
But you certainly should know better than to leave the gun near him. 
I'm going to give you a sedative, 
Polly, and maybe after a good—" 



MARS CHILD 



135 



"No," she said. "No sedative. 
I'll be all Eight. But can I keep the 
gun?" 

She wiped her eyes and, with an 
effort, laid her twitching hands 
quietly in her lap. 

"If you know how to use it and 
keep the safety on and put it some 
place besides under Sunny's mattress, I don't see why not. But all 
the brownies you'll ever shoot with 
it you could stick in your eye and 
never notice." 

"Like the old lady, maybe 1 
don't believe in ghosts but I'm terribly afraid of them?" She tried to 
laugh and Tony managed a smile 
with her. 

"Nothing wrong with blowing 
your top once in a while. Nothing 
at all. Women ought to bawl 
oftener." 

She grinned weakly and said: 

"Maybe Sunny's going to eat 
better now." 

"I hope so. I'll see you tomorrow, Polly." 

ii 

AS THEY walked down the 
street in a strained, embarrassed silence, Graham looked as if 
he wanted to ask something. He 
finally did: "By the way, Tony, do 
you know where I'm supposed to 
sleep? Or where I'd find my bag? 
It was on the plane." 

"Might as well stay with me, 
And your baggage ought to be at 
the Campbells. Tad Campbell was 



that young sprout who deflated my 
fight with Brenner." 

The baggage, a sizable B--1 bag 
on which Graham must have paid a 
ruinous overweight charge, was at 
the Campbells. After picking it up, 
the writer followed the doctor to 
his hospital-hut. 

Tony snapped a heat beam on 
the two plastic chairs — standard 
furnishings of a Sun Lake living 
room — and took off his sandbobts 
with a grunt. Graham rooted 
through his 'baggage, picked up 
Chabrier's gaudy package and 
hefted it thoughtfully, then shook 
his head and dove in again. He 
came up grinning, with another 
bottle. 

"How about it. Doc?" he asked. 
"1 1 1 is is Earthside." 

"It's been a long time," Tony 
sighed. "I'll get a couple of 
glasses." 

The stuff went down like silken 
fire. It had been a very long time. 

"What's about brownies?" the 
writer asked suddenly. "I couldn't 
help hearing part of that when I 
went out of the room." 

Tony shook his head. "BrowJi/esf 
As if we didn't have enough trouble here, without inventing Martian 
monsters ... ." 

"Well, what about them? All 
I've ever heard is that deep purple 
scene in Granata's interplanetary 
show. It's silly stuff, but nobody's 
handled it yet at all except Granata. 
Maybe I could use something; it's a 
beautiful story if there's anything 



136 




 



at all to back it up. Does anybody 
claim a connection between fairy 
book brownies and the Martian 
variety?" 

"Two ways. First of all, Mars 
brownies are just as much a fairy 
story as the Earthside kind. Second, 
somebody once suggested that the 
ones in the story books were the 
space traveling ancestors of the 
present-day hallucinations."* 

"Could be," the gunther reflected. "Could be . . ." 

"Could be a lot of rot," Tony 
said without heat. "Space travel inquires at an absolute minimum the 
presence of animal life — or at least 
mobile, intelligent life. Show me 
so much, as one perambulating vegetable cm Mars, let alone a native 
animal life-form. Then it's likely 
I'll think about brownies some 
more." 

"How about a declining race?" 
Graham speculated. "Suppose they 
were space travelers, on a high level 
of civilization — they might have 
killed off all lesser life-forms. You 
see it happening some on Earth, 
and back there it's just a matter of 
living-space. We don't have the 
problem the Martians had to face, 
of dwindling water an d oxygen 
supplies. Probably got them in the 
end, and destroyed their civilization . . . except," he added, "for 
the ones who got to Earth. I understand from authoritative sources 
that the last expedition to Earth 
was led by a guy named Oberon." 
Graham chuckled and drank, then 



asked seriously: "Has anybody ever 
seen one, except Granata?" 

"Hundreds of people," Tony 
said drily. "Ask any one of the old 
prospectors who come into town 
hauling dirt. They've all seen 'em, 
lived with 'cm; some even claim to 
have been at baby-feasts. You'll get 
all the stories you want out of any 
of the old geezers." 

"What are brownies supposed to 
look like?" the writer insisted. 

TONY sighed and surrendered, 
recognizing the same intense 
manner Graham had displayed in 
the Lab. The man was a reporter, 
after all. It was his business to ask 
questions. Tony gave him what he 
wanted, with additions, explanations, and embellishments. 

Brownies : an intelligent lifeform, either animal or mobile vegetable. About a meter and a half 
in height; big ears; skinny arms. 
Supposed to be the naked remnants 
of a once-proud Martian civilization. (Except that there were no 
other remnants to support the 
theory.) In the habit of kidnaping 
human children (except that there 
was no specific authenticated case 
of a baby's disappearance) and eating them (except .that that seemed 
too pat and inevitable an idea-association with the kidnaping — the 
sort of additional embellishment 
that no good liar could resist). 

"It's an old prospectors' yarn," 
Tony wound up. "The homesteaders picked it up to frighten kids 



MARS CHILD 



137 



into sticking close to home. There 
are hundreds of people on Mars 
today who'll tell you they've seen 
brownies. But not only is there no 
native animal life of any kind on 
Mars today — so far as we can tell, 
there never has been. No ruins, no 
old cities, no signs of civilization, 
and not so much as one single dessuated dricd-out scrap of anything 
resembling an animal fossil." 

"That's strictly negative evidence," Graham pointed out. He 
emptied his glass, and poured another drink for both of them. "Cigarct?" 

Tony shook his head. "I gave up 
smoking long ago. We all quit 
sooner or later. Too much trouble 
to keep tobacco burning." He 
reached out to pick up his empty 
pipe from the table beside him, and 
he clenched the stem comfortably 
between his teeth. 

Graham repeated; "Strictly negative evidence. But on the other side 
you have footprints, for instance, 
and eyewitness stories." 

"If you're talking about the cataract-covered eyes of old Marsmcn," 
Tony retorted, "don't call it evidence." 

"It wouldn't be," Graham agreed, 
"except that there are so many of 
them. I'm beginning to think 
there's a story in il after all." 

"You mean you believe it?" the 
doctor demanded. 

"Do I look crazy? I said it was a 
story." 

"So you came 150 million kilom


eters on a rocket, and then four 
more hours across Mars in a beatup old rattletrap of a plane," the 
doctor said bitterly. "You eat food 
that tastes like hospital disinfectant, 
and live in a mud hut, all so you 
can go back home and write a nice 
piece of fiction about brownies — a 
piece you could have dashed off 
without ever leaving Earth!" 

"Not exactly," the gunthcr said 
mildly. "I was only thinking of using the brownies for one chapter. 
Local color, tales and legends — that 
kind of thing." 

"You could get plenty of stories 
back on Earth," Tony went on bitterly. "Stories worth writing. How 
about Paul Rosen's story? There's a 
real one for you." 

"Rosen?" Graham leaned forward, interested again. "Seems to 
me I've heard the name before. 
Who was he?" 

"Not was. Is. He's still alive; a 
cripple nobody knows." 

<*fllELL me about Rosen." The 
-L writer tilled their glasses 
again. 

"I'll tell you about Mars; it's the 
same story . You came to w rile i 
book about Mars, didn't you? Well, 
Mars — this Mars, without oxygen 
masks — is Rosen's work. Rosen's 
lungs. And you never heard of 
him . . . Rosen was the medical 
doctor aboard the relief ship, the 
one thai found what was left of the 
first colony. He had a notion about 
the oxygen differential, was con


138 




 



viaeed that it wasn't responsible for 
the ^failure. He was wrong, of 
course, but he was right, too. To 
prove his point he took off his 
mask and found he didn't need it. 

"His assistant tried it, and nearly 
died of anoxemia. That proved 
some people could take Mars 
straight and others couldn't. When 
the ship got back Rosen went to the 
biochem boys with his lungs. They 
told him a few c.c. wouldn't be 
enough to work with, so he volunteered for an operation. Most of his 
lung tissue was removed. He was 
crippled for life, but they tracked 
down the enzyme that made the 
difference, and worked out a test." 

"That I remember," said Graham, continuing to fill the glasses 
almost rhythmically. "Half the guys 
I met in Asia claimed they enlisted 
because they weren't Marsworthy 
and life wasn't worth living if they 
couldn't go to Mars." 

«f| "1H AT was the beginning of 
-1- it," Tony said. "The ones 
who passed the test began to come 
over. Thousand dollars a day prospecting, and always the chance of 
finding bonanzas. At first they were 
pork-and-beaners, but the Mars 
vegetation they brought back took 
us one step closer to fitting into the 
Martian ecology. The biochem boys 
came up with a one-shot hormone 
treatment to stimulate secretion of 
an enzyme from the lining of the 
pylorus. It's present in most people 
without the shot, but not enough 



to break down the Martian equivalent of carbohydrates into simple 
sugars which the human body can 
handle. You asked mc before what 
all the shots you got on board the 
rocket ship were for. That's one 
of them. It means you can handle 
the Mars plants which don't contain compounds poisonous to Earth 
animals. 

"The other shots you got were 
to protect you against all the rest 
of the things that killed off the 
first pork-and-beaners — fungi, ultra-violet damage to the eyes, 
dehydration, viruses. For every shot 
you got, half a dozen of the first 
explorers and prospectors were 
killed or crippled to find the cause 
and cure. 

"Five years ago came the payoff. 
The biochem boys got what they'd 
been looking for ever since they 
first sliced up Rosen's trick lungs. 
They synthesized the enzyme, your 
little pink OxEn pill, and that did 
it. That's when the Sun Lake Society was founded; and the new 
rocket fuel two years ago made Sun 
Lake a reality: With OxEn and 
four trips a year, we can make out 
until we find a way to get along 
without Earth. 

"Sun Lake is Mars, Graham. 
Sun Lake's all's gonna be left when 
you crazy bastards back on Earth 
blow yourselves up. The other 
colonists here aren't Mars; they're 
part of Earth. When Earth goes, 
they go. Sun Lake's all's gonna be 
left . . ." 



MARS CHILD 



1 29 




"Coupla catches/' said Graham, 
trying to make a glass stay put so 
he could fill it. "Commish Bell and 
his eviction notice. And you still 
need OxEn. Can you make that inna 
Lab?" 

"Not yet, " ' Tony brooded . He 
had forgotten the lovely optimism 
that could be poured out of a bottle. 
"Guess I had 'nough to drink. I 
have a hell of a day ahead of me." 

CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

A HELL of a day it was. It started, for one thing, with a 
hangover. Tony heaved himself" out 
of bed, glad to find Graham still 



asleep. He didn't want any cheerful conversation just yet. He prescribed, dispensed, and self-administered some aspirin, used an extra 
cup of water for a second cup of 
"coffee," finally decided he was 
strong enough to face the reek of 
methyl alcohol, and got washed. 

Mimi Jonathan was in charge at 
the Lab when he got there. Law or 
no law, he raced through the A.M. 
Lab check to get ahead on the awful job of monitoring the unpacking operation. He rode out on a 
bike to the five spots Stillman had 
selected for the inspection crews 
and found them reasonably low in 
radioactivity. 



140 




 



Sheets of plastic had been laid 
down lor flooring and tent walls 
were going up, with little tunnels 
through which the crates could be 
passed without the handlers bringing in all the dust of Mars on their 
feet. Blowers were rigged to change 
the air between each inspection and 
radiologitally clean overalls would 
be passed in at the same time. 

A little after dawn, the careful 
frenzy was in full swing. A crew in 
the shipping room eased out crates 
and passed them to wrappers who 
covered them with plastic sheeting 
and heat-sealed them. Aboard skids, 
the crates were manhandled up the 
slight slope from the "canal" bed to 



the tents in the desert, unwrapped, 
passed in, opened, searched, 
checked for chemical and radiological contamination, sealed and 
passed out again. Back at the Lab, 
they would be wrapped in lead 
sheets pending recrating and stored 
separately in every workroom that 
could be spared. 

jMimi was everywhere, ordering 
a speedup on the heat-sealing, or a 
slowdown on the bucket- brigade 
manhandling, routing crates to the 
station that would soonest be free, 
demanding more plastic sheeting, 
drafting a woman to wash more 
coveralls when a stand of them 
toppled over. The few Lab proccs


MARS CHILD 



>41 



scs that wouldn't be left alone were 
tended under the direction of Sam 
Flexner, by people from agro and 
administration, and by specialized 
workers like Anna Willcndorf. 

Tony and Harve Stillman moved 
constantly up and down the line, 
back to the Lab and out to the 
desert, checking persons, places and 
materials. Before noon Tony had 
the bitter job of telling Mimi: 
"We've got* to abandon the Number Two tent. It's warming up. 
Radioactivity's low on the site, but 
it's from something that chains 
with the plastic flooring, I don't 
know what. Another hour and 
radiation from the flooring will 
contaminate the crates." 

The woman set her jaw and 
picked another crew from the line 
to set up a tent on another monitored site. 

Somebody slipped in the Number 
Three tent, and Harve Stillman 
found some of the Leukemia Foundation's shipment of radiophosphorus had got from the inside of 
the crate to the outside — enough to 
warrant refusal by the rocket supercargo in the interests of the 
safety of the ship. 

But never a trace of marcaine did 
the search crews find. 

LUNCH was at noon, carried 
about by Colony children. 
Gulping cool "coffee," Tony told 
Harve Stillman : "You'll have to 
take it alone for a while. I haven't 
visited my patients yet. I missed 



Joan Radcliff altogether yesterday." 

"Hell, I don't know whe-ther I'm 
coming or going," grunted Stillman, then added, "I guess I can 
manage." 

"Send for me if there's anything 
you really can't handle." Tony 
started back toward the street of 
huts before a new emergency could 
delay him. 

He stopped at his own house 
to pick up his medical bag, and 
found, Graham awake, at work in 
front of an old-fashioned portable 
typewriter. Another surprise from 
the gunther; Tony had assumed the 
man worked with a dictatyper. Even 
in the Colony they had those. 

Graham looked up pleasantly and 
nodded. "Somebody waiting for 
you in the other room, Tony." He 
motioned with his head toward the 
door that led to the hospital. "You 
going out again?" 

The doctor nodded. "I don't 
know when I'll get back. You can 
walk around and ask questions 
wherever you find anybody. You 
understand the situation here — we 
can't let up on this marcaine business even for the press," 

"Sure." The gunther nodded, 
unperturbed. 

"I'll get around in time to pick 
you up for supper anyhow," Tony 
promised. "Did you get any 
lunch ?" 

"I managed." Graham grinned 
and pointed to an open can still 
half full of meat, and a box of 



142 




 



hard crackers. "Look," said the 
writer, "Unless you've lost your 
Earthside tastes completely, why 
don't you have supper on me to-night ? There's lots more where 
lunch came from." 

"Thanks. I might lake you up 
on that." 

Tony went into the hospital, 
where Edgar Kroll was waiting for 
him. 

"Sorry to bother you today, 
Doc," Kroll apologized. "I came 
over on the chance you'd be around 
right about now. Another one of 
those damned headaches; I couldn't 
get any work done at all this morning, Guess I'm just getting old." 

"Old !" Tony snorted. "Man, 
even in Sun Lake, you're not old at 
thirty-five! Not just because you 
need bifocals. You've stalled around 
long enough now . . ." And heaven 
only knew what boudoir tauntings 
from young Jeanne Kroll lay behind that, Tony thought, as he 
reached into the dispensary cabinet. 
"Here's some aspirin for now. If 
you come around tomorrow, I think 
I'll have time to refract you; I just 
can't manage it today. Take the 
afternoon off if the headache 
doesn't go away." 

HE GOT his black bag, and 
walked down the street with 
Edgar, as far as the Kandros' place. 
At the door, he bumped into Jim, 
just leaving for the Lab, after 
lunch. 

"Glad I saw you. Doc." The 



new lather stood hesitantly in the 
doorway, waiting till Kroll was out 
of earshot, then burst out: "Listen, 
Tony, I didn't want to say anything 
in front of Polly, but . . . arc you 
sure it's going to be all right ? 
Sunny still isn't eating. Maybe it's 
cancer or something! I heard of 
something like that with one of our 
neighbor's kids back in Toledo — " 

Just— just exactly the sort of 
thing that made Tony almost blind 
with rage. He liked the man; Jim 
Kandro was his brother, his comrade in the Colony, but — ! With 
his pulse hammering, he made it 
clear to Jim in a few icy sentences 
that he had studied long, sacrificed 
much and worked hard to learn 
what he could about medicine, and 
that when he wanted a snap diagnosis from a layman he would ask 
for one. Jim and Polly could yank 
him out of bed at three in the 
morning, they could make him minister to (heir natural anxieties, but 
they could not make him take such 
an insult. 

He stalked into the house, ignoring Jim's protests and apologies 
both, and professional habit took 
over him as he greeted Polly and 
examined the baby. 

"About time for a feeding, isn't 
it?" he asked. "Is it going any 
better? Since last night, I mean? 
Want to try him now while I observe?" 

"It's a little better, I guess." 
Polly smiled doubtfully and picked 
up the baby. She moved the plastic 



MARS CHILD 



143 



cup of the oxygen, mask up a little 
over the small nose, and put Sunny 
to her breast. 

To Tony, it was plain that "the 
infant was frantic with hunger. 
Then why didn't H nurse properly? 
Instead of closing over the nipple, 
Sunny' s mouth pushed at it onesidedly, first to the right, then to 
the left, any way but the proper 
way. For seconds at a time the baby 
did suck, then would release the 
nipple, choking. - m 

"He's doing a little better," said 
Polly. "He's doing much better!"' 

"That's fine!" Tony agreed feebly. 'Til be on my way, then. Be 
sure to call me if there's anything." 

HE WALKED down the Colony 
street wishing a doctor could 
afford the luxury of shaking his 
head in bewilderment. Maybe it 
was all straightening out. But 
what could account for the infant's 
fantastic behavior? There's nothing 
so determined as a baby wanting 
to feed — but something was getting in the way of Sunny's instinct. 

He hoped Polly realized that 
Sunny would feed sooner or later, 
that the choking reflex which frustrated, the sucking reflex would disappear before long. He hoped she 
would reali2e it; he hoped desperately that it would happen. 

Joan Radclifr was next and this 
time he found her awake. She was 
no better and no worse; the enigmatic course of her nameless disease had leveled off. All he could 



do was talk a while, go through 
the pulse-taking and temperaturereading mumbo-jumbo, change the 
dressings on her sores, talk some 
more, and then go out. 

Now Dorothy, the sinus case, 
and he was done with his more 
serious cases for today. 

Tanya Beyles had a green sick 
card on her door, but he decided 
to ignore it. He was already past 
the house when she called his name, 
and he turned to find her beckoning from the opened door. 

She had dressed up to beat the 
band — an absurdly tight tunic to 
show off her passable thirty-plus 
figure, carefully done hair and the 
first lipstick he remembered seeing 
around in months. 

"I don't have much time, today, 
Mrs. Beyles," he said carefully. 
"Could it wait till tomorrow?" 

"Oh, please, Doctor," she 
begged, and launched into a typical 
hypochondriac resume of symptoms, complete with medical terms 
inaccurately used. What it boiled 
down to was that a thorough examination was in order though there 
was nothing nasty wrong with her. 

"Very well," he said. "If you'll 
come over to the hospital — next 
week, perhaps — when I have more 
time." With a chaperone, he added 
silently. 

"Wouldn't it be just as easy here, 
and more private?" she ventured 
shyly, indicating the bedroom, 
where a heat lamp was already focused on the made bed. 



144 




 



"Dear God," he muttered, and 
found the professional restraint that 
had taken over while he was with 
Polly Kandro had now quite abandoned him. "Mrs. Beylcs," he said, 
plainly and nastily, "you may not 
realize it, but we do have a sense 
of humor here, even if we don't 
share your ideas of fun. We've been 
able to laugh off your malicious 
gossiping and the lousy job you do 
in Agronomy; you do get some 
work done in Agro, and you don't 
cat too much to keep your shape. 
Up to now, we've been able to 
faugh everything off and hope* 
you'd straighten out. But I warn 
you, if you start being seductive 
around Sun Lake — even if you start 
with me — you'll get shipped out so 
fast you won't . , ." 

"Is that so?" she screamed. 
"Well, maybe you'd like to know 
that I can get all the love and respect I want around here and where 
you got the nasty idea that I'm at 
all interested in you I can't imagine. I've heard of doctors like you 
before and if you think you're going to get away with it you're very 
much mistaken. And don't think I 
don't know all about you and that 
Willendorf woman, f know things 
people would love to hear . . » 

He walked off before she could 
say any more. God only knew what 
they'd do with her — deport her, he 
supposed, and her sad sack of a 
husband would have to go, too, and 
it would all be very messy and badtempered. Maybe Bell and Graham 



and all the others were right, regarding Sun Lakers as anywhere 
from mildly insane to fanatically 

obsessed. 

Maybe anything at all, but liestill had to go to see Dorothy and 
her sinuses. The doctor's fat tal 
muscles fell into their accustomed 
neutrality as he walked into the 
girl's bedroom and his mind automatically picked up the threads of 
the bacitracin story where he had 
left off two days before. 



HALF an hour later, he was back 
at the unpacking and search 
operation where he took over alone 
while Stillman, groggy with the. 
strain, the responsibility and the 
plain hard work, took a short break. 
The two of them divided the job 
then, moving steadily up and down 
the lines, checking, rechecking endlessly until, as darkness closed 
down, they were suddenly aware 
that there were no more crates. 

Mimi Jonathan bitterly enumerated the results of the search : 
"About 1,500 man-hours shot to 
hell, three crates contaminated beyond salvage, nine salvageable for 
umpty-hundrcd more man-hours— 
and no marcainc. Well, nobody can 
say now that we didn't try." She 
turned to Tony. "Your move," she 
said. 

"Graham?" The doctor stood up. 
"All I can do is try to get him on 
our side. He's friendly anyhow; he 



MARS CHILD 



145 



asked me to have supper with him 
out of his private stock of genuine 
synthetic Earthside protein." 

"You don't sound too hopeful," 
Gracey ventured. 

"I'm not. Did 1 tell you what 
his favorite story is so far ? 
Brownies!" 

"You mean he's passing up a 
yarn like the killing at Pitted, and 
he wants to write about Brownies?" 
Nick asked incredulously. 

"You think he's going to step 
on P it tco 's toes ? ' ' Tony retorted . 
"Not that smart boy ! Okay, I 
might as well get back and make 
my try." He started across the 
darkening desert, and Nick fell 
into step beside him. "Why don't 
you conic* along?" the doctor suggested. "Maybe you could talk his 
language better than I do. You 
might get a decent meal out of it, 
too." 

"It's a thought. A good one. 
Only Marian's probably got supper 
all ready by now. I better check in 
at home first. I don't know — would 

you say it was official Council business?" 

"That's between you and your 
hunger,'' the doctor told him. 
"What do you want most — meat or 
Marian ?" 

"Damned if I know," Nick admitted, grinning. 

"Doc!" It was Jim Kandro, running down the street toward them. 
"Hey, Tony! I just came from the 
hospital — looking all over . . ." 

"What's up?" 



"The baby! He's having convulsions." 

"I'll go right over. Pick up my 
bag at the hospital, will you?" 

JIM set off in one direction, and 
Tony in the other. "Sec you 
later," Nick called out to the doctor's rapidly retreating back. 

At the Kandros, he found Polly, 
near-hysterical, with a struggling infant in her arms. Sunny was obviously in acute discomfort; the veins 
were standing out on his fuzzy 
scalp, he was struggling and straining feebly, his belly was distended 
and his checks puffed out uncomfortably. 

How's h e been eating ?' ' the 
doctor demanded, scrubbing his 
hands. 

"The way you saw before," said 
Polly. "Better and better, but just 
the way you saw before, wiggling 
and pushing so half the time he 
was sucking on nothing at all. He 
was crying and crying, so I fed him 
three or four times and each time 
he got more — " 

She fell silent as Tony picked up 
the baby and patted and stroked it. 
It burped loudly. The alarming red 
color faded and the tense limbs relaxed. With a whimper Sunny collapsed on the doctor's shoulder and 
fell asleep before he was back in 
his crib. 

"But you said—" Polly gasped. 
"I guess Sunny didn't hear me," 
Tony said. 

"Here you are, Doc." Jim came 



T46 




 



in and looked from Polly's empty 
arms to the quiescent baby in the 
crib. "I guess you didn't need the 
bag. What was it?" 

"Colic," Tony grinned. "Good, 
old-fashioned, Earthside colic." 

"But you told me . . ." Jim 
turned accusingly on his wife. 

"And I told Polly," Tony put 
in quickly. "It doesn't usually happen. Babies don't have to be burped 
on Mars — most of them, that is. 
The mask feeds richer air into a 
Mars baby's nose so he just naturally breathes through his nose all 
the time and doesn't swallow air 
and get colic when he feeds. But 
I guess Sunny had his heart set on 
a bellyache. Was he crying when 
he fed, Polly?" 

" Why, yes, a little bit. Not really 
crying, a kind of whimper every 
now and then." 

"That could explain it. All right, 
now you know it isn't serious. Just 
be sure to bubble him after feeding. Thank the Lord he's nursing. 
That young man of yours gave us 
all a bad time, but I think we're 
, out of the woods now." 

Sunny was going to be all right; 
for the first time, Tony really believed it. 

Somehow that changed the whole 
dismal picture. 

ijl 

fTlONY entered his own house 
-L and found Graham still sitting 
in front of his typewriter, not writ


ing now, but reading through a 
pile of onionskin pages. 

"Hi. I was waiting for you." The 
journalist looked pleased with himself. "I'll fix us some sandwiches 
if you'll do something about that 
coffee of yours. When you make it, 
it's almost drinkable." 

There was a knock on the door. 

"Come in," Tony called out. 

"Oh, am I busting in on something?" Nick asked innocently. 

"No, of course not. Glad to see 
you. Doug, this is Nick Cantxetta, 
I don't know if you met him before. He's in charge of maintenance 
and equipment in the Lab, and a 
member of our Council. Nick, you 
know who Doug Graham is." 

"Uh-huh. My rival. My wife's 
only true love." 

"And you should see his wife," 
Tony added. 

"This gets more and more interesting. You're not married to 
that lady pilot by any chance?" Graham extended a greasy hand. "No? 
Too bad. Join us? We're eating 
meat J" 

"Don't mind if I do. How's the 
baby, Tony ? Any th i ng rea 1 1 y 
wrong?" 

"Yes and no. Colic. Good old 
colic," the doctor gloated. "It 
shouldn't happen, but, by God, it's* 
something I know how to cope 
with; I think the kid's going to be 
all right. Coffee's ready. Where's 
the food?" 

They munched sandwiches, and 
had "coffee" which Graham pro


MARS CHILD 



147 



nounccd a very slight improvement 
over his own efforts. The two Sun 
Lakers were more than happy with 
it; it was sweetened with gratings 
from a brick of sugar produced by 
the gunthcr from his wonderpacked luggage. The same suitcase 
turned out to hold another bottle 
of Earthside liquor, and Graham 
poured drinks all around. 

"It's a celebration," the writer 
insisted, when Tony, remembering 
his hangover, would have demurred. 
"I got a week's work done today. 
Whole first chapter — complete 
draft of the trip out and impressions of Marsport!" He tanned out 
a sheaf of pages covered with 
single-spaced typing, and corked 
the bottle. 

Nick took a long deep swallow, 
settled back blissfully on the bunk 
.where he was sitting. "Marcaine," 
he said at last. "That could explain 
it." 

"What?" 

"I've been sitting here imagining I was eating meat and drinking 
whiskey. Can you beat that?" He 
sipped more slowly this time, savoring the drink, and said determinedly to Graham, "You're just about 
up to Sun Lake in your notes 
then?" 

"That's right," Graham said. In 
the silence that followed, he asked 
brightly: "Say, aren't you the guy 
who saw the brownie tracks." 

"Brownie tracks? Who, me? 
You're sure you weren't thinking 
of unicorns?" 



"Do unicorns leave little footprints?" 

"Oh, that. Yeah, I saw something out around the caves in the 
Rimrock Hills. That's where the 
kids take the goats to graze." 

"Are they allowed to go barefoot around there?" Graham 
asked. 

"Allowed!" Nick exploded. 
"You haven't been ten years old for 
quite a long time, have you? How 
much attention do you think they 

pay?" 

QUITE a bit, Tony thought, remembering his talk with Tad, 
but he didn't bring it up. Out loud 
he said: "I've got a .theory about 
that. I've been thinking about it 
since last night, Doug. Maybe you 
can use it in your book." It wasn't 
smart, maybe, to keep riding the 
writer about it, but he'd had enough 
of brownies for awhile. "I'll tell 
you what I think. I think, some kids 
who weren't supposed to do it went 
exploring in a cave, and one of 
them got lost. Then the rest 
wouldn't admit what happened, and 
all the search party could find was 
kid-sized footprints. So we have 
'brownies'. And a couple of dozen 
rei i red prospectors back on Earth 
are coining money telling lies about 
them," he finished, more sharply 
than he meant to. 

"I guess that squelches me," Graham laughed boisterously, picked 
up his papers, and stood up. "I 
better be getting along. Have to 



148 




 



find out about getting this stuff 
radioed out." He started for the 
door, and almost collided with 
Anna coming in. 

"Oh, I'm sorry. I forgot you had 
company, Tony. They kept me busy 
all day out at the Lab, and I thought 
maybe I could get some work done 
here this evening, but . . ." She 
smiled apologetically at Tony and 
Nick, then turned to Graham. 
"Were you going out?" 

"Shouldn't I?" 

"Of course not/' said Tony. "Not 
when Anna's just come in. Stick 
around, and you'll see something." 

"What does she do?" Graham 
asked. "Song and. dance routine? 
Prestidigitation?" 

Nick said from his perch on the. 
wall bunk: "Graham, if you had 
an ounce of Earthside chivalry in 
your bloodstream, you'd uncork that 
bottle and offer the lady a drink." 

"You're right. I'll even offer you 
one." Tony got another glass, and 
the writer poured. Then he turned 
to Anna, and asked again, "Well, 
what do you do?" 

"I'm a glassblower, that's all. 
Tony 1 ikes to watch it, an d he 
couldn't possibly understand that 
other people might not enjoy it as 
much." 

, "Oh. You do your work over 
here?" 

"Yes," the doctor said testily. 
"Anna is also my assistant, if you 
recall — neither one is a full-time 
job, so she keeps her equipment 
here, and combines the two." 



For a few minutes, the four of 
them sat talking inconsequentially, 
the three Sun Lakers answering 
Graham's endless variety of questions. Finally, Anna got up. 

"If I'm going to get any work 
done, I better get started." She 
opened the cupboards and began 
pulling out equipment. 

' Graham stood up, too. 
"Well . . ." He picked up his sheaf 
of papers . 

"Tony \" 

ALL three men focused their attention on Anna, who stood 
facing them, her arms full of assorted junk. 

"Tony," she said bluntly, "Have 
you told Mr. Graham about our 
problem here? Don't you think he 
might be able to help?" 

"Well!" Graham sat down again, 
and suddenly grinned. "Tell me, 
what can I do for dear old Sun 
Lake?" 

"You can save our necks," Nick 
told him soberly. "At least I think 
you can, if you want to. You're going back on the rocket," he explained, "and that rocket won't 
have our shipment on it, because — 
actually because- — we didn't steal 
some marcaine we're accused of 
stealing. It's not here, so we 
couldn't find it, and that means Bell 
will throw a cordon around us on 
Shipment Day. You know Bell from 
way back. You could raise such a 
stink about what he's doing to us — 
if you wanted to — that there'd be 



MARS CHILD 



149 



orders recalling him to Earth on 
the next rocket that comes in. 
You're big enough to do it. And 
we don't know any other way." 

"You're very flattering," the 
writer said, "and also too damn 
brief. I already know that much. 
Suppose you fill me In on some of 
the details." 

"Bell tramped in three days ago/" 
the doctor began carefully, and 
went through the story, step by 
step, not omitting the information 
he had picked up in Marsport, and 
reminding Graham at the same time 
about the Cham's new regulations 
against ma renin e. 

"Brenner wants to get his hands 
on the Sun Lake Lab," Tony wound 
up. "You got Bell kicked out of a 
good job once for crooked dealing. 
You could do it again, Unless Bell's 
got religion, and I see no sign of 
it, Brenner could easily hire him to 
kick us off Mars and then see that 
Brenner Pharmaceutical got the 
assets of the busted Sun Lake Colony — including the Lab — in a 
rigged auction." 

The writer pondtered, and then 
told them slowly: "I think I can 
do something about it. It's a good 
story, anyhow. The least I can do 
is try." 

Nick let out a wild: "Wa-hoo!" 
and Tony slumped with relief. 
He looked back to Anna's work 
bench, smiling — but she was gone. 

"Now that that's settled," said 
Graham, "I want a favor myself." 

"Up to but not including my 



beautiful blonde wife," promised' 
Nick fervently. 

"If it was women, I'd want that 
lady airplane pilot. But it isn't 
women. I still want to get this stuff 
filed to Marsport by your radio. 
I'm going to have a crowded schedule before takeoff and every minute 
I clip off in advance, like getting 
this stuff typed and microfilmed, 
will help." 

"Sure, pal! Sure!" Nick stood 
up and shook the writer's hand 
earnestly. "I'll take you to the radio 
shack myself and give you the 
blanchest carte you ever saw!" 

CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

It's a It' I Mars baby, 
It's a li'l Mars baby, 
It's it I'll Mars baby, 
Li'l Mars baby 
All — our — own ! 

^TT WAS midnight, and Polly sang 
X her song very softly, so as not 
to awaken Jim. Her hand, on the 
baby's back, caressed the tiny, clearly defined muscles, rigid now with 
concentration of effort. Her eyes 
filled with wonder as she watched 
Sunny nuzzle awkwardly, but successfully, against her breast- - He was eating ! He was swallowing the milk, and not choking on 

, it or spitting it back! 

With a touch of awe at the 
thought that she was the only 
mother on Mars who had the privilege, she laid the baby over her 



ISO 




 



MARS CHILD 



shoulder and gently patted. Sunny 
bubbled and subsided. She laid him 
in the basket and sat watching him 
raptly. Jim rolled over and muttered, 50 she decided not to |Sing 
her song again. She was hungry, 
anyway. She touched her lips to 
the baby's forehead, straightened 
his mathematically straight blanket 
and went to the little pantry cupboard in the living room. 

A dish of left over navy beans 
would settle her for two or three 
more hours of sleep. She found a 
spoon and beg*an to eat, happily. 
She cleaned the dish and licked the 
spoon, put them away and started 
back for bed. 

She was halfway to the bedroom 
door when it happened. 

EVERYTHING went slower and 
slower and came to a stop. She 
was frozen to the floor, giggling — 
and she was also somewhere else, 
watching herself giggle. The reddish walls turned the most beautiful apple-green, her favorite color, 
and put forth vines and branches. 
They were apple tree branches, and 
they began to bear apples that were 
baby's heads— -severed baby's heads, 
dripping rich delicious juice. The 
babies sang her song in a cheeping 
chorus, and she saw and heard herself giggle and sing with them, and 
pluck the heads from the branches, 
open her mouth — 

"Jim!" she shrieked, and it all 
collapsed. 

Her husband stood in the door


way, looked at her and leaped to 
catch her. 

"Get Dr. Tony," she gasped 
after she had vomited and he had 
carried her to a chair. "I think I'm 
going crazy. There were these — get 
Dr. Tony, please, Jim !" 

The thought of being left alone 
horrified her, but she clutched the 
chair arms, afraid to close her eyes 
while he was gone. She counted to 
more than a hundred, lost track and 
was starting again when Jim and 
the doctor burst in. 

"Polly, what is it? What happened ?" 

"I don't know. Doctor, / don't 
know! It's all over now, but I don't 
know if it's going to come back. I 
saw things. I think . . . Tony, I 
think I'm crazy." 

"You threw up," he reminded 
her. "Did you eat anything?" 

"I was hungry after I nursed 
Sunny. I ate some beans-A:old 
beans. And then it was horrible. It 
was like a nightmare, only I was 
watching myself ..." 

"This happened right after you 
ate the beans ?" he demanded. "You 
didn't eat the beans earlier?" 

"No, it was .right after. I fed 
Sunny, and then I ate, and then it 
happened. I was frozen to the floor 
and I watched myself. I was going 
to do something horrible. I was 
going to . i ." She couldn't say it; 
she remembered it too clearly. 

"That's too quick f or food 
poisoning," the doctor said. "You 
froze, you say. And you watched 



152 




 



yourself. And there were hallucinations." 

'"Yes, like the worst nightmare 
in the world, yet I was awake." 

"Stay with her, Jim. I've got to 
get something. Can you clean up 
in here?" 

Jim clenched his wife's hand in 
his big, red fist and then began to 
mop. 

Tony came back with a black box 
they all knew — the electroencephalograph. 

"Look here, Tony," growled 
Kandro. "If you're thinking that 
Polly's a drug addict, you're crazy." 

Tony ignored him and strapped 
the electrodes to the woman's head. 
Three times he took traces, and 
they were identical. Positive brain 
waves. 

"You were full of marcaine," he 
told her .flatly. "Where did you get 
it?" 

"Well, I never — " and "God 
damn it all, Doc — " the couple began simultaneously. 

Tony relaxed. "I don't need a 
lie-detector," he said. "It must have 
been put on the beans. Lord knows 
how or why." 

Polly asked incredulously: "You 
mean people go through that for 
pleasure?" 

"You had the reaction of a wellbalanced person. It's the neurotic 
who enjoys the stuff." 

Polly shook bet head dazedly. 

"But what are we going to do?" 
demanded Jim. 

"First thing is to get some bottles 



and nipples, and goat's milk for 
you. Breast-feeding is out for at 
least the next week, Polly. There'd 
be marcaine in your milk. You 
don't want to wean Sunny now?" 
"Oh, no!" 

Tony jmilcd. "We'll have to get 
a breast pump made, too, to keep 
your supply going. But that can 
wait till morning." 

"But — " protested Jim. 

The doctor swung around to face 
him. "All right, what do yon suggest we do?" 

Jim thought and said hopelessly: 
"I don't know." 

*<"\T EITHER do I. I'm a doctor, 

JLN not a detective. All I can do 
is write a formula for the baby, and 
get people moving right now turning out the stuff you need." 

He stepped into the nursery for 
a moment to peer at Sunny, in the 
crib — a beautiful, healthy child. 
Tony wondered for a moment 
whether Polly's earlier fantasy 
about a menacing brownie had also 
been caused by her food being 
doped. There had been no nausea 
that time, but it might have been 
a smaller dose. 

Time enough later to figure all 
that out; Sunny would be hungry 
again in a few hours. 

"Jim,", he directed, "you better 
beat it over to Anna Willcndorf's 
and tell her we'll need bottles right 
away. And get some milk while 
you're out. If you move fast, we'll 
have time to boil it and make the 



MARS CHILD 



153 



first formula before Sunny wakes 
up again." 

"Milk?" Jim said, dazed. 

"Milk. From one of the goats. 
Don't you know how?" 

"I've milked cows," Kandro said. 
"Couldn't be much different." 

"One other thing," Tony called 
to Jim, who was already at the 
door. "Nipples. Get Bob Carmichael for that. I think he can figure 
out some way . . . make sure he 
checks with Anna on the size." 

"Right." Jim closed the door behind him. 

u 

THEY had the milk boiling on 
the alky stove when Anna arrived with the first bottle. "The 
others are still cooling," she explained. "I'll go buck for them 
later, but I thought you'd need one 
right away." She handed it over, 
went to look down at the calmly 
sleeping baby, and asked Polly, 
"What can I do?" 

"I don't know. Nothing, I guess. 
The doctor's showing me how to 
make formula and I suppose that's 
all there is. It was awfully nice of 
you to get up to make the bottles. 
I feeL terrible about making so 
much trouble, but I just . . ." She 
trailed off helplessly. • 

"It wasn't your fault," Anna told 
her, then asked the doctor: "Do 
you want me to take over with the 
formula?" 

"There's no need to," Tony told 



her. "For that matter, you can go 
back to bed if you want to. There 
shouldn't be any more trouble tonight." 

"I have to go back and get the 
other bottles later anyhow," she 
protested. She took over at the 
stove, showing Polly the simple 
procedures of sterilization and 
measuring involved in the baby's 
formula. 

Jim came back from a second 
trip to the Lab in time to boil up 
one of the new nipples, and fill a 
bottle before Sunny woke. Polly, 
still shaken, but determined to behave normally, picked the baby up 
and changed him, warmed the bottle herself under Anna's watchful 
eye, and settled herself on a chair 
with baby and bottle. 

"You want to make sure the neck 
of the bottle is full of milk," Tony 
told her. "Aside from that, there's 
nothing difficult about it. Don't try 
to force his position. Let him wriggle around just as if he was at the 
■breast." He watched while she 
nudged the new plastic nipple into 
his mouth. "That's right. Fine. I 
think he's going to take it all 
right." 

Sunny sucked hungrily, wriggled, 
pushed his mouth sidewise, and 
then to the other side, sucking all 
the time. Milk spilled out the side 
of his mouth as he sucked without 
swallowing, and turned his reddening face from side to side, 
squirming desperately. 

Tony, suddenly frightened, took 



154 




 



a step forward. He could see the 
trouble clearly enough, but from 
above, looking down at the baby's 
face, Polly couldn't possibly see 
what was happening. 

Sunny was trying to make use of 
the peculiar sidewise suckling he 
had developed at his mother's 
breast, but he couldn't wedge his 
small mouth around the comparatively firm plastic of the new nipple. Tony opened his mouth to 
speak; in a minute the baby 
would . . . 

"Stop it! O-o-h-b slop it! You're 
choking — .'" 

Polly's hand, holding the bottle, 
shot away from the baby's mouth. 
Tony whirled to see Anna crumble 
to the floor, her mouth still open in 
the drawn-out shriek. 

"Jim !" he shouted. "Quick ! 
Take care of her!" Then he turned 
back again without waiting to see 
what Kandro did. He lifted the 
choking, convulsive infant out of 
Polly's limp arms, turned him upside down, and stroked the small 
stiff back vigorously. Within seconds, a thick curd of milk dribbled 
out of the baby's mouth, and the 
terrible gasping sounds turned into 
a low monotonous wailing. 

TONY put the baby back in his 
mother's arms, and turned briefly to look at Anna. Jim had lifted 
her on to the wall bunk. Tony 
checked quickly to make sure she 
hadn't hurt herself. 

"Just fainted," he said, puzzled, 



and gave Kandro instructions to restore consciousness. 

Sunny's wailing was turning into 
a steady, vigorous hunger cry. The 
doctor picked him up again, and 
wrapped him in one of the warm 
new blankets. 

"Where arc you taking Sunny?" 
asked Polly with shrill nervousness. 

"To the hospital." He turned to 
|im, still standing over the unconscious Anna. "Don't let her leave 
when she comes to, Jim. I'll be 
back later." 

He went out, carrying the screaming baby in one arm and his black 
bag in the other. 

The walk back to his own house 
was haunted. The ghost of a newborn baby went with him along the 
curving street in the dark, a ghost 
that gasped and choked as Sunny 
did, twisting in agony until it died 
again as it had already died a thousand thousand times for Tony, only 
the first time was the worst, the 
first baby born and the first one 
dead in Sim Lake, and he'd had to 
watch it all, the ghost of a baby 
that died for want o( air . . . 

He went in by the hospital door. 
He didn't want to sec Graham. 

Systematically, he turned on the 
lights and assembled his instruments in the sterilizer, turned a 
heat lamp on the examination table, 
and stripped off the baby's clothes. 
This couldn't go on; there had to 
be an answer to Sunny's troubles, 
and he was going to find it now, 
tonight. 



MARS CHILD 



Tony examined the child with 
every instrument and technique in 
his repertory. He felt it, probed 
and thumped it, listened to its interior plumbing. He could find 
nothing that resembled organic 
trouble. And be could think of no 
rational explanation for a mask 
baby breathing through its mouth. 

"It's got to be nasal," he said 
out loud. Three Limes he had used 
the otoscope, and three times he 
had found no obstruction. But — 

CAREFULLY, Tony slipped the 
mask off Sunny' s nose. He 
slipped it over the mouth instead, 
stifling its scream in mid-voice. At 
least, he thought grimly, the baby 
would have to breathe through the 
mask now if it wanted to keep on 
crying. The doctor began to probe 
delicately into one nostril, and Sunny 
promptly reacted with the unexpected. Impossible or not, he tried 
to draw a breath through his exposed nostrils, found an impediment and began to choke again. 

Tony withdrew the slender probe 
and stared at the gasping, redfaced infant. For just a moment, a 
clear and frightening picture of the 
other baby blotted out what was be


fore his eyes — the ghost baby that 
had come up the street with them. 
Then he looked at Sunny again and 
everything began to full Into place. 

Sunny was the wrong color. 

He should have been blue and he 
wasn't. He was gasping for air, he 
couldn't breathe; he should have 
been oxygen starved. And be tints 
flushed a bright crimson.' 

It wasn't lack of oxygen, then. It 
was impossible! But it was the only 
logical answer. Tony removed the 
mask from the baby's face with 
trembling hands. 

He wailed. 

It took Sun Lake City Colony 
Kandro less than thirty seconds to 
do what Tony knew he couldn't do 
— and most certainly would do. 
Sunny gasped sharply for a moment. Then this breathing became 
even, his color turned a normal 
healthy pink, and he resumed his 
monotonous hanger cry. 

Sunny didn't need an oxygen 
mask at all to survive on Mars, nor 
did he need OxEn. 

The fact Was scientifically paralyzing . . .. the child was adapted 
not to the rich air of Earth, but the 
deadly thin atmosphere of Mars ! 