Don't Live in the Past BY DAMON KNIGHT 



Abruptly the ceiling light 
dimmed and something swatted him 

on the rump three times in machine tempo, jarring him ail the way 
up his spine. Vargas found himself 
canted across his desk with his head 
in an overturned flower vase. The 
lights flickered again, went out altogether; and in the brief interval 
before they went on again a fourth 
more violent than the others, 
lifted Vargas all the way across his 
desk and onto the thick body-temper atu re carpet. 

He SAT up slowly, inarticulate 
with rage. It was at this moment that his assistant, Knut Everett 
Uoku LaSalle Choong, chose to 
burst into the room. Choong was 
(just as disheveled as his superior. 
He tripped over the doorsill. 
lurched wildly and brought up 
against Vargas' totem post, saving 
himself by clutching a white silk 
banner which carried the names and 
honors of two hundred and fiftynine of Vargas' most distinguished 
ancestors. 

Hanging dramatically from the 
banner, Choong bleated, "Chief! 
The pipelines have busted!" 

Vargas' face, which had been 
flushed a moment before, took on 
a blotchy appearance. "What, all 
of them?" lie whispered hoarsely. 

"All," said Choong tragically. 
"We're right over a fault, you 
know. The quake must ' have 

58 



snapped the pipelines like — like 
pi pest cms." 

Vargas scrambled up and 
clutched the other man by the slack 
of his sunflower-colored robe. "Did 
they cut transmission?" he demanded. 

"Yes, but — " 

"How long before the flow 
stopped?" 

"About two seconds, chief. Possibly a little more. I didn't stop to 
get the meter readings — " 

"Don't interrupt me!" said Vargas in a restrained shout. He took 
a firmer grip and brought his popeyed face close to Choong. "Wbcit 
tr.is behig IrunsnjiJIeJ P" 

"Flangs," said the assistant in a 
barely audible voice. He gulped. 
"Tweed ledums. Collapsed flooring. 
Argo paste. Rozzcrs. And — and — " 

Vargas had been puffing heavily. 
Now he held his breath for an instant. "Well?" 

"And mangels," said Choong in 
terror. "Three pipes of mangels." 

Vargas collapsed on the floor and 
looked at Choong through his fingers. "Oh, Great Blodgett, no!" 

"Yes." 

"Mangels!" 

Bedlam was growing in the outer 
olfices. There were running footsteps, shouts, shrieks of dismay. 

"Tweed ledums arc bad enough.'* 
^said Vargas. "But mangels! We'll 
be excommunicated. They'll hang 
our totems upside down." 

A red-faced man appeared in the 
doorway. His expression was noi 


 



pleasant. Vargas scrambled to his 
feet and both he and Choong stood 
at attention. 

"Two and five-sevenths seconds," 
the red-faced man remarked. "Not 
& very good response for trained 
monitors, is it? Too much Rhinebeer the night before, perhaps? Or 
reading a tape— composing poetry ? 
Catching a little nap ? Or was 
it — ?" He stopped, wincing, and 
looked at a white-metal doughnut 
strapped to his right wrist, above 
his ruffled sleeve. A tiny voice spoke 
at some length; Vargas could only 
catch the words "jackass" and "cretin." 

"Yes, sir," said the red-faced 
man, whose name, for the record, 
was Wallace Hyacinth Manuel 
Chiang Llewellyn. He barked at 
Vargas, "Turn on the tri-D!" 

Vargas stumbled over to his desk 
and obeyed. A live foot disc set into 
a low platform on his right glowed 
faintly, sparked and then spat a 
vertical stream of color. The image 
steadied and became the all too convincing three-dimensional replica of 
a portly man with a bulbous nose 
and long gray hair. 

"Enlarge your image!" it said 
sharply. 

Vargas jumped a foot and tremblingly adjusted the controls on his 
desk. The portly man frowned at 
them and said, "I happen to be 
Representative John Hsi BrightFeather Wilson Woodcock, Chairman of the Committee to 
Investigate the San Juaquin Dis


aster, which was formed in emergency session five months ago. Now, 
arc you all of the scoundrels who 
Were immediately responsible for 
this outrageous dereliction of duty? 
If not, get the rest of 'em in here. 
We'll get to the bottom of this if 
it's the last — " 

THE Chief Executive, His Honor 
Ibrahim L. Btandu Eriksson 
Dickey, frowned an executive 
frown. "Now let me get this 
straight," he said. "The goods are 
put into one end of the tube and 
they arc turned into some kind of 
temporal flow?" 

"That's it approximately, Your 
Honor." Representative Rowland 
Mokai Dejonge Baruch Schemkov, 
Chairman of the Plenary Committee 
which had replaced Representative 
Woodcock's Emergency Committee 
( Woodcock having been impeached) glanced at a few notes 
in his palm. He had briefed himself thoroughly. 

" In transit, Your Honor, the 
goods are in a special state of 
matter, in which they are partially 
out of our frame of spacio-tcmporal 
reference, and are carried along by 
the universal drift, thus apparently 
bypassing the laws of inertia and 
conservation of energy. We apply 
no force once they enter the tube; 
that's why tube transport is so 
cheap. 

"Moreover, the size and shape of 
the goods to be transported make 
no difference, since the spacial co


DOMT LIVE IN THE PAST 



ordinates arc not fixed with reference to normal spate. You might 
say that the net result is the same 
as if you had melted everything 
down to a kind of thin mush. This, 
of course, is done before the shipment is fed into the pipelines. I 
would not insult Your Honor's intelligence by explaining the method 
by which the shipments arc moved 
out of our space-time, for it is too 
well known to need explaining. 

"There is just enough contact 
between the two matter states so 
that the material being transported 
will not go through a solid of any 
thickness. In other words, we can 
lead the shipments anywhere in the 
world through a tube, even a very 
small one — the tubes we use are 
three-eighths inches in width. At 
the end of the tube, the expansion 
of the material releases it from the 
special state and it comes out in 
its original form, ready to be 
processed, stored, consumed or 
whatever." 

"I see," commented the Chief. 
"That's all very well, Representative, but what I want to know is 
this. Just why were we caught with 
our robes up in this situation?" 

Schemkov cleared his throat. 
"There appears," he admitted, "to 
have been some theoretical possibility of this happening all along. 
I have several abstracts, which I 
will turn over to your office, of 
articles and scientific papers in 
which reference is made to the 
possibility. It — " 



THE Chief looked down his long 
nose in a manner which suggested that the Representative was 
not quite human. He said slowly 
and earnestly, "And this possibility 
was given no consideration when 
the transport tubes were built? Is 
that it?" 

Representative Schemkov had 
been a member of the Subcommittee 
to Pass on Recommendations for 
the Erection of Chang- Wiley Transport Tubes, and he quaked in his 
sandals. "No safeguard was possible, Your Honor. What occurred 
was that the rupture in the lines 
took place at exactly the instant 
when that section of the planet was 
revolving directly opposite the line 
of universal drift — an event which 
astronomers assure me is very rare 
— and, in addition, I understand 
that the temporal displacement at 
that moment was exceptionally 
great. Under these conditions, the 
material released from the end of 
the tube did not reform normally, 
but was carried some distance back 
along the temporal line — " 

"How far back? I mean exactly, 
not a guess." 

"The mathematicians are still 
working on that, Your Honor, and 
the best they can say now is that ii 
was probably somewhere between 
the mid-Twentieth Century and the 
late Twenty-First. However, there 
is a strong possibility that none of 
the material reached any enclosed 
space which would attract.it, and 
that it may all have been dissipated 



60 




 



harmlessly in the form of incongment molecules." 

"But those materials," said the 
Chief grimly, "included what?" 

"Flangs," said Representative 
Schcmkov, "and tweedlcdums, and 
collapsed flooring, and argo 
paste — " 

"And mangels" added the 
Chief. "Isn't that correct?" 

"Yes, Your Honor." 

"And you tell me that there is a 
possibility that these things did not 
suddenly appear in the homes and 
business places of persons of 
Blodgett' s own time — " he touched 
his forelock, and Schcmkov automatically did the same — "causing 
Blodgett knows how many neuroses, 
how many psychoses, how many 
lost contracts, how many broken 
homes — " 

"But, Your Honor — " 

"—and do you realize that if 
these things do appear in that era, 
the total course of our civilization 
might be altered? That we might 
today become a world of many 
warring nations instead of one? Of 
many races instead of one blended 
humanity? That the great naatl to 
whom we owe all this, Blodgett 
himself, might be — " he lowered 
his voice in horror — "destroyed by 
your carelessness? Do you realize 
that, Representative -'" 

Even the Chief was stunned by 
his own frightening suggestion, 
while Schemkov felt terror climbing his spine. 

"No Blodgett?" Schemkov whis


pered. "You're — you're just -saying 
that to scare me. It isn't — possible.'' 

The Chief's face was rigid with 
fear. "It is. Blodgett was the greatest of our Sacred Ancestors, but he 
was superhuman in a human way, 
not supernatural. With all thosje 
ghastly things loose in his era, and 
— and mangels, especially . . ." « 

"Destroying any of our other 
Sacred Ancestors would be unthinkable enough,'' said Schcmkov. "Bujt 
Blodgett himself—!" 

"This wonderful civilization he 
constructed entirely by the might of 
his incredible mind," the Chief 
added bitterly. "Gone." 

"I'd have myself ritually beheaded," said Schemkov, "rather than 
live in any civilization Blodgett did 
not create." 

"Representative, the men responsible for this catastrophe arc going 
to be sorry they were ever born into 
the public service. We're going to 
get to the bottom of this, and when 
we drj — " 

"TTERE'S what it boils down 
J. A t o," said the square man 
in the gray diamond-dusted robe 
with a non-objective dragon. He 
made a triangle with his hands on 
the desk-top. "The kick went all 
the way upstairs and now it's come 
all the way down again. Everybody 
in fifteen echelons has a sore tail, 
the blame has been passed around, 
and now you're it. That's all." 

Ronald Mao Jean-Jacques von 
Hochbein Mazurin wore a slightly 



DON'T LIVE IN THE PAST 



stunned expression on his normally 
cheerful, pug-nosed face. The face, 
up to now, had been his fortune; it 
bore a slight but perceptible resemblance to that of Blodgett, the 
Father of the World, as he appeared in early prints and paintings. 
Mazurin had learned to emphasize 
the resemblance by assuming a 
soulful I ook , once he d iscovered 
that it usually earned him the 
juicier and less messy jobs in the 
Bureau. 

He said, "Now wait a minute. 
How do they know they can get me 
to the right time line with this new 
gimmick of theirs? Isn't that a contradiction in terms? If I'm in it, 
that's a new line, isn't it? I 
mean — " 

"I know what you mean," said 
the square man. "Every displacement moves the observer to a new 
time line. But remember, you're not 
required to do anything once you 
get there; all you have to do is see 
what happened. As I understand it, 
you won't be attached to that time 
line at all; you'll just be partially 
in it, the same way stuff in a transport tube is partially in this line. 
You can't possibly affect anything 
that happens there. There-tore, from 
a mathematical point of view, 
you're not in it at all. You'll be 
able to see, because light quanta 
have binding extensions on either 
side of the plenum-line proper, but 
you can't influence anything that 
happens there." 

Mazurin was feeling uncomfort


able. "How do I get back?" 

"Don't worry," said the square 
man impatiently. "You'll get back 
all right. You'll be at the end of a 
pencil of temporal energy all the 
time. That's what will be holding 
you in the partly there state. After 
a few days, they'll send an impulse 
along it to bring you back. You'll 
have enough time to do the job 
properly, because if any of that 
stuff did come out where it would 
menace our Sacred Ancestors, it 
wouldn't have come out all at the 
same time or the same place. A 
difference of micro-seconds here 
could mean hours or days there." 

1 1HEN that's why nothing hap-L pened to our civilization yet," 
Mazurin said. "The things probably haven't landed." 

"It could be," the square man 
agreed worriedly. "Or it might not 
happen on this time line at all — 
the results of any change in the 
past could leave this one alone and 
affect only alternate futures." 

"Do you really think it might?" 
asked Mazurin hopefully. 

"No. Or maybe. How in hell 
would I know? All I'm supposed 
to discuss with you is sending you 
back to the past, to the time of 
Blodgett — " They touched their 
forelocks reverently — "At the end 
of a pencil of temporal energy, and 
that it'll bring you back okay in a 
few days." 

"Sounds like deep-sea diving at 
the end of a piece of string," said 



62 




 



Ma&uxin. "What happens if the 
power fails, or the contact is 
broken some other way?" 

"Then I suppose you'd be stuck 
in that line — which would, of 
course, immediately become another line. Not that it matters. But 
you wouldn't be too badly off if 
that did happen, I'd say. That was 
a pretty interesting period, not too 
Uncivilized, and you'd see a lot of 
action." 

"Umm," said Mazurin. He rapidly calculated his chances of 
getting another job if he were discharged and blacklisted by the ICS 
Intelligence Bureau— zero. "All 
right, I'm your boy." 

The square man came around 
the desk and patted his shoulder 
with a hand like a jeweled bunch 
of sausages. "Good man," he said 
emotionally. "I knew you'd comethrough, the Bureau knows how to 
pick 'em. Get your affairs wound 
Up and report to the Physics Bureau at twelve o'clock tomorrow." 

MAZURIN turned up in the 
white-tiled laboratory ten 
minutes late, with traces of lipstick 
still adhering to his right ear and 
exuding an enviable odor of good 
rice wine. In the interests of truth, 
it must be stated that he did not 
entirely absorb all the briefing hereceived before he was thrust unceremoniously into the temporal 
projection machine. 

He retained a definite impression ot the nun hine it self, which 



was of an unpleasant hollow -iube 
shape and emitted a disquieting 
hum, together with a sharp smell 
of ozone- He recollected that, once 
arrived at his destination, lie would 
be able to walk about on any available surface, but unable to move 
any solid object or enter into any 
sort of communication with the inhabitants. 

The breathing apparatus strapped 
over his mouth and nose was reminder enough that he was dc 
pendent upon his own air suj^ply. 
He recalled being asked it he bad 
been checked out in lip reading 
and Twentieth Century English, 
and oi replying, with hurt dignity, 
that he most certainly had. Then 
there was some more talk, during 
which he had been distracted by a 
tendency of his knees to swivel 
sharply, and then he had been 
grasped by the nape of the neck 
and his heels and slung into the 
machine. 

It was a Lyscnko-bcgotten silly 
business, altogether. He seemed to 
be sitting now on nothing in particular, in the middle of a bright 
blue sky with clouds in it, while 
an . obviously spurious landscape 
(flat, with antique square houses 
and a lot of palm trees, the whole 
being tilted at a forty-five degree 
angle) gently rose toward him. He 
watched this process with growing 
disapproval until the scene grew to 
full size and he bumped gently 
against a sidewalk which felt like 
sponge rubber. _ 



DON'T LIVE IN THE PAST 



He stood up and soared some 
twenty feet into the air, coming 
down in an approximately upright 
position. He looked around him. 
breathing heavily. His head was 
clearing, and he didn't like it. 
What had seemed Idle nonsense a 
few moments ago was now assuming the aspect of an incredible 
reality. The buildings around him 
were angular and massive, with an 
appalling quantity of extremely 
ugly embellishments in the way of 
glass bricks, chromium statues, 
walls of enormous windows. The 
people were all either walking or 



driving antique four-wheeled vehicles, and most of them were 
dressed in garments constructed on 
a curious cylinder principle, also 
with a great deal of angular detail 
work. 

This period, he recalled, had 
been addicted to what its denizens 
termed "the functional" in design. 
Not a curved line anywhere. 

Culturally, this was a dismal era, 
yet being in it gave Mazurin a holy 
thrill. There was practically no 
doubt about it— Blodgett himself 
was alive at this actual moment ! 

Directly in front of Mazurin, 





64 




 



the st rcet widened into a sort 
of village square, in the center of 
which a wooden platform was 
erected. A man in black stood on 
this platform, evidently making a 
speech to a small crowd assembled 
around him. Mazurin saw several 
instruments which were evidently 
crude vision cameras. He watched 
the speaker's lips, and made out a 
few phrases: "... the principles 
of loyalty and obedience to which 
we are all dedicated . . . one world, 
one people, one leader, one glorious 
ideal . . ." 

Interested, he walked closer. A 



gentleman approach ing the crowd 
on a tangential course strode into 
him before he had time to get out 
of the way, and Mazurin found 
himself violently propelled several 
yards away, to bounce from still 
another moving spectator and tome 
to rest finally sprawled on the pavement. 

He got up determinedly, soaring 
as before, and this time leaped 
scjuarely into the thick of the crowd 
before any other outriders could 
get at him. The crowd was closejucked, and he stood with very 
little difficulty on their heads. Now 




he was near enough to read, the 
speaker's lips easily, and he followed the speech with attention. 

THIS, our youngest but not 
least hallowed day, we must 
dedicate ourselves in our hearts to 
the eternal principles for which so 
many brave men and women died. 
For if wc do, those men and women 
are not ten years dead, but gloriously living in the eternal atmosphere 
of our truth. If we do this, the 
world did not end for them on that 
terrible day, August the seventeenth, nineteen eighty-one. The 
world will never end for them and 
for ourselves!" 

The speaker paused. "Citizens of 
the world, a salute to the heroes of 
the World State!" 

A man to the right of the speaker's platform, dressed in an exceedingly ugly green uniform, raised a 
brass instrument to his lips and 
blew mightily on it. Mazurin 
leaped nimbly as the citizens on 
whom he stood took off their hats 
and bowed their heads. The musician got through with whatever 
sounds he had been producing, and 
a row of similarly dressed men behind him raised antique rapid-fire 
rifles to their shoulders, aiming 
diagonally upward. 

Mazurin, directly in the line of 
fire, automatically threw himself 
flat, but he was still unused to his 
new condition and the motion sent 
him in a lazy parabola five feet 
over the crowd's heads. 

66 



Tin.' guns fired in unison, but a 
peculiar thing happened. From 
three-quarters of them leaped 
streaks of fire; from the other quarter issued something else entirely. 
At the end of each barrel, a dark 
blue bubble appeared. The bubbles 
swelled rapidly, more and more of 
them extruding, until they became 
ovoids three feet long and two feet 

wide, dotted with stumpy tentacles* 
Then they dropped out of Mazurin's vision, but he could judge their 
activity by the way the crowd 
scattered. 

Mazurin leaped nimbly and 
watched the square empty itself beneath him. The uniformed men 
broke ranks and fled, some dropping their guns. The crowd was 
spreading out as quickly as those 
in the center could force the others 
back. In the cleared space, the blue 
ovoids were leaping like f rogs, 
pausing and leaping again. At each 
pause, a toothless mouth gaped, and 
Mazurin could almost hear the bass 
"Urk!" they emitted. 

Nobody was left on the speaker's 
platform except the speaker himself, who had misjudged his vault 
over the railing and got himself 
tangled in the large black-and-red 
flag which draped it. While Mazurin watched, one of the blue 
ovoids bounded onto the speaker's 
back, settled down and began contentedly munching his jacket. 

As he floated down, Mazurin 
took a notebook from his pocket 
and wrote: Tweedledums: probably 


 



pineapple-flavored; very unripe and 
active; emerged without damper 
controls and broke up large religions gathering, j Tightening approx. 
500 persons. 

II 

MAZURIN sat alone in the sunwashed and empty square, 
letting the full enormity of the 
scene he had just witnessed seep 
into him. After a while he took out 
his notebook again and tried to calculate the probable number of surviving descendants, in his own 
world, of the five hundred people 
who had just been introduced to 
twecdledums. He had got up to 
five generations, and reached the 
utterly discouraging figure of 
20,420, when he gave up. 

He shuddered. He was not a devout man by nature, but he had had 
the usual training as a child, and 
the idea of so much as being disrespectful to ancestors — much less 
confronting them unexpectedly 
with a troop of tweedledufns!— 
made him cringe as if he had 
touched something unclean. 

And the other things had still 
to be accounted for: the rozzers, the 
collapsed flooring, the argo paste, 
the— 

No. It was better not to think of 
that. 

He got morosely to his feet and 
watched as the first of a long line 
of archaic ground -vehicles zoomed 
into the square and skidded to a 



stop. Green-uniformed men got out 
and ran off in all directions, till the 
square and the surrounding streets 
were covered with them. Presently 
a group of them came running 
back to the cars, carrying a tweedledum which was struggling furiously to escape. After a while they 
captured another one. 

/ hope they get them all, Mazurin thought; but he doubted that 
they would. Free of the projected 
energy that ordinarily kept them 
quiescent, a live tweedledum was 
the most active and elusive artificial food product ever invented. 
They had been one of Mazurin's 
favorite dishes; but he suspected 
now, with a sliding lurch in his 
stomach, that he would never, never 
eat one again. 

Something else seemed to be going on at the far side of the square. 
Resignedly, he propelled himself 
that way. A large knot of the greenuniformed men had collected near 
a doorway to one of the square 
buildings and was slowly moving 
back toward the cars. Mazurin 
leaped onto the heads of the crowd 
for a better view, and, approaching 
the center of the group, found that 
the quarry was not tweedledums 
this time, but people. A young man 
and a girl, to be exact. They were 
staggering along with their heads 
down , pushed and dr agged by 
many hands. As Mazurin watched, 
someone reached over someone 
else's arm and struck the girl in 
the face. 



DON'T LIVE IN THE PAST 



67 



MAZURIN'S first reaction was 
horror; his second was bewilderment. He saw now that what 
his superior had described as an 
"interesting" era could only be 
painful to any person of normal 
sensibilities; for all of these people, 
without exception, were ancestors 
in one sense or another! 

And why were these officials, 
who were possibly ancestors, maltreating two young possible ancestors in this manner, instead of 
running down twccdlcdums as they 
had evidently been sent to do? 
Could it be that the boy and the 
girl were suspected of being responsible for the catastrophe? 

It was absurd, but the only explanation he could think of. He 
followed, soaring over the rooftops, 
as the car containing the two 
zoomed off again. 

lie managed to keep in sight of 
the car, though it moved much 
too fast for him, and saw the two 
captives half -dragged, half -carried 
up the steps of a large, cubical 
black building. 

Once inside the building, however, he was lost in a maze of 
corridors full of hurrying, worricdlooking people. The place was three 
stories tall above the ground, and 
ten stories below, and there were 
hundreds of separate offices and 
Suites. It was not till a full hour 
liter that he found them, in a 
brilliantly lit cell facing a whitecnamcled corridor, in the lowest 
level of all. 



If it weren't for the bruises and 
cuts on their faces, Mazurin 
thought, they would have been a 
handsome couple. The boy was tall 
and lean, with a dark, thoughtful 
face; the girl was neatly rounded 
and had a charming head of almostplatinum hair. 

They were sitting side by side 
on a hard, narrow bench that ran 
from wall to wall of their five-byfivc cubicle. The harsh glare that 
illuminated them was hard on Mazurin's eyes; he put his polarized 
goggles on. They themselves had 
shut their eyes tight against the 
fierce light, and their heads were 
close together, their hands clasped. 

Mazurin watched their lips. The 
girl was saying, "We must be 
guilty, of course. I mean guilty of 
something." 

"Or they never would have 
arrested us," the young man finished after a pause. 

"Yes," said the girl. "They arc 
always right. AJwttyj. So we must 
be guilty. And yet it's hard to 
see — " 

"Hush, dear. It isn't for us to 
question what they do. Perhaps we 
have committed some crime without even being aware of it. Or 
maybe — " 

"Yes?" 

"Well, maybe they arc just testing us, or — or something." 

THE girl's eyes opened for a 
second. "Oh, Rob, do you suppose that's it?" 



68 




 



"It might be. Certainly wc didn't 
cause any disturbance at the patriotic meeting that wc know of." 

"But it's not for us to judge." 

"No." 

For some time, while he watched 
this conversation, Mazurin had been 
increasingly aware that the two 
young people were doing something 
rather odd. It had to do with their 
hands. He stopped watching their 
lips altogether and concentrated on 
the hands. 

They were clasped loosely together on the bench between the 
two, half covered by the drape of 
the girl's flowered skirt. Between 
the boy's palms and the girl's, Mazurin could see a constant flicker 
of motion, fingers flashing back and 
forth, first hers, then his. 

Now this, thought Mazurin, was 
extremely interesting. Beyond a 
doubt, the two prisoners were communicating by means of some ancient form of the finger-code he 
had learned as a raw cadet in the 
Internal Security Commission. If he 
could only get closer, he was almost 
sure, he could read it . . . 

Cadcnced footsteps came down 
the corridor. It was a white-robed 
attendant, flanked by two of the 
green-clad officials, each with a 
drawn missile gun. The attendant 
was carrying something in a white 
enamel tray, and in his other hand 
he had something that looked like 
the key to an old-fashioned mechanical lock. 

Clearly, they were going to open 



the young people's cell, to feed 
them, most probably. If he could 
slip in while they did it . . . Caution urged him back, curiosity drew 
him forward. There was no danger, 
he told himself. If the cell was 
opened once, it would be opened 
again, and he could get out. He 
made up his mind. 

The two guards stepped back, 
guns ready, as the attendant opened 
the door and stepped inside, depositing the tray — which did, indeed, contain food of some sort — 
on a shelf. As he stepped out again, 
Mazurin, lithe as a rozzer, squeezed 
in past him. Simultaneously, two 
things happened. 

The door shut with a clang. 

Mazurin topped to the metal 
floor under a totally unexpected 
access of weight. 

The two prisoners, the attendant, 
and the guard turned to stare at 
him with saucer eyes. 

WHILE he sat there, feeling as 
if someone had slugged him 
from behind, the three men outside exploded into activity. The 
attendant fled with hoarse cries 
down the corridor, and the two 
guards threw themselves flat, aiming their curious weapons at Mazurin. The two people in the cell 
with him, he was vaguely aware, 
had moved as far away as they 
could get and were sitting in 
stricken silence. 

Mazurin said weakly, "Kamerad. 
Tovarich. Ami." Then it occurred 



DON'T LIVE IN THE PAST 



to him that these men ■ spoke English and, anyway, they apparently 
didn't intend to shoot. Not as long 
as he didn't move, at any rate. He 
shut up and tried to think. What 
the Blodgctt had happened to him? 

The metal floor of the cell was 
hard and told under his palms. He 
was here, all right, and not on the 
end of any pencil of temporal 
energy. It had happened when the 
cell door shut behind him. 

He looked at the door. It was a 
grid of stout chrome-plated bars, 
with an interval between the bars 
of about three centimeters. A nonsense phrase came into his mind, 
"Eve and Agrid," which meant 
nothing. It wasn't Eve and Agrkl; 
it was Eve and Adam. Eve and 
Agrid. Eve and Agrid. Avcandagrid— 

Even a grid. 

Mazurin shut his eyes and 
g roan ed . He opened them again 
when one of the guards made a 
warning sort of noise, and stared 
miserably at the limited vista before him. "Above all," one of the 
technicians had said, "don't get 
yourself completely surrounded by 
metal, even a grid. It will break 
the temporal beam and you'll be 
marooned there ..." 

Marooned. Stuck with a lot of 
irrational people in a barbaric century. In a cell, at that. Under suspicious circumstances. 

He thought about it gloomily for 
a few minutes before, being a naturally cheerful young man, he tried 



to find the brighter side of it. Even 
then, the best he could do was, 
Weil, things ain't get any worse, 
and Blodgett himself is eilire right 
tit this moment. 

Running footsteps approached 
down the corridor, and a squadron 
of the green-uniformed men hove 
into view. Two of them had a 
thing on a wheeled tripod that 
looked as if it were capable of 
blowing out the side of a building. 
The rest spread out with drawn 
hand-guns. The two on the floor 
got up, saluted and joined the* 
semi-circle. 

"Stand ■ up !" said one who 
seemed to be in command. 

Mazurin obeyed with alacrity. 

"Remove that mask ! Put your 
hands behind your head! Face the 
wall!" 

When he had done all that, the 
cell Jour opened, someone took 
two swift strides inside, and then 
colored lights detonated inside 
Mazurin's head. 

He couldn't have been entirely 
out, because when he came to he 
was already thinking, Very cjjir/eni 
police methods. They didn't take 
any chances. Just the way an ISC 
man would hate handled it , . . 

HIS head ached abominably, and 
his hands and feet seemed 
swollen. Green- trousered legs were 
scissoring back and forth in front 
of his eyes, and the gray concrete 
floor was moving rapidly backward 
under him. He was, he realized. 



70 




 



trussed ii j> like a rozzer, be ini; 
dragged down the corridor. 

His head cleared a little and he 
glanced to either bide. The boy and 
the girl were in the party, in approximately the same condition as 
himself. 

They reached an elevator, and 
Mazurin got a view of its scuffed 
metal floor before they carried him 
out of it again. More corridor, 
black-tiled this time. Several turns. 
Then a doorway with an ebony sill, 
followed by flooring of some brown 
composition, probably a primitive 
pressed fiber. 

Finally he was set upright against 
a slender metal post and manacled 
there. The boy and girl were similarly disposed of to his right. 

A round man jn the green uniform stalked quickly in and stared 
at Mazu rin. His little blue eyes 
darted quickly from Mazurin's 
cloth-of-platinum robe to his face, 
then to the equipment hung at his 
belt. 

"All right," the round man said, 
"who arc you?"' 

Ma2urin opened his mouth, then 
shut it again. Tell the truth? Oh, 
no. 

His training as a law officer 
told him exactly what would 
happen to him if he did. But what 
lie could he invent that would save 
him the pain of being questioned? 
For he had no doubt that being 
questioned in this era would be 
painful, despite the rudimentary 
methods. 



The beat thing, he decided, was 
to say nothing. He tried it. 

The round man nodded decisively. "We'll see," he said. He turned 
as a set und and a third officer Strode 
in. All three stared at Mazurin, 
then turned and went to the far 
end of the room. Mazurin cc.ild 
read their lips easily. 

"*Wc knew they were cooking up 
something, but wc had no reports 
that even hinted at anything like 
this." 

"I don't like the smell of it. 
Why would they materialize him in 
that cell and then let us capture 
him? Better get him out of the city 
as fast as possible." 

The round man got in the way 
at that point and Mazurin missed 
sonic of it. Then all of them turned 
to come back, and he caught one 
more sentence: "Put them all in one 
cell, and we may learn something." 

The three of them were detached from the pillars, efficiently 
trussed up again, and hurried outside to the waiting maw of a long 
black paddy-wagon. 

IT WAS a long ride and an uncomfortable one. Not being able 
to talk under the eyes of t heguards, Mazurin had plenty of time 
to think, and, by the time half an 
hour had gone by, he was shoulderdeep in gloom. 

He was roused out of himself 
when the car suddenly leaped six 
inches off the road, came down and 
leaped again. Looking back through 



DON'T LIVE IN THE PAST 



71 



the barred window, Mazurin could 
see that they had left the smooth 

concrete highway and were rushing 
down a cowpafh of some kind. He 
and the two young people, all with 
their wrists manacled around a 
horizontal bar, bounced like popcorn. The two guards crooked their 
free arms around stanchions. 

Glancing down, Mazurin noted 
that the two kids were at it again 
with the fingers. He looked away 
miserably, then peeked back. It was 
his damned curiosity that had put 
him there; he might as well satisfy 
it while he could — if he could. 

THE code was the same, all right: 
five standard positions for each 
of the five fingers gave you twentyfive letters, and a clenched fist was 
"X" if you needed it. After a moment, he could read what the boy 
was saying without difficulty. 

'\ . . in my shoe. If they give 
me a chance . . ." 

"Charlie, I'm scared!" 
"Only way. They'll get it all out 
of us otherwise. They know how 
to. Would have done it before now 
if he hadn't turned up." 
"Think he's one of ours?" 
"Can't be; we haven't anything 
like that. Don't understand it, but 
can't take any chances. He might 
be a spy." 

They meant bim, Mazurin surmised. An interesting century, indeed. 

The girl again: "Okay. I guess 
it's worth it." 



It occurred to Mazurin. with an 
ineffable shock, that it must be 
poison Charlie had in his shoe, of 
all unsanitary places . . . They 
were going to kill themselves, to 
keep the authorities from patting 
them to question. Evidently, either 
a large and fanatical fraternal society, or else a revolutionary group; 
all kinds of secrets. But he couldn't 
let them commit suicide ! Such a 
thing would be an ineradicable blot 
on the totems of their thousands 
of descendants. Even worse, he 
didn't know their surnames; they 
might be his own great-great -greatgreat grandparents. 

Worst of all, he suddenly realized, their suicide might blot more 
than totems — himself, for example, 
right out of existence! 

He could alert the guards, of 
course, but the more he thought 
about that, the less he liked it. 
Questioning, this far back in history, would be sure not to be subtle. 
From one point of view it was perfectly sensible of them to prefer 
poi son . Bum pt If only the car 
would stop bouncing for a minute 
so he could think . . . 

The car abruptly outdid itself. 
Mazurin found himself whirling 
around the horizontal bar like a 
demented acrobat, while two green 
blurs that were the guards soared 
airily to the forward end of the 
compartment. Something struck Mazurin a dizzying blow on the head, 
the car bounced twice more and 
came to rest, while the echoes of a 



72 




 



thunderous explosion died away in 
his ears. 

Ill 

THE car was canted, half in a 
ditch. The guards, piled up 
against the forward wall, were not 
moving. Charlie and the girl were 
half stunned but conscious. Mazurin pulled futilely at his wristcuffs; they were too tight even for 
his trained hands to slip. 

Acrid fumes drifted into the car 
through a burst seam in the rear. 
Mazurin sniffed, and felt a cold 
dew break out on his forehead. 

"Oh, what is it?" asked the girl 
faintly, 

"Argo paste," said Mazurin, jittering. "It must have started coming out of the exhaust or the jet 
tube — whatever these vehicles use. 
Oh, sacred name . . ." 

"What's argo paste?" demanded 
the youth groggily. "I never heard 
of the stuff." 

"I know you haven't," Mazurin 
said. He groaned. "They use it to 
burn through metal. It's supposed 
to come out into glazed vats. If only 
it's stopped — " 

The fumes grew thicker. Mazurin 
looked out the barred rear window. 

"We're in a 'pool of it," he said. 
He turned. "Can you reach those 
two?" he asked the boy, nodding 
toward the two unconscious guards. 

The boy shook his head. "They 
haven't got our keys, anyhow. The 
guard up front with the driver has 



them. And he's knocked out, or 
he'd have been back here by now." 

The car lurched and settled. A 
section of the floor began smoking 
and dripped away, leaving a puckered gap through which ihey could 
see a slowly heaving pool of gray 
paste. 

"Can you get your shoe off?" 
Mazurin asked suddenly. 

Charlie gave him a look full of 
suspicion. 

"Your shoe," Mazurin repeated 
with agonized patience. "Either one, 
it doesn't matter." He slipped his 
left foot out of his own elastictopped sandal, grasped it between 
his toes and held it up. "Mine's 
no good, you sec? Too thin. Yours 
is made of thick leather. Can you 
take it off?" 

"I don't get it," said Charlie, 
baffled. A heavier drift of choking 
fog came up through the vanishing 
floor. "Hut — " He grunted, raising 
and twisting his leg until his manacled hands could reach the laces. 
"Here." He dropped the shoe and 
kicked it along to Mazurin. 

The car settled again. The pool 
of gray slime was now only a foot 
below them. Mazurin grasped the 
shoe with his toes, shifting his grip 
till it was as firm as he could manage. Then he held on like glUM 
death and lowered the shoe 
through the gap in the floor, into 
the gray pool un derneath. He 
brought it up quickly. 

There was a good gob of the 
stuff in the heel end of the shoe, 



DON'T LIVE IN THE PAST 



73 



about two inches from his own 
bare foot, but it was smoking 
furiously. In another second, the 
leather would be eaten through. 

He brought the shoe up, under 
the horizontal bar, over it again — 
and dumped the paste on the bar 
just as the leather gave way. The 
metal smoked acridly and melted. 

Mazurin jettisoned the shoe, 
jammed his foot back into his own 
sandal, and peered at the bar 
through watering eyes. There was 
a hearty bite out of it, but a slender 
tongue of metal still united the two 
sections. 

"Now!'' said Mazurin. "Pull!" 

He braced his back and shoved 
at the bar till his muscles cracked, 
while Charlie, his face white with 
strain, pulled from his side. The 
car lurched once more, and the 
gray surface beneath leaped up to 
the level of the floorboards. Mazurin got his feet up on the bar 
and gave one last desperate shove. 
The metal gave a f>i"g and moved 
a fraction of an inch. Through the 
smoke, Mazurin saw that the 
narrow part had snapped. He 
pushed some more, until the bar 
reluctantly bent a full three inches 
out of its original line. 

KNEELING on the bench, Mazurin held his wrists carefully 
away from the smouldering ends of 
the bar and slipped his arms free. 

"Nice work so far," said Charlie, 
"but what about the door?" 

He slid down to the end of the 



bench and moved his own arms 
free of the bar. The car tilted again 
as the girl moved to follow him. 

"Get back!" said Mazurin urgently. He motioned Charlie to the 
forward end of the car. "Balance 
the weight while she gets loose." 
He looked at the door that still 
barred their way to freedom. The 
lock, naturally, was about halfway 
up, better than two feet from the 
level of the argo paste. "Other 
shoe," he told Charlie. "Can't be 
helped." 

Charlie took it off and handed 
it down to him. The girl had got 
her arms free now and was leaning 
forward with the wristcuffs spread, 
evidently intending to touch the 
connecting piece to the smoking 
end of the bar. 

"No !" yelled Mazurin, and she 
started back. "Horrible stuff — get a 
drop of it on your flesh, no way 
to stop it. Get back with Charlie, 
please." 

Squatting on the bench, he leaned 
forward precariously and dipped 
the second shoe into the seething 
gray mass. He got a bigger quantity this time, and he could control 
it better. He brought It up swiftly 
and caref ully pou red it over the 
lock, peering through the haze to 
make sure he had the right place. 

Smoke gushed out, and he 
couldn't sec what was happening; 
but he pushed the door outward, 
and it gave. He stood up, put one 
foot on the opposite bench, and 
got the other wedged into the 



74 



&ALAXY science fiction 



barred opening of the door. A push 
and a twist, and he was precariously balanced outside, directly over 
the center of the viscous, smoking 
pool. 

The car settled again under his 
weight. He scrambled to get both 
feet on top of the door, lunged and 
sprawled across the smooth top of 
the car. Panting, he got his feet 
under him again and flung himself 
forward, feeling the car tilt slightly 
under him as he moved. 

"All right," he called, "come out 
quickly!" 

He saw a motion beneath him, 
and turned as the door of the cab 
opened and a head thrust itself out. 
The head shook itself, dazedly. Mazurin, flat on his stomach, leaned 
out and slammed his manacled 
wrists apologetically under the 
man's ear. 

"Sorry, Sacred Ancestor," he 
said regretfully. "One must take 
sides, it would seem." 

THE guard dived slowly and 
gracefully out of the open 
door and sprawled on the grass outside. Mazurin, overbalanced by the 
blow, felt himself slipping, grabbed 
for a hand-hold, then let himself 
go. He landed on his shoulders, 
rolled quickly and stood up, poised 
to leap into the cab. But the second 
uniformed man was still hunched 
over with his flattened face pressed 
against the windshield. A trickle of 
blood trailed from his ear. 

Mazurin looked up as Charlie 



appeared on top of the car, followed by the girl. "All secure 
here," he said. "You two all 
right?" 

"We're just fine," said Charlie 
grimly, "and we're certainly grateful to you for saving our lives. But 
would you mind giving us a hint 
of what this is all about?" He and 
the girl jumped down beside Mazurin, and Charlie gestured toward 
the dwindling rear end of the car. 
"Argo paste," he said. "And those 
things back in Welfare Square." 

"Tweedledums," Mazurin supplied helpfully. "Pineapple-flavored, I think." 

"Tweedledums," repeated the 
boy. "And you. What are you, the 
Mad Hatter? If so, what are you 
going to pull out of your hat next ?" 

"There's lots more," Mazurin 
said gloomily. "We haven't seen 
the flangs yet, or the collapsed 
flooring, or the rozzers, or — " 

"Wait a minute," Charlie interrupted. "Just one minute. One 
thing at a time. What are flangs?" 

Mazurin searched his mind for 
the archaic word. Castards ? Something like that. Ces, cis, cos — "Custards," he said. "From the French 
flm. although I believe there was 
some influence dating from the 
Early Hollywood Era. They're mobile, but not as much as the tweedledums. They only creep around, 
and they like to crawl into any dark 
enclosed space they find. So you 
just leave them with a bunch of 
open pastry shells, and — " 



DON'T LIVE IN THE PAST 



75 



Charlie interrupted again, "All 
right, I knew it was going to be 
something like that. I won't ask 
you what rozzers are." 

"Like a very slender pig," said 
Mazurin promptly. "Fast as lightning. Some people like to race 
them." 

"And eat them." 

"Eat rozzers?" Mazurin exclaimed in disgust. "We'd sooner 
starve !" 

CHARLIE looked at him, breathing heavily. "All I want to 
know," he said, "is where all these 
things that nobody ever heard of 
tame from, and that includes you." 

"Well, I'll tell you," said Mazurin reluctantly, "but I have a 
feeling you won't believe me." 

He squatted and began going 
through the pockets of the guard 
who lay on the greensward at their 
feet. 

"No," said Charlie, and gave 
him a push that sent him sprawling. Charlie knelt quickly and removed the guard's hand-gun from 
its holster. Backing up, he handed 
the gun to the girl and then went 
back to the guard. "Sorry, but I 
don't see how we can trust you." 

He found the guard's keys, stood 
up and held the gun trained on 
Mazurin while the girl unlocked 
his wristcuffs; then they traded 
while he unlocked hers. It seemed, 
Mazurin thought ruefully, that they 
had no present intention of unlocking his. 

76 



"Can I get up now?" he asked 
* mildly. 

"Yes, - * said Charlie. He gestured 
with the gun to their left, across 
an open field that ended at a wooded ridge. "We've got to get under 
cover." He glanced at the gun in 
his hand, then back at the smoking 
rear of the paddy-wagon. "What 
do you think, Eve?" 

"It would be nice to have it," 
the girl said regretfully, "but it's 
sure tipoif." 

"Right," said Charlie, and he 
returned the gun to the guard"s 
holster. Then he pulled the keys 
out of his pocket and replaced them 
as well. 

"Hey," objected Mazurin, "when 
do I get out of these things?" 

"Later — -maybe," said Charlie. 
"By the time anybody finds the 
car, there's a good chance that the 
whole rear end will be gone, and 
they'll figure we went with it. But 
not if wc take anything from this 

e u y-" 

"They'll die if we leave them 
unconscious in this pool of argo 
paste !" Mazurin said, horrified. 

"What of it?" Charlie wanted to 
know. "You don't think they'd let 
us live long, do you?" 

Mazurin paused. "They wouldn't?" 

"Certainly not," said Eve. 
"That's how they stay in power — 
kill off the opposition." 

"But I'm not the opposition," 
Mazurin denied. 

"Oh, no?" Charlie demanded 



77 



threateningly, and Mazurin decided 
abruptly that he was. Charlie said, 
"You don't know how close you 
came to joining these stinkers." 

Eve started walking- "Let's go. 
Someone may come along and ask 
why we're not helping our gallant 
lads out of danger." 

THEY headed across the field, 
Mazurin in the lead. He felt 
a little sick. In his own time, he 
tried to tell himself, he'd seen men 
killed often enough for exactly 
similar reasons. But this wasn't his 
own time; this time he belonged 
to his Sacred Ancestors, some of 
them were being left to die in argo 
paste. He felt a wave of resentment against the two youngsters 
behind him, and then recoiled 
from that, too. They could be his 
ancestors. Now just what in the 
name of Blodgett could a man do 
in a situation like this? 

They pushed through a tangle of 
saplings and undergrowth for what 
seemed like several hours, until 
they reached a little stream. ; Eve 
sat down, gasping, and the other 
two followed suit. 

"It's getting too late to eo much 
farther, anyway," said Charlie. He 
inspected his shoeless feet glumly, 
then turned to Mazurin. "All 
right," he said, "let's have your 
story, improbable or not." 

Mazurin told them, from the beginning. They listened in discouraging silence. Finally, "Is that 
all ?" Charlie asked. 



"That's all," said Mazurin 
"What happens next / don't know, 
except that we'll probably run into 
the rozzers committing a nuisance 
in City Hall, or somebody triggering a section of collapsed flooring 
and getting knocked into the next 
canton, or — " 

"What makes you think you're 
going lo see any city hall?" asked 
Charlie ominously. 

"No reason, except that defiling 
a public building is one of the few 
supreme- crimes I haven't been responsible i or yet. " 

"How's (hat again?" said 
Charlie, confused , 

"Don't you remember what he 
said aboi it an c es tor wo rsh i p ? " 
asked Eve. "It makes sense. He 
feels directly responsible for all 
these tilings that have been happening to people who, for a! I he 
knows, may be his own ancestors." 
She frowned at Mazurin, opened 
her mouth to speak again. 
"How—" 

"Now wait a minute," Charlie 
burst out. "You're not assuming 
that he's telling the truth, are 
you ? ' ' 

"You wait," she told him. Then, 
to Mazurin, "See if I've got this 
right. You come from about four 
centuries from now, and in your 
time the World State is an established lact. There never was any 
successful attempt to overthrow it. 
Is that right?" 

Mazurin nodded. 

Charlie snorted. "Well, if wc 



78 




 



fell for thai, we'd simply knuckle 
under and let Blodgett's hoodlums 
have it all their own way." 

"Hoodlums ?" Mazurin echoed, 
touching his forelock. "Our most 
Sacred of Ancestors!" 

Charlie peered at Mazurin 
puzzledly. "Is that what you're for, 
to convince \is we can't win? It 
seems a little too simple-minded 
to deserve all this buildup." 

MAZURIN shook his head. 
' 'You don' t quite un derstand," he said. "This is a different 
time-line from the one I came from. 
It's different because I'm in it, 
here. Anything can happen now." 

Charlie looked more baffled than 
ever. 

"Listen," said Eve, "just suppose he is telling the plain truth. 
And as you said a minute ago, if 
the Worstas had all that new stuff 
— materializing him in our cell, and 
those green things in the Square — 
why would they waste it on a silly 
trick like this?" 

"All right," said Charlie. "What 
then ?" 

"Then he might be able to help 
us win," said Eve. 

"Just for the theoretical interest 
of it — suppose you could help us 
overthrow the Worstas, Mazurin, 
would you do it?" 

"The who?" 

"The Worstas— the World Staters. Blodgett and his gang. You've 
seen the kind of tyrannical crew 
they are. All right, would you help 



us if you could?" 

"Well, no," said Mazurin honestly. 

"Why not?" 

"Because, for one thing, if I 
help you I hurt them, and vice 
versa. I couldn't help either side. 
It would be irreligious." 

Charlie stared at him contemptuously, and Mazurin felt his 
ears getting red . It did sound 
stuffy, at that. Why couldn't they 
have let him stay in his own environment, where a man could take 
his religion on sacred days and 
forget about it the rest of the 
time ? 

"There's another good reason," 
he said defensively. "You seem to 
forget that I come from the world 
that grew out of this one. Well, 
it's a pretty good world. It's peaceful; there hasn't been a war in 
more than three centuries. Nobody 
has to work hard, as a general rule. 
No more race or nationality problems — everybody's interbred so 
much, as a result of the lowering 
of national barriers, that" there's 
only one kind of people. Why 
should I want to change all that?" 

"No reason, maybe, ' ' said the 
girl, "but you can see why we want 
to change our world, can't you?" 

Mazurin thought about it. "No. 
It would change the fine world of 
my time — the world that Blodgett—" 

He touched his forelock — 
"created by the might of his giant 
intellect." 



DON'T LIVE IN THE PAST 



79 



"Well, look,'" said the girl. "Ten 
years ago there was a world war, 
the ninth in sixty years. There was 
a worldwide organization that was 
righting the war, had been righting 
against war since about nineteen* 
sixty. They had a lot of followers, 
nil piper, but they weren't strong 
enough to do anything until the 
people finally got fed up. After 
all, it had got to the point where 
you'd have two or three months 
of peace after the armistice was 
signed, and then the whole bloody 
mess would start all over again. 

"CIVILIZATION was going 
VJ straight downhill. That had 
been happening lor a long time, 
but now it was happening so fast 
that you could see it happening. 
There was a spontaneous wave of 
revolt all through South America, 
where the fighting was going on at 
thai time. It started with a French 
regiment that turned around and 
shot its officers. Then the Canadian 
regiment they were fighting did the 
same thing, and after that it spread 
too fast to figure out how the idea 
got around. 

"All the armies in Soutli America 
sent delegates to a conference — -the 
conference of Acapulco — and the 
Worstas put over their program. 
Then all the armies went home, 
kicked out their governments, held 
general elections, and ten months 
later we had the World State." 

"Well," said MazurJn, "what's 
wrong with — " 

80 



"Wait. For five months everything went fine. All the important 
nations were in, and it was a surething that the others — the ones 
that hadn't been in this particular 
fighting -would come in later. We 
had a swell Constitution and wc 
were disarming like fury. Then 
there was a (oup d'etat. Blodgett 
and his gang moved in, kidnaped 
Provisional President Carres, 
drugged him and made him sign 
orders appointing Blodgett's gang ' 
to key positions. 

"It was logical enough; blodgett 
himself was the number two man 
in the Worstas movement to begin 
with. By the time anybodv found 
out what was going on, they were 
so firmly entrenched that they've 
been able to stamp out every rising 
against them ever since. They've 
got the best propaganda line since 
Stalin, and the people as a wholewon' t move because there's peace, 
and they're sick of war. So all 
we've wound up with is just another damned dictatorship. Now 
do you see?" 

"Wait a minute," said Mazurin. 
He had been listening with growing horror to Eve's use of the 
Sacred Name. "This Blodgett 
you' re talk i ng abou t — t h a t can ' t 
possibly be Ernest Elwood Vernon 
Crawford Blodgett, can it?" 4 

"His name is Ernest, and his 
mother's name was Crawford," said 
Eve. "Where you got those other 
handles from, 1 don't know." 
"It's the way wc name our

 



selves," Mazurin explained. "Your 
own given name, given names of 
two prominent ancestors, one from 
each line, then mother's and father's 
line names. Anyway, if that's the 
Blodgctt y&u're talking about, you 
must have your facts all wrong. 
Blodgctt — " he touched his forelock — " was the founder and first 
President of the World State. Kids 
learn about him in the first course. 
The Father of the World and so 
forth. He wasn't any dictator and 
there wasn't any president before 
him." 

"Blodgett is busy revising the 
histories right now," said Eve grimly. "I'll bet the big ham hasn't got 
buck teeth in the pictures you've 
seen, either." 

"Of course not," said Mazurin. 
"Have you ever seen him in person?" He demanded. 

Eve reddened. "No. But I've seen 
smuggled pictures of him before he 
got his dentures — " 

"Then," said Mazurin triumphantly, "how do you know the pictures you saw weren't faked?" 

They kept it up for another hour, 
ruffling tempers all around, until 
Charlie told them both to pipe 
down and get some sleep. 

IV 

MAZURIN awoke feeling as if 
he had spent the night hanging by his thumbs. His hands were 
completely numb, and the rest of 
his body was so stiff and painful 



that it took him ten minutes to 
stand up. 

The other two had made out a 
little better, but they were all cold, 
hungry and short-tempered. They 
drank water from the stream, ate 
some wild berries they found after 
an hour's search, stuffed leaves into 
Charlie's socks, and then started oft 
again through the woods. Charlie, 
when Mazurin asked him where 
they were going, politely requested, 
him to keep his geographically described questions to his precisely 
defined self. 

An hour or so later, when the 
Suii was higher and exercise had 
loosened their muscles, they were 
feeling a little better. They had 
struck a path of sorts under sonic 
kind of fragrant trees that were 
unfamiliar to Mazurin. The 
branches made a comfortable pattern against the deep-blue sky, and 
there were birds calling pleasantries 
. back and forth. Mazurin moved upbeside Eve and walked with her for 
a while in silence. 

"I suppose I was kidding myscli 
last night when I thought you might 
be able to help us," she said 
finally. "We've got a fair chance 
as it is, but it's awfully risky. It 
would be nice to know that the 
Marines were going to ride up at 
the last moment." 

Mazurin made sympathetic 
noises, feeling a little embar* 
rasscd. 

"How do you feel about being 
cut off from your own time?" she 



DON'T LIVE IN THE PAST 



81 



asked suddenly. "You're in a pretty 
tough spot, too." 

Mazurin realized that he hadn't 
had time to wonder how he did 
feel about it. He imagined the 
technicians back at the Physics Bureau searching through the timelines, finding him by some 
improbable chance, and yanking 
him back. He had a clear vision of 
the expression on the face of his 
square-jawed superior when that 
worthy read his report. 

He shuddered. 

"What's the matter * 
"If I got back now,'' said Ma2urin, "they'd give me one year 
in the Black House and then turn 
my totem upside down and demote 
me to the Cleanliness Inspection 
Squad." 

"Why ? Because your mission 
wasn't successful?" 

"Well, that isn't exactly the way 
my chief would put it. He'd say I 
w.ts .i disgusting ghoul with the 
moral fiber of a cuckoo, who would 
pick his teeth with a splinter from 
his uncle's coffin." 

"But you did all you could, 
didn't you?" 

Mazurin conscientiously reviewed 
his activities of the day before. "I 
guess I did, but that doesn't matter. 
They go by results." 

"H'm," said Eve. "So does Buck 
tooth Blodgett. How did you 
happen to go to work for the — 
what is it ?" 

"Internal Security Commission," 
said Mazurin. 



."It would be'. Fancy name for 
secret police, isn't it? Well, how 
did you happen to join up?" 

"Why," said Mazurin in astonishment, "I was selected. When I 
was fifteen. Those decisions can't 
be left to individuals." 

She stopped and stared at him, 
wide-eyed. "And you think that's 
the best of all possible worlds ? 
Even Blodgett hasn't pulled anything quite as rank as that yet. But 
he will, I can see." 

She moved on, and Mazurin 
followed her, puzzled. "How else 
would you do it?" he inquired. 

"Free choice," she said curtly. 
"Government docs its best to provide equal opportunities for everybody, and you choose what you 
want to be." 

"Ah," said Mazurin shrewdly, 
having swiftly found the illogicality, "but who would want to go 
into the ISC?" 

"Yes," she agreed, "who ?" 

Mazurin mulled that over for a 
while. 

"It wouldn't work," ne said 
finally. "You could never get people to agree to it, in my time. It 
goes directly contrary to the teachings of our ancestors." 
"Exactly," she saidHalf an hour later, Mazurin was 
still thinking about the implications 
of that remark. 

THEY stopped when they got to 
another small stream that 
Charlie and Eve seemed to recog


82 




 



nize. Charlie washed his face and 
hands, swore because be had no 
razor, and looked suspiciously .it 
Mazurin's pinkly beardless chin. 

"Depilatory cream," Mazurin 
told him. "Stuns the follicles for a 
month. Invented about 2050, I 
think." 

Charlie grunted, but looked halfconvinced. 

"Let me have those sandals," he 
said. He put them on and climbed 
along to the top of the next ridge. 
He looked cautiously over, then 
waved (o Eve and disappeared over 
the top. 

"What now?" asked Mazurin. 

"We wait here," said Eve shortly. "There's a town up ahead where 
one of our contacts lives. Charlie's 
going in to see if it's safe." 

He was back in half an hour, 
wearing shoes and carrying Mazurin's sandals ^wrapped in a 
bundle. He looked worried. 
"There's hell to pay," he told Eve, 
then turned to Mazurin. "I guess 
you're on the level, all right. Those 
col keyed things of yours — the 
tweedledums and so forth — have 
been popping up all over this area 
for the last twenty-four hours.- The 
Worstas are going crazy. They 
can't figure it out, and it scares 
them. The place is swarming with 
troops and no-goods." 

"National Guardsmen," Eve explained to Mazurin, seeing his 
puzzled look. "N. G. — no good. 
They're a bunch of picked stinkers, 
probably about like your ICS. Any


body ever call your crowd the Icks, 
by the way?" 

Charlie made an impatient gesture, cutting off Mazurin's reply. 
"Here's what we're up against," 
lie said. "Baucrnt'cind got through 
to H.Q. all right, and they'll send 
a 'copter in time to .get us to rendezvous. But the woods are full of 
patrols— we're lucky we haven't 
been picked up before now. The 
only place we'll be safe is in 
Bauernfeind's sub-cellar." 

He stared at Mazurin's outlandish costume. "You and I probably 
can get through all ri^ht, one at a 
time," he said to Eve, "but he's a 
problem. I was ready to ditch him 
if we had to, but Baucrnfcind says 
we've got _to take him along; the 
Central Council wants him. Wc 
couldn't figure out any way to take 
those cuffs off, without bringing a 
machine shop out here. Best we 
could think of was this." 

HE UNFOLDED his bundle 
and produced a long-sleeved 
robe, a pair of scissors, needles and 
thread. "There arc two or three 
different sects in the hills around 
here," he explained. "This isn't 
cjuitc the color any of 'em wear — 
Bauernfeind got it from a theatrical cos turner's— but he thinks it 
will pass. We'll have lo cut it open, 
so he can get: his arms into the 
sleeves, and then sew him into it." 
He picked up the scissors and 
spread the robe out over his knees. 
"No, not that way," said Eve, 



DON'T LIVE IN THE PAST 



and took the scissors from him. 
'Underneath, where it won't show." 
She rapidly snipped the robe apart, 
starting in the middle of the chest, 
upward to the end of each sleeve. 

The result looked like nothing 
that would ever serve as a garment 
again, but she slipped it over Mazurin's head, brought the dangling 
top part over his shoulders and, 
working swiftly, sewed it into shape 
again. 

"That'll hold," she said, "if you 
don"t wave your arms around. Remember, you've got your hands 
clasped in meditation, and you keep 
your eyes down. What about those 
sandals, Charlie?" 

"Half the crackpots in California wear them," he said. "And 
that long hair of his looks natural 
in this getup. Let's move along." 

Mazurin did as he was told. His 
brad ached miserably, and it 
seemed to him that his situation 
was getting worse by the minute. 
From the time that he had been 
captured by the Worstas, he'd had 
no power of decision whatever; 
and, even worse, he still had no 
idea what he could do if he were 
free to do it. 
. Mazurin walked forward me
64 



chanically, still only half attentive. 
Just suppose lie were to settle down 
in this century — providing he could 
get out of this present mess alive. 
Suppose he married and had 
progeny. That would obviously 
make hint an ancestor, from the 
viewpoint of his own time. Then 
it would be just as important to 
save his own neck as anybody 
else's! . . . 

Wait a minute, there was something funny about that line of 
reasoning. Everybody, theoretically, 
could continue his own line. So 
when was an ancestor an object of 
veneration and when was he just 
a person? It couldn't be merely a 
matter of elapsed time, could it? 
Because elapsed time was subjective, an abstraction, a point of view. 
From where he was now, the world 
he came from didn't even exist; 
it was just a remote future possibility. But — 

IT WAS too much. Mazurin 
thought he saw the glimmer of 
a final answer, but he couldn't pursue it. It made him feel dizzy when 
he tried. 

They clambered cautiously up 
to the top of the ridge, rccon

 



noitcred, and went down the other 
side to where a dusty road showed 
through the trees. Directly ahead 
oi them, when they reached the 
road, were the outskirts of a small, 
weatherbeaten town. They waited 
for twenty minutes before a squad 
of soldiers hanging around in front 
of a warehouse decided to go elsewhere. Twice they heard distant 
shots, and once a confused sound 
of yelling. 

Mazurin sighed with relief when 
they finally reached a fairly wellpopulated street. Mingling with the 
crowd, Charlie in front, then Mazurin, and Eve bringing up the 
rear, they weren't conspicuous, but 
as a group tbey had been decidedly 
peculiar. And if they looked nervous, he decided, it was in character; 
so did most of the people he saw 
around him. Every block or so they 
passed a patrol of green-uniformed 
men, hands on the straps of their 
slung missile weapons, looking 
alertly to each side as they walked. 

The three bunched momentarily 
as they waited for a traffic light 
to change, and Charlie murmured, 
' ' Two blocks more, then half a 
block to the right. It's the plate 
called 'Hi-Tone Tailors.* Go 
straight to the back and down the 
stairs." 

He stopped talking as a grccnuni formed officer paused nearby and 
glanced at them. The light changed 
and they started across the street. 
Mazurin kept his eyes down, as 
directed, even when a loud whir
M 



ring noise approached him from 
behind and hovered over him. 
Immediately thereafter, something 
mushy hit him on the head and 
slithered down his face, blinding 
him momentarily. 

He heard startled cries around 
him. The next instant, the mushy 
something had reached his nose 
and was' trying to crawl up it. 
Strangling, Mazurin unwarily 
opened his mouth, and the stuff 
crawled into that, too. He swallowed as much as he could — it was 
lemon-flavored — and spat the rest. 

He looked up just in time to see 
another glob hurtling toward him. 
He flung up his hands instinctively, 
and heard the popping threads as 
Eve's hasty stitching gave way. 

ABOVE him the flangs were 
raining down. The whirring 
noise, he found, proceeded from 
the blades of a helicopter that was 
hovering over the intersection. Two 
grecn-un i formed men in its cab 
were leaning out to peer in amazement and horror at the four loudspeaker horns fixed to its underside. 
From these, in an apparently endless flow, issued the flangs. They 
were piling up underfoot now, 
climbing up people's trouser legs, 
squirming in a custafdy wave toward the comparative darkness of 
doorways. 

Desperately, Mazurin warded off 
another yellow blob, leaped the 
writhing form of a fat citizen who 
had flangs in his pants, and then 


 



lost his own footing, skidding half 
the width of the street and fetching up against a green-uniformed 
soldier. He saw the soldier's eyes 
widen as he Caught sight of the 
wristcuffs. Then there was a. shout 
and a whirl of motion, and something hard struck him solidly on 
the back of the head. 

LIGHT brought him to: blinding, hot yellow light that 
shone through his closed lids and 
made his eyes water fiercely. He 
tried instinctively to turn his head 
aside, and found he couldn't. For 
a moment he couldn't orient himself; he was being put to the auestion, that was obvious, but what 
for? He hadn't done anything — or 
had he? How had he made out on 
that time mission ? He had a dim 
recollection of something unpleasant . . . 

The rest of the memories came 
back then, and Mazurin groaned. 
He was in the hands of the Wocstas again, those peculiarly unpleasant ancestors who were incredibly 
the founders of his own state; and 
some of the police methods in' this 
century were crude, he remembered. 

They'd got the other two, undoubtedly. They'd all been close 
together when the flangs started 
falling, and the soldiers would have 
rounded up everybody in sight after 
they caught him. Now it was going to be bad. Now it was going 
to be very bad. 

He heard a sudden "Ouch!" and 



then a stifled shriek. A moment 
later he understood the reason; 
something needle-sharp was jabbed 
an inch 'into his left buttock. He 
added his outcry to the others, 
whereupon a voice said, "They're 
ready, Mr. President." 

"Proceed," said a slightly lisping voice. "Begin with the girl." 

"Your name is Gertrude Meyer?" 
said the other. 

Mazurin heard the girl gasp. She 
said, "Yes." 

"You are a member of the underground society of wreckers and 
assassins known as the Freedom 
Party, and you are known to your 
co-conspirators as Eve?" 

Again the gasp, and again, 
"Yes." 

"You are aware of a plot to 
assassinate the President?" 

The gasp, a pause, then another 
gasp. "Yes!" 

"What is the nature of this 
plot?" 

This time Eve sobbed. "Oh, 
don't do that — oh!" 

"What is the nature of this 
plot?" 

"Oh! I don't know — " She 
shrieked and then Mazurin heard 
her weeping. "I'll never tell you 
— oh! — anything. Oh!" 

Mazurin found himself struggling like a wild man against his 
shackles. He had an idea he knew 
what they were doing to Eve; it 
was a traditional method of interrogating females, so they'd probably 
had it even this early. It was very 



DON'T LIVE IN THE PAST 



87 



nearly infallible, and very unpleasant to think about. 

EVE'S cries grew louder and 
more frequent Finally she 
screamed and there was silence for 
a while. Then the interrogation began again. After twenty minutes. 
Eve began telling all she knew. 

It was a primitive plot, and it 
seemed to Mazurin that it could 
have had only a slender chance of 
success even in so barbaric an era 
as this one. In his own time, nothing whatever would be gained by 
assassinating the Chief Executive; 
the next eligible member of the 
Executive Families would simply 
take over. What you had to watch 
out for was thought subversion and 
heresy. 

Here, apparently, the critical area 
was at the (op. Blodgett was so 
obsessed by the idea that someone 
in his hierarchy might kick him 
out, as he'd done to Carres, that 
he'd made sure lh.it the whole 
structure would collapse without 
him. 

The Freedom Party knew this, 
or guessed it, according to Eve. 
They didn't know exactly what 
would happen if they killed Blodgett, but they were pretty sure it 
would be fatal to the present dictatorial group. In any case, they'd 
be rid of Blodgett and would, at 
worst, take their chances on his 
successor being less brutal. 

The time they'd picked was an 
annual celebration at which Blod


gett traditionally showed himself. 
It was always held in a big outdoor arena, and there would be 
thousands of spectators. Blodgett 
would be well guarded, of course, 
but they couldn't possibly screen 
everybody who got into the arena. 
All the revolutionists needed was 
an inconspicuous weapon, and it 
seemed that the underground's 
scientists had perfected one about 
eight months ago and had been 
turning them out in quantity in a 
hidden factory. Eve didn't know 
where the factory was. She and 
Charlie were the liaison agents, 
who were to pick up the completed 
weapons from other agents and lake 
them to distribution points. 

The weapon was a miniature bazooka. Only two inches long, it 
could he concealed so well that 
only the most rigorous search would 
find it, and its range was more than 
adequate for the job they wanted 
to do. Accuracy would have been 
too much to ask for, but they had 
intended to concentrate the fire of 
several hundred weapons on the 
rostrum, and hope that Blodgett 
would be killed. 

The questioners took Eve 
through the whole story again, then 
started on Charlie. He held out 
for a few minutes, but he talked. 
He knew no more than Eve. 

THEN it was Mazurin' s turn. 
The first question was: 
"What is your name?" and it was 
followed instantly by the touch of 



as 




 



warm metal on the back of his 
hand. 

Only a reminder, Mazurin 
guessed. They thought he was valuable and wanted to be very careful 
not to injure him seriously; but if 
he didn't answer satisfactorily, the 
iron would get hotter. And many 
things, Mazurin knew, could be 
done with iron not hot enough to 
burn. 

He answered the question with 
his full name. The next was, 
"Where do you come from?" He 
told the truth, not expecting to be 
believed, but unable to think of 
any lie that would be more credible. 

There was a muttered consultation, then, "Do you maintain 
that you can tell us about events 
which are to us in the future, because your knowledge of what is 
to you history?" 

Mazurin said, "Yes, only — " 

Blodgett's lisping voice interrupted him. "That's enough. General, this information is restricted. 
Take him into my private office. I 
will continue the interrogation personally." 

The light clicked off, and Mazurin felt the shackles being 
loosened. 

"Prisoner, have you given any 
of this information to these other 
two?" 

Mazurin hesitated, trying to figure out which was the dangerous 
answer, yes or no. The President's 
voice said, "Never mind, General. 



I will assume that he has. Bring 
all three of them into my private 
office. Here, give me those manacle 
keys." 

Someone hauled Mazurin off the 
table on which he had been lying 
and locked his wrists together. He 
was able to open his smarting eyes 
after a moment, but he could see 
nothing except the after-image of 
the brilliant interrogation light. 
Hands turned him, pushed him, 
caught him when he staggered and 
kept him moving. He heard 'the 
shuffle of other feet. Eve was crying quietly. 

A door was opened ahead of 
them. Mazurin was led forward a 
few steps and then shoved into a 
deep cushioned chair. Footsteps receded and the door shut again. 
Deep silence fell instantly, punctuated by their breathing and the 
President's soft footsteps, then the 
slight creak of a swivel chair. 

"Now," said Blodgett's voice, 
apparently from some little distance. "We are entirely private 
here; this room is soundproof and 
spyproof. Tell me all about the 
future of my regime, Mr. Mazurin 
■ — and, I warn you, tell me the 
truth." 

MAZURIN'S vision was clearing rapidly. Directly ahead 
of him, twenty feet away across a 
deep carpet and a huge polished 
desk, sat Blodgett. He didn't look 
anything like the pictures in the 
histories. He was short and plump, 



DON'T LIVE IN THE PAST 



89 



and he looked crafty and nervous 
and worried. Mazurin glanced to 
his right. There was a row of chairs 
like his own, and in two of them, 
(Mifiacled like himself, were Eve 
and Charlie. Eve was bent over 
with her head in her hands; 
Charlie was rigid and stony-fated. 

Perhaps the history books had 
idealized Blodgett's appearance. It 
didn't matter. Mazurin was in the 
Presence and he was awed. 

"In case any of you arc thinking 
of attempting violence against me," 
remarked Blodgett, "don't." He 
showed them a heavy little machine-gun, mounted on a wheeled 
frame, that stood on liis desk. "You 
are too far away, and those extremely comfortable chairs are in
90 



gemiously hard lo get out of. Also, 
this room contains a minor arsenal. 
I could fight off a regiment here, 
if I had to. Now, Mr. Mazurin. 
talk. You needn't be afraid of telling the truth, whether you think I'll 
like it or not. You're a mine of 
information, and I expect to be 
able to use you for a long time to 
come. So tell me the unvarnished 
truth." 

Mazurin told him. 

Blodgett smiled at the end of it. 
"One thing more, Mr. Mazurin. At 
what age will I die?" 

"I don't remember exa Sly, Your 
Honor. About eighty, as I recall." 

"Good, good," said Blodgett. 
"Surprisingly good." He took a 
seedless grape from the bowl in 


 



front of him and popped it into 
his mouth. "You arc sure, Mr. Ma 
zurin, that you have not colored 
this talc to please my fmcy? No, 
I can sec that you are sincere; you 
have no reason to lie." 

He ate another grape, smiling;, 
pushed the bowl aside and leaned 
confidently over the desk. , 

"If you had prophesied disaster, 
Mr. Mazurin," he said, "I should 
never in the world have believed 
you . Do you kn ow why ?" The 
pause was rhetorical. "Because I belong to the ages. I know it I have 
felt it since I was a young man. I 
was born to rule the world. Would 
you believe that I have known that 
since I was twenty? And my rule 
is destined to endure; I knew that. 



"Why? Because I started with 
what every other conqueror tried 
in vain to achieve — a world dominion. It is all the world or none, 
Mr. Mazurin. Napoleon knew that. 
Hitler knew that. Stalin knew thai. 
And that was the inexorable law 
that humbled each in his turn. 
TTicy tried to achieve peace 
through war— fatal, fatal. They had 
to try, of course. They were born 
to rule, too, but the wrong time." 

He talked on interminably, 
his face y, rowing flushed and his 
eyes glistening. He gestured, he 
smiled, he frowned. Didactic, he 
stood up and leaned earnestly over 
the table. Self-satisfied, he sat back 
and popped grapes into his mouth. 
Mystical, he stared at the ceiling. 



DON'T LIVE IN THE PAST 



It was during the latter phase 
that Mazurin — like the other two, 
half-stunned by oratory — suddenly 
came awake. From the muzzle of 
the squat weapon on Blodgett's 
desk, a tiny green bubble bulged. 
As Mazurin watched, the bubble 
grew to half an inch dropped to 
the desk and rolled until the edge 
of the fruit-bowl stopped it. 

Mazurin felt suddenly cold all 
over. He darted a glance to his 
right. Eve was looking at the floor 
and had seen nothing; but Charlie 
was looking at him with one eyebrow raised, an expression that 
said plainly, What is it? 

Mazurin looked back at the 
President. Blodgett brought a rolling period to a close, smiled soulf ully, sighed, and became stern. 

"As for you, sir," he said, "your 
destiny is allied with mine. To this 
favor you must submit. I do not 
ask, I give. I give you a living god, 
as you have yourself justly described 
me, to worship and follow faithfully all of your life. And I give 
you what is immeasurably more 
precious than the schoolboys' history you give me — I give you a 
place beside me in all the history 
that's yet to be written!" 

For an instance, that idea captured Mazurin's imagination. What 
a fantastic end to his assignment 
that would be — the Chief Executive, and the ISC Intelligence chief, 
and everybody, worshipping every 
holy day at his shrine! 

Even while that thought raced 



through his mind, Mazurin watched 
the tiny green globule in utter fascination. If Blodgett reached for 
that globule, thinking it a grape, 
then for the first time in this whole 
misbegotten affair Mazurin would * 
have reached a point of decision. 
And to save himself he couldn't 
tell whether he wanted that or not. 
He knew what he wanted to do, 
well enough, but he felt the first 
premonitory stirrings of a guilt that 
he knew would plague him for 
years after the act. What right had 
he to interfere with the lives of 
millions of still unborn? 

Mazurin, he told himself, you're 
an ancestor.' He glanced at Eve's 
pale, drawn face. see to it that 
you are, he added. 

BLODGETT'S open palm came 
down on the desk, sideswiping 
the fruit bowl. The bowl wobbled 
elliptically arpund the desktop, 
spilling grapes. But the nearest to 
Blodgett's hand was still the globe 
that was not a grape. 

"iJow say you, sir?" demanded 
Blodgett. "Destiny or death?" 

His hand hovered, as ready for 
one gesture as another. He glared 
at Mazurin. 

Mazurin took a deep breath. "I 
choose destiny, Your Honor." 

Blodgett's features relaxed. His 
hand dropped gently on the table, 
the pudgy fingers curling. Gently 
they closed on the green sphere. 
Smiling benignly, Blodgett popped 
it into his mouth. 



92 




 



He stayed that way, without 
changing posture or expression, for 
three Jong seconds. Then his eyes 
bulged. A shout formed itself on 
his lips, but no sound came out. 
He — withered somehow, shrank indescribably in his uniform. There 
was a look of horror and of passionate appeal in his eyes. And 
then, suddenly, Blodgett was not 
there any longer. 

To the others, it looked as if he 
had simply vanished out of the 
world of men. But Mazurin, shuddering, knew that his fate had not 
been that simple- — or that pleasant. 

Eve gasped, "What was it? That 
grape he ate — " 

Mazurin felt sick. "A mangel." 

Charlie demanded, "What's a 
mangel? What did it do to him?" 

MAZURIN said shakily, "You 
could torture- me in the subtlest or crudest ways and I would 
not tell you. This primitive civilization is not ready to know anything 
at all about mangels. Nothing!" 

He put his head in his hands. 
One part of him knew that Blodgctt 
was a stinker; the other part was 
simply saying, You let him eat a 
mangel. You killed him. The most 
sacred ancestor of all, the Father of 
the World. 

He heard the other two talking 
in low, tense voices. Eve said, "Are 
you thinking what I'm thinking?" 

"Blodgett had already started 
making himself up to look like his 
propaganda pictures." 



"Yes. We could put it over, 
Charlie. They'd have no choice. It's 
either agreement or total collapse." 

"Gone," Mazurin moaned. 
"Blodgett. The beautiful society he 
built with his giant intellect — " 

"No," said Charlie. "None 
it's lost. Except the worst part 
your civilization." 

"And certainly not the mo 
sacred ancestor," Eve added. "N 
the Father of the World." 

Mazurin, lost in misery, looker 
up. "But the mangel got him. Blodgett is gone." He touched his forelock absently. 

"You're here," said Eve. "You 
know what the future is supposed 
to be like. You'll build Blodgett's 
world — with a few important 
changes." 

"Oh," Mazurin said, suddenly 
realizing. "You'll put one of your 
men in Blodgett's place and I'll 
advise him on what I remember." 

Charlie leaned over his chair. 
"One of our men — one of everybody's." 

"Isn't it obvious?" asked Eve, 
squeezing Mazurin's arm. "The 
Father of the World, the most 
sacred ancestor, will be a descendant." 

"He doesn't get it," Charlie said. 

"You," Eve stated, "will be 
Blodgett." 

Mazurin started to touch his 
forelock. "Me?" he asked dazedly, 
then finished the reverent gesture. 

He Was an ancestor, after all. 