SUMMER 
20c 




fc" " - -, 



storie 



i 






> 



\ 



HAR 



OPPttv 



tt CLAIR 






•0 WIHfflliM : M 



H 



d D f <crt»orM< Month* HIGH 6RACKHT 



A 



STORIES ^ 



T. T. SCOTT, Fres* MALCOLM REISS, Gen. Mgr. PAUL L. PAYNE, Ed. 

A TREMEHVOUS HEW BRACKETT HOVEL 
QUEEN OF THE MARTIAN CATACOMBS . by Leigh Brackett 4 

Gaunt gjiant and passionate beauty, they dragged their thirst-crazed way across the endless orimson sands in a terrible test of endurance. For one of them knew where cool 
life-giving water lapped old stones smooth — a place of secret horror that it was death 
to reveal! 

WO THRUUHG HOVELETTES 

THE STARBUSTERS by Alfred Coppel, Jr. 60 

A bunch of kids in bright new uniforms, transiting the constellations in a disreputable 
old bucket of a space-ship — why should the leathery-tentacled, chlorine-breathing 
Eridans take them seriously? 

STALEMATE IN SPACE by Charles L. Harness 84 

Two mighty metal globes clung in a murderous death-struggle, lashing out with flames 
of poison. Yet deep in their twisted wreckage the main battle raged — where a girl 
swayed sensuously before her conqueror's mocking eyes
FOUR EXCITIHG STORIES 
THE MADCAP METALLOIDS by W. V. Athanas 37 

Plucked from the space-lanes by its ravening magnetism, the two intrepid Terrans 
defied this deadly radioactive worldlet by playing games with the rolypoly natives! 

S.O.S. APHRODITE! by Stanley Mullen 45 

No wonder that signal stabbed out into the icy void! For it was a ship of hate and 
evil, and IP patrolman Steve Coran trusted only one person aboard — after strapping 
her in her bunk! 

PERIL ORBIT by C. J. Wedlake 72 

Caught in the sun! The young pilot stared at the mass of angry flame — wondering 
why his training wouldn't let him give up. 

GARDEN OF EVIL . . ' by Margaret St. Clair 77 

Even to a drug-soaked outcast ethnographer, Fyhon was a paradise planet. It was 
worth anybody's life to find Dridihad, the secret city of dread! 

AND PLANET'S SPECIAL FEATURES. 

THE VIZIGRAPH by The Readers 2\ 

PER ASPERA AD ASTRA by TDCUAIN 75 



Summer Issue 1949 




VoLIV, No. 3 
20c per copy 



PLANET STORIES: Published quarterly by Love Romances Pub. Co., Inc., 670 Fifth Ave. New York 19 N Y 
The entire contents of this magazine are copyrighted, 1948, by Love Romances Publishing ' Co., Inc. Entered as 
second-class matter October 2, 1944, at the Post Office, at New York 1, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. All 
rights reserved. While due care is always exercised, the publishers will not be responsible for the return of unsolicited 
manuscripts. Yearly subscription rate 80^ in advance. For advertising rates address: Advertising Director, Fiction 
House, Inc., 670 Fifth Ave., New York 19, N. Y, Printed in U. S. A. 



$ 



iMVD'fc 



if 



Greetings, fan- friends! Once again we put you on display — in the 
form of your letters — the best we have received. 

Read, write, vote — the three Vizigraph functions from the very 
(beginning. Perhaps your letter will be voted best in the next issue I 

This time Radell Nelson (BeM) wins first choice of the pix in 
the Winter Ish. Congratulations ! Then Bob Bradley hits second 
and names two choices, in case Nelson grabs his first. Bill Ober field 
comes in third — and chooses three. 

Nice work, boys. Now let's see who wins this time I 

— Planet's Little Parasite 

MORE SEX IN THE FUTURE? 

New Brunswick, N. J. 
Dear Editor: 

These letters squawking emotionally against the inclusion) of sex 
in science-fiction stories leave me disappointed, disturbed and more 
than a little disgusted. They seem to be the work of inhibited, 
repressed personalities. I am not placing myself in the position of 
endorsing smut or pornography, but I believe the subject of sex 
deserves some straightforward, adult handling. 

If science- fiction has anything to offer other than mere escapism, 
its value lies in promoting a receptive, questioning attitude and 
freeing the mind from the narrow, superstition-bound, taboo-ridden 
ruts of accustomed thought channels. 

Nearly every science-fiction story is a glimpse into some writer's 
conception of a possible future, and as change is the one certainty 
in this universe, the future will be different from the present. How 
different? Our present-day patterns are neither perfect nor static. 
Some of our better brains have concluded that if we don't rapidly 
learn as much about our own psychology and social structures as 
we already know about the guts of a uranium atom, we are heading 
for disaster on a grand scale. 

Anyone not entirely prejudice-blinded can see that the conventional standards of sex conduct of today are irrational, hypocritical, 
and simply are not zvorking. The Kinsey report indicates clearly 
that a socially dangerous schizoid gap exists between "moral 
principles" and actual conduct. 

Our self-appointed "moral leaders" have decreed certain rules, 
to which everyone is supposed to adhere unquestioningly on blind 
faith alone. And they insist in the face of contrary evidence that 
these rules are eternal and immutable and unchanging. They carefully ignore the fact that other civilizations have done as well or 
better than our own in promoting human welfare, using an entirely 
different set of standards of conduct. 

Polygamy has been successful in many places, until our own 
civilization intervened with superior military and police forces. 
(And the present Hollywood concept of marriage is nothing but 
legalized serial polygamy.) Many cultures, those of Crete and 
Athens and Bali, for instance, have (Continued on page 105) 



1 WAS ASHAMED 
OF MY FACE 

until Viderm helped moke my skin clearer in one short week 91 

(FROM A UTTER BY I. $. JORDAN, DETROIT, MICH.) 

H your lace is broken-out, if bad skin is making you miserable, 

here is how to stop worrying about pimples, blackheads and 

other externally-caused skin troubles. 

JUST FOLLOW SKIN DOCTOR'S SIMPLE DIRECTIONS 




IT doesn't pay to put up with a broken-out face. Your very 
success in business, love and social life may depend upon 
your looks. Handsomeness end a good appearance usually 
start with the condition of your skin. Nobody likes to look 
at a face that is blemished by blackheads or pimples. 
WOMEN ARE ATTRACTED TO MEN WHO HAVE 
SMOOTH, CLEAR, HEALTHY- LOOKING SKIN. Business executives don't choose men whose complexions are 
against them. Don't take chances with your success in life 
when this inexpensive Viderm formula may help you. 

Good-looking Skin Is Not for Women Only 

You — yes, you— can have the same handsome complexion, 
free from externally caused skin troubles, simply by giving 
your face the special care that screen stars give theirs. 
There's almost nothing to it — it is just about as easy as 
washing your face. The whole secret consists of washing 
your face in a way that thoroughly purges the pores of every 
last speck of dirt and grime-* 
something that ordinary cleansing seldom does. In fact, examination after examination shows 
that, usually, it is not a case of 
"bad skin" so much as a case of 
faulty cleansing. What you 
•should use is a highly concentrated soap like Viderm Skin 

Cleanser. This penetrates- the pores and acts as an antipeptic. Specks of irritating dirt and grime are quickly 
gashed out. They dissolve and disappear, leaving your skin 




entirely free of the dirt particles that usually bring out pinv 
pies, blackheads and other externally- caused skin troubles. 

Squeezing pimples or blackheads to get rid of them is a 
nasty, messy business — but that isn't the worst of it. Doing 
so may also be injurious and leave your face with unsightly, 
embarrassing blemishes. There is, now, a much easier, safer, 
cleaner way to help you rid your face of ugly, offensive, 
externally- caused skin troubles. You merely follow a doctor' 9 
simple directions. 

Don't murder your skin! Here's all you have to do to get it 
smoother and clearer and to keep it that way. Use Viderm 
Skin Cleanser when you wash your face. Rub the rich lather 
of this highly-concentrated medicated soap on your face 
for just a few seconds and then rinse it o% Then apply a 
little Viderm Medicated Skin Cream and that's all there is 
to it. Viderm Medicated Skin Cream quickly disappears, 
leaving your skin nice and 
smooth. This simple treatment, 
used after shaving, helps heal 
tiny nicks and cuts, relieves 
razor-burn and smarting*, besides 
conditioning your skin. 



DONT DO THIS! 



Don't murder your skin by squeezing 
If. Skin is delicate. When you break 
it, you leave yourself open to miseries. It's far easier, far safer, to let 
the Double Viderm Treatment help 
you enjoy o handsome, clearer, 
blemish-free complexion. 




Give Your Face This Treat 
for 7 Days 

Stop worrying and being embarrassed over what may happen 
to your skin. Just send for your Viderm Double Treatment 
this minute, and be confident of a smoother and clearer 
complexion. Follow the simple directions, written by a 
doctor, that you will get with your Viderm Double Treatment. Then look in your mirror and listen to your friends 
admire your smoother, clearer skin— the kind that women go for. 

Just mail your name and address to The New York Skin 
Laboratory, 206 Division Street, Dept. 40, New York City 2, 
N. Y. By return mail you will receive both of the Viderm 
formulas, complete with full directions, and mailed in a 
plain wrapper. On delivery, pay two dollars plus postage. 
If you wish, you can jave the postage fee by mailing the 
two dollars with yourj letter. Then, if you aren't thrilled 
with results, your mjbney will be cheerfully refunded. 
Remember that both Of the formulas you use have been 
fully tested and proven, and are reliable for you. If they 
don't help you, your treatments cost you nothing. After 
you have received your Viderm, if you have any questions 
to ask concerning abused skin, just send them in. 



Queen Of The Martian 

Catacombs 



By LEIGH BRACKETT 




She would have broken past him, but Delgaun was too quick* 



F)R HOURS |HE HARDpressed beast had fled across the Martian desert with its dark rider. Now 
it was spent. It faltered and broke stride, 
and when the rider cursed and dug his 
heels into the scaly sides, the brute only 
turned its head and hissed at him. It 
stumbled on a few more paces into the lee 
4 



of a sandhill, and there it stopped, crouching down in the dust. 

The man dismounted. The creature's 
eyes burned like green lamps in the light 
of the little moons, and he knew that it 
was no use trying to urge it on. He looked 
back, the way he had come. 

In the distance there were four black 




Gaunt giant and passionate beauty, they dragged 
their thirst-crazed way across the endless crimson sands in a terrible test of endurance. For 
one of them knew where cool life-giving water 
lapped old stones smooth— a place of secret 
horror that it was death to reveal! 



shadows grouped together in the barren 
emptiness. They were running fast. In a 
few minutes they would be upon him. 

He stood still, thinking what he should 
do next. Ahead, far ahead, was a low 
ridge, and beyond the ridge lay Valkis and 
safety, but he could never make it now. 
Off to his right, a lonely tor stood up out 
of the blowing sand. There were tumbled 
rocks at its foot. 



"They tried to run me down in the 
open," he thought. "But here, by the Nine 
Hells, they'll h^ve to work for it!" 

He moved then, running toward the tor 
with a lightness and speed incredible in 
anything but an animal or a savage. He 
was of Earth stock, built tall, and more 
massive than he looked by reason of his 
leanness. The desert wind was bitter cold, 
but he did not seem to notice it, though 

•5 



PLANET STORIES 



he wore only a ragged shirt of Venusian 
spider silk, open to the waist, His skin 
was almost as dark as his black hair, 
burned indelibly by years of exposure to 
some terrible sun. His eyes were startlingly light in colour, reflecting back the 
pale glow of the moons. 

With the practised ease of a lizard he 
slid in among the loose and treacherous 
rocks. Finding a vantage point, where his 
back was protected by the tor itself, he 
crouched down. 

After that he did not move, except to 
draw his gun. There was something eerie 
about his utter stillness, a quality of patience as unhuman as the patience of the 
rock that sheltered him. 

The four black shadows came closer, 
resolved themselves into mounted men. 

They found the beast, where it lay panting, and stopped. The line of the man's 
footprints, already blurred by the wind 
but still plain enough, showed where he 
had gone. 

The leader motioned. The others dismounted. Working with the swift precision of soldiers, they removed equipment 
from their saddle-packs and began to assemble it. 

The man crouching under the tor saw 
the thing that took shape. It was a Banning shocker, and he knew that he was 
not going to fight his way out of this trap. 
His pursuers were out of range of his own 
weapon. They would remain so. The 
Banning, with its powerful electric beam, 

would take him dead or senseless, as 

they wished. 

He thrust the useless gun back into his 
belt. He knew who these men were, and 
what they wanted with him. They were 
officers of the Earth Police Control, bringing him a gift twenty years in the Luna 

cell-blocks. 

Twenty years in the grey catacombs, 
buried in the silence and the eternal dark. 

He recognized the inevitable. He was 
used to inevitables hunger, pain, loneliness, the emptiness of dreams. He had 
accepted a lot of them in his time. Yet 
he made no move to- surrender. He looked 
out at the desert and the night sky, and 
his eyes blazed, the desperate, strangely 
beautiful eyes of a creature very close to 



the roots of life, something less and more 
than man. His hands found a shard of 
rock and broke it. 

The leader of the four men rode slowly 
toward the tor, his right arm raised. 

His voice carried clearly on the wind. 
"Erie John Stark!" he called, and the dark 
man tensed in the shadows. 

The rider stopped. He spoke again, but 
this time in a different tongue. It was no 
dialect of Earth, Mars or Venus, but a 
strange speech, as harsh and vital as the 
blazing Mercurian valleys that bred it. 

"Oh N'Chaka, oh Man-without-a-tribe, 
I call you!" 

There was a long silence. The rider and 
his mount were motionless under the low 
moons, waiting. 

Eric John Stark stepped slowly out 
from the pool of blackness under the tor. 

"Who calls me N'Chaka?" 

The rider relaxed somewhat. He answered in English, "You know perfectly 
well who I am, Eric. May we meet in 
peace ?" 

Stark shrugged. "Of course." 

HE walked on to meet the rider, who 
had dismounted, leaving his beast 
behind. He was a slight, wiry man, this 
EPC officer, with the rawhide look of the 
frontiers still on him. His hair was grizzled 
and his sun-blackened skin was deeply 
lined, but there was nothing in the least 
aged about his hard good-humored face 
nor his remarkably keen dark eyes. 

"It's been a long time, Eric," he said. 

Stark nodded. "Sixteen years." The 
two men studied each other for a moment, 
and then Stark said, "I thought you were 
still on Mercury, Ashton." 

"They've called all us experienced hands 
in to Mars." He held out cigarettes. 
"Smoke?" 

Stark took one. They bent over Ashton's lighter, and then stood there smoking 
while the wind blew red dust over their 
feet and the three men of the patrol waited 
quietly beside the Banning. Ashton was 
taking no chances. The electro-beam could 
stun without injury. 

Presently Ashton said, "I'm going to be 
crude, Eric. I'm going to remind you of 
some things." 



qtJEEN OF THE MARTIAN 

"Save it," Stark retorted. "You've got 
me. There's no need to talk about it." 

"Yes/' said Ashton, "I've got you, and 
a damned hard time I've had doing ifc 
That's why I'm going to talk about it." 

His dark eyes met Stark's cold stare 
and held it. 

"Remember who I am Simon Ash


CATACOMBS 



ton. Remember who came along when the 
miners in that valley on Mercury had a 
wild boy in a cage, and were going to 
finish him off like they had the tribe that 
raised him. Remember all the years after 
that, when I brought that boy up to be a 
civilized human being." 

Stark laughed, not without a certain 
humor. "You should have left me in the 
cage. I was caught a little old for civilizing." 

"Maybe. I don't think so. Anyway, I'm 
reminding you," Ashton said. 

Stark said, with no particular bitterness, "You don't have to get sentimental. 
I know it's your job to take me in." 

Ashton said deliberately, "I won't take 
you in, Eric, unless you make me." He 
went on then, rapidly, before Stark could 
answer. "You've got a twenty-year sentence hanging over you, for running guns 
to the Middle-Swamp tribes when they 
revolted against Terro-Venusian Metals, 
and a couple of similar jobs. 

"All right. So I know why you did it, 
and I won't say I don't agree with you. 
But you put yourself outside the law, and 
that's that. Now you're on your way to 
Valkis. You're headed into a mess that'll 
put you on Luna for life, the next time 
you're caught." 

"And this time you don't agree with 
me. 

"No. Why do you think I broke my 
neck to catch you before you got there?" 
Ashton bent closer, his face very intent. 
"Have you made any deal with Delgaun 
of Valkis? Did he send for you?" 

"He sent for me, but there's no deal 
yet. I'm on the beach. Broke. I got a 
message from this Delgaun, whoever he 
is, that there was going to be a private war 
back in the Drylands, and he'd pay me to 
help fight it. After all, that's my business." 

Ashton shook his head. 



7 

"This isn't a private war, Eric. It's 
something a lot bigger and nastier than 
that. The Martian Council of City-States 
and the Earth Commission are both in a 
cold sweat, and no one can find out exactly 
what's going on. You know what the LowCanal towns are Valkis, Jekkara, Bar
rakesh. No law-abiding Martian, let alone 
an Earthman, can last five minutes in 
them. And the back-blocks are absolutely 
verboten. So all we get is rumors. 

"Fantastic rumors about a barbarian 
chief named Kynon, who seems to be 
promising heaven and earth to the tribes 

of Kesh and Shun some wild stuff 

about the ancient cult of the Ramas that 
everybody thought was dead a thousand 
years ago. We know that Kynon is tied 
up somehow with Delgaun, who is a most 
efficient bandit, and we know that some 
of the top criminals of the whole System 
are filtering in to join up. Knighton and 
Walsh of Terra, Themis of Mercury, Ar
rod of Callisto Colony and, I believe, 

your old comrade in arms, Luhar the 
Venusian." 

Stark gave a slight start, and Ashton 
smiled briefly. 

"Oh, yes," he said. "I heard about 
that." Then he sobered. "You can figure 
that set-up for yourself, Eric. The barbarians are going to go out and fight some 
kind of a holy war, to suit the entirely 
unholy purposes of men like Delgaun and 
the others. 

"Half a world is going to be raped, 
blood is going to run deep in the Drylands and it will all be barbarian blood 

spilled for a lying promise, and the carrion crows of Valkis will get fat on it. 
Unless, somehow, we can stop it." 



H 



'E paused, then said flatly, "I want 

you to go on to Valkis, Eric 

but as my agent. I won't put it on the 
grounds that you'd be doing civilization a 
service. You don't owe anything to civilization, Lord knows. But you might save 
a lot of your own kind of people from getting slaughtered, to say nothing of the 
border-state Martians who'll be the first 
to get Kynon's axe. 

"Also, you could wipe that twenty-year 
hitch on Luna off the slate, maybe even 



PLANET 

work up a desire to make a man of yourself, instead of a sort of tiger wandering 
from one kill to the next" He added, 
"If you live." 

Stark said slowly, "You're clever Ashton. You know I've got a feeling for all 
planetary primitives like those who raised 
me, and you appeal to that." 

"Yes," said Ashton, "I'm clever. But 
I'm not a liar. What I've told you is 
true." 

Stark carefully ground out the cigarette 
beneath his heel. Then he looked up. 
"Suppose I agree to become your agent 
in this, and go off to Valkis. What's to 
prevent me from forgetting all about you, 
then?" 

Ashton said softly, "Your word, Eric. 
You get to know a man pretty well when 
you know him from boyhood on up. Your 
word is enough." 

There was a silence, and then Stark 

held out his hand. "All right, Simon 

but only for this one deal. After that, no 
promises." 

"Fair enough." They shook hands. 

"I can't give you any suggestions," 
Ashton said. "You're on your own, completely. You can get in touch with me 
through the Earth Commission office in 
Tarak. You know where that is?" 

Stark nodded. "On the Dryland Border." 

"Good luck to you, Eric." 

He turned, and they walked back together to where the three men waited. 
Ashton nodded, and they began to dismantle the Banning. Neither they nor 
Ashton looked back, as they rode away. 

Stark watched them go. He filled his 
lungs with the cold air, and stretched. 
Then he roused the beast out of the sand. 
It had rested, and was willing to carry him 
again as long as he did not press it. He 
set off again, across the desert. 

The ridge grew as he approached it, 
looming into a low mountain chain much 
worn by the ages. A pass opened before 
him, twisting between the hills of barren 
rock. 

He traversed it, coming out at the farther end above the basin of a dead sea. 
The lifeless land stretched away into darkness, a vast waste of desolation more lone


STOMES 

ly even than the desert. And between the 
sea- bottom and the foothills, Stark saw 
the lights of Valkis. 



II 



THERE WERE MANY LIGHTS, 
far below. Tiny pinpricks of flame 
where torches burned in the streets beside the Low-Canal the thread of black 

water that was all that remained of a forgotten ocean. 

Stark had never been here before. Now 
he looked at the city that sprawled down 
the slope under the low moons, and shivered, the primitive twitching of the nerves 
that an animal feels in the presence of 
death. 

For the streets where the torches flared 
were only a tiny part of Valkis. The life 
of the city had flowed downward from 
the cliff-tops, following the dropping level 
of the sea. Five cities, the oldest scarcely 
recognizable as a place of human habitation. Five harbors, the docks and quays 
still standing, half buried in the dust. 

Five ages of Martian history, crowned 
on the topmost level with the ruined palace 
of the old pirate kings of Valkis. The 
towers still stood, broken but indomitable, 
and in the moonlight they had a sleeping 
look, as though they dreamed of blue 
water and the sound of waves, and of tall 
ships coming in heavy with treasure. 

Stark picked his way slowly down the 
steep descent. There was something fascinating to him in the stone houses, roofless and silent in the night. The paving 
blocks still showed the rutting of wheels 
where carters had driven to the marketplace, and princes had gone by in gilded 
chariots. The quays were scarred where 
ships had lain against them, rising and 
falling with the tides. 

Stark's senses had developed in a strange 
school, and the thin veneer of civilization 
he affected had not dulled them. Now it 
seemed to him that the wind had the 
echoes of voices in it, and the smell of 
spices and fresh-spilled blood. 

He was not surprised when, in the last 
level above the living town, armed men 
came out of the shadows and stopped him. 

They were lean, dark men, very wiry 



QUEEN OF THE MARTIAN CATACOMBS 



and light of foot, and their faces were 

the faces of wolves not primitive 

wolves at all, but beasts of prey that had 
been civilized for so many thousands of 
years that they could afford to forget it. 

They were most courteous, and Stark 
would not have cared to disobey their request. 

He gave his name. "Delgaun sent for 
me." 

The leader of the Valkisians nodded his 
narrow head. "You're expected/' His. 
sharp eyes had taken in every feature of 
the Earthman, and Stark knew that his 
description had been memorized down to 
the last detail. Valkis guarded its doors 
with care. 

"Ask in the city," said the sentry. "Anyone can direct you to the palace." 

Stark nodded and went on, down 
through the long-dead streets in the moonlight and the silence. 

With shocking suddenness, he was 
plunged into the streets of the living. 

It was very late now, but Valkis was 
awake and stirring. Seething, rather. The 
narrow twisting ways were crowded. The 
laughter of women came down from the 
flat roofs. Torchlight flared, gold and scarlet, lighting the wineshops, making blacker 
the shadows of the alley-mouths. 

Stark left his beast at a serai on the 
edge of the canal. The paddocks were already jammed. Stark recognized the longlegged brutes of the Dryland breed, and as 
he left a caravan passed him, coming in, 
with a jangling of bronze bangles and a 
great hissing and stamping in the dust. 

The riders were tall barbarians ■ 

Keshi, Stark thought, from the way they 
braided their tawny hair. They wore plain 
leather, and their blue-eyed women rode 
like queens. 

Valkis was full of them. For days, it 
seemed, they must have poured in across 
the dead sea bottom, from the distant oases 
and the barren deserts of the back-blocks. 
Brawny warriors of Kesh and Shun, making holiday beside the Low-Canal, where 
there was more water than any of them 
had seen in their lives. 

They were in Valkis, these barbarians, 
but they were not part of it. Shouldering 
his way through the streets, Stark got the 



peculiar flavor of the town, that he guessed 
could never be touched or changed by anything. 

In a square, a girl danced to the music 
of harp and drum. The air was heavy 
with the smell of wine and burning pitch 
and incense. A lithe, swart Valkisian in 
his bright kilt and jewelled girdle leaped 
out and danced with the girl, his teeth 
flashing as he whirled and postured. In 
the end he bore her off, laughing, her black 
hair hanging down his back. 

Women looked at Stark. Women graceful as cats, bare to the waist, their skirts 
slit at the sides above the thigh, wearing 
no ornaments but the tiny golden bells that 
are the particular property of the LowCanal towns, so that the air is always 
filled with their delicate, wanton chiming. 

Valkis had a laughing, wicked soul. 
Stark had been in many places in his life, 
but never one before that beat with such 
a pulse of evil, incredibly ancient, but 
strong and gay. 

He found the palace at last a great 

rambling structure of quarried stone, with 
doors and shutters of beaten bronze closed 
against the dust and the incessant wind. 
He gave his name to the guard and was 
taken inside, through halls hung with antique tapestries, the flagged floors worn 
hollow by countless generations of sandalled feet. 

A GAIN, Stark's half-wild senses told 
-**■ him that life within these walls had 
not been placid. The very stones whispered 
of age-old violence, the shadows were 
heavy with the lingering ghosts of passion. 

He was brought before Delgaun, the 
lord of Valkis, in the big central room that 
served as his headquarters, 

Delgaun was lean and catlike, after the 
fashion of his race. His black hair showed 
a stippling- of silver, and the hard beauty 
of his face was strongly marked, the lines 
drawn deep and all the softness of youth 
long gone away. He wore a magnificent 
harness, and his eyes, under fine dark 
brows, were like drops of hot gold. 

He looked up as the Earthman came in, 
one swift penetrating glance. Then he 
said, "You're Stark." 



10 



PLANET STORIES 



There was something odd about those 
yellow eyes, bright and keen as a killer 
hawk's yet somehow secret, as though the 
true thoughts behind them would never 
show through. Instinctively, Stark disliked the man. 

But he nodded and came up to the council table, turning his attention to the others. 

in the room. A handful of Martians 

Low-Canallers, chiefs and fighting men 
from their ornaments and their proud 

looks and several outlanders, their 

conventional garments incongruous in this 
place. 

Stark knew them all. Knighton and 
Walsh of Terra, Themis of Mercury, Ar
rod of Callisto Colony and Luhar of 

Venus. Pirates, thieves, renegades, and 
each one an expert in his line. 

Ashton was right. There was something 
big, something very big and very ugly, 
shaping between Valkis and the Drylands. 
But that was only a quick, passing 
thought in Stark's mind. It was on Luhar 
that his attention centered. Bitter memory 
and hatred had come to savage life within 
him as soon as he saw the Venusian. 

The man was handsome. A cashiered 
officer of the crack Venusian Guards, very 
slim, very elegant, his pale hair cropped 
short and curling, his dark tunic fitting 
him like a second skin. 

He said, "The aborigine ! I thought we 
had enough barbarians here without sending for more." 

Stark said nothing. He began to walk 
toward Luhar. 

Luhar said sharply, "There's no use in 
getting nasty, Stark. Past scores are past. 
We're on the same side now." 

The Earthman spoke, then, with a peculiar gentleness. 

"We were on the same side once before. Against Terro-Venus Metals. Remember ?" 

"I remember very well!" Luhar was 
speaking now not to Stark alone, but to 
everyone in the room. "I remember that 
your innocent barbarian friends had me 
tied to the block there in the swamps, and 
that you were watching the whole thing 
with honest pleasure. If the Company men 
hadn't come along, I'd be screaming there 
yet." 



"You sold us out," Stark said. "You 
had it coming." 

He continued to walk toward Luhar. 
Delgaun spoke. He did not raise his 
voice, yet Stark felt the impact of his command. 

"There will be no fighting here," Delgaun said. "You are both hired mercenaries, and while you take my pay you will 
forget your private quarrels. Do you understand ?" 

Luhar nodded and sat down, smiling out 
of the corner of his mouth at Stark, who 
stood looking with narrowed eyes at Delgaun. 

He was still half blind with his anger 
against Luhar. His hands ached for the 
kill. But even so, he recognized the power 
in Delgaun. 

A sound shockingly akin to the growl of 
a beast echoed in his throat. Then, gradually, he relaxed. The man Delgaun he 
would have challenged. But to do so would 
wreck the mission that he had promised to 
carry out here for Ashton. 

He shrugged, and joined the others at 
the table. 

Walsh of Terra rose abruptly and began to prowl back and forth. 

"How much longer do we have to wait?" 
he demanded. 

Delgaun poured wine into a bronze goblet. "Don't expect me to know," he snapped. He shoved the flagon along the table 
toward Stark. 

Stark helped himself. The wine was 
warm and sweet on his tongue. He drank 
slowly, sitting relaxed and patient while 
the others smoked nervously or rose to 
pace up and down. 

Stark wondered what, or who, they were 
waiting for. But he did not ask. 
Time went by. 

Stark raised his head, listening. "What's 
that?" 

Their duller ears had heard nothing, 
but Delgaun rose and flung open the shutters of the window near him. 

The Martian dawn, brilliant and clear, 
flooded the dead sea bottom with harsh 
light. Beyond the black line of the canal 
a caravan was coming toward Valkis 
through the blowing dust. 

It was no ordinary caravan. Warriors 



QUEEN OF THE MARTiAN 

rode before and behind, their spearheads 
blazing in the sunrise. Jewelled trappings 
on the beasts, a litter with curtains of 
crimson silk, barbaric splendor. Clear and 
thin on the air came the wild music of 
pipes and the deep-throated throbbing of 
drums. 

Stark guessed without being told who 
it was that rode out of the desert like a 
king. 

Delgaun made a harsh sound in his 
throat. "It's Kynon, at last!" he said, and 
swung around from the window. His eyes 
sparkled with some private amusement. 
"Let us go and welcome the Giver of 
Life!" 

Stark went with them, out into the 
crowded streets. A silence had fallen on 
the town. Valkisian and barbarian alike 
were caught now in a breathless excitement, pressing through the narrow ways, 
flowing toward the canal. 

Stark found himself beside Delgaun in 
the great square of the slave market, 
standing on the auction block, above the 
heads of the throng. The stillness, the 
expectancy of the crowd were uncanny . . . 

To the measured thunder of drums and 
the wild skirling of desert pipes, Kynon 
of Shun came into Valkis. 



Ill 

STRAIGHT INTO THE SQUARE 
of the slave market the caravan came, 
and the people pressed back against the 
walls to make way for them. Stamping of 
padded hoofs on the stones, ring and 
clash of harness, brave glitter of spears 
and the great two-handed broadswords of 
the Drylands, with drumbeats to shake the 
heart and the savage cry of the pipes to 
set the blood leaping. Stark could not restrain an appreciative thrill in himself. 

The advance guard reached the slave 
block. Then, with deafening abruptness, 
the drummers crossed their sticks and the 
pipers ceased, and there was utter silence 
in the square. 

It lasted for almost a minute, and then 
from every barbarian throat the name of 
Kynon roared out until the stones of the 
city echoed with it. 

A man leaped from the back of his 



CATACOMBS 11 

mount to the block, standing at its outer 
edge where all could see, his hands flung 
up. 

"I greet you, my brothers!" 

And the cheering went on. 

Stark studied Kynon, surprised that he 
was so young. He had expected a graybearded prophet, and instead, here was a 
brawny-shouldered man of war standing 
as tall as himself. 

Kynon's eyes were a bright, compelling 
blue, and his face was the face of a young 

eagle. His voice had deep music in it 

the kind of voice that can sway crowds 
to madness. 

Stark looked from him to the rapt faces 

of "*the people even the Valkisians had 

caught the mood and thought that Kynon was the most dangerous man he had 
ever seen. This tawny-haired barbarian 
in his kilt of bronze-bossed leather was 
already half a god. 

Kynon shouted to the captain of his 
warriors, "Bring the captive and the old 
man !" Then he turned again to the crowd, 
urging them to silence. When at last the 
square was still, his voice rang challengingly across it. 

"There are still those who doubt me. 
Therefore I have come to Valkis, and this 

day now ! 1 will show proof that I 

have not lied I" 

A roar and a mutter from the crowd. 
Kynon's men were lifting to the block a 
tottering ancient so bowed with years that 
he could barely stand, and a youth of Terran stock. The boy was in chains. The 
old man's eyes burned, and he looked at the 
boy beside him with a terrible joy. 

Stark settled down to watch. The litter 
with the curtains of crimson silk was now 
beside the block. A girl, a Valkisian, stood 
beside it, looking up. It seemed to Stark 
that her green eyes rested on Kynon with 
a smouldering anger. 

He glanced away from the serving girl, 
and saw that the curtains were partly open. 
A woman lay on the cushions within. He 
could not see much of her, except that 
her hair was like dark flame and she was 
smiling, looking at the old man and the 
naked boy. Then her glance, very dark in 
the shadows of the litter, shifted away 
and Stark followed it and saw Delgaun. 



12 



PLANET STORIES 



Every muscle of Delgaun's body was 
drawn taut, and he seemed unable to look 
away from the woman in the litter. 

Stark smiled, very slightly. The outlanders were cynically absorbed in what 
was going on. The crowd had settled 
again to that silent, breathless tension. The 
sun blazed down out of the empty sky. 
The dust blew, and the wind was sharp 
with the smell of living flesh. 

The old man reached out and touched 
the boy's smooth shoulder, and his gums 
showed bluish as he laughed. 

Kynon was speaking again. 

"There are still those who doubt me, 
I say! Those who scoffed when I said 
that I possessed the ancient secret of the 

Ramas of long ago the secret by which 

one man's mind may be transferred into 
another's body. But none of you after today will doubt that I hold that secret ! 

"I, myself, am not a Rama." He 
glanced down along his powerful frame, 
half-consciously flexing his muscles, and 
laughed. "Why should I be a Rama? I 
have no need, as yet, for the Sending-on 
of Minds !" 

Answering laughter, half ribald, from 
the crowd. 

"No," said Kynon, "I am not a Rama. 
I am a man like you. Like you, I have no 
wish to grow old, and in the end, to die." 

He swung abruptly to the old man. 

"You, Grandfather! Would you not 

wish to be young again to ride out to 

battle, to take the woman of your choice ?" 

The old man wailed, "Yes ! Yes I" and 
his gaze dwelt hungrily upon the boy. 

"And you shall be!" The strength of a 
god rang in Kynon's voice. He turned 
again to the crowd and cried out, 

"For years I suffered in the desert alone, 
searching for the lost secret of the Ramas. 
And I found it, my brothers ! I hold their 

ancient power. I alone in these two 

hands I hold it, and with it 1 shall begin 
a new era for our Dryland races ! 

"There will be fighting, yes. There will 
be bloodshed. But when that is over and 
the men of Kesh and Shun are free from 
their ancient bondage of thirst and the 
men of the Low-Canals have regained their 
own then I shall give new life, unending life, to all who have followed me. 



The aged and lamed and wounded can 
choose new bodies from among the captives. There will be no more age, no more 
sickness, no more death!" 

A rippling, shivering sigh from the 
crowd. Eyeballs gleaming in the bitter 
light, mouths open on the hunger that is 
nearest to the human soul. 

"Lest anyone still doubt my promise," 

said Kynon, "watch. Watch and I 

will show you !" 

They watched. Not stirring, hardly 
breathing, they watched. 

THE drums struck up a slow and 
solemn beat. The captain of the 
warriors, with an escort of six men, 
marched to the litter and took from the 
woman's hands a bundle wrapped in silks. 
Bearing it as though it were precious beyond belief, he came to the block and lifted 
it up, and Kynon took it from him. 

The silken wrappings fluttered loose, fell 
away. And in Kynon's hands gleamed two 
crystal crowns and a shining rod. 

He held them high, the sunlight glancing in cold fire from the crystal. 

"Behold !" he said. "The Crowns of the 
Ramas !" 

The crowd drew breath then, one long 
rasping Ah! 

The solemn drumbeat never faltered. It 
was as though the pulse of the whole 
world throbbed within it. Kywon turned. 
The old man began to tremble. Kynon 
placed one crown on his wrinkled scalp, 
and the tottering creature winced as though 
in pain, but his face was ecstatic. 

Relentlessly, Kynon crowned with the 
second circlet the head of the frightened 
boy. 

"Kneel," he said. 

They knelt. Standing tall above them, 
KynGn held the rod in his two hands, between the crystal crowns. 

Light was born in the rod. It was no 
reflection of the sun. Blue and brilliant, 
it flashed along the rod and leaped from it 
to wake an answering brilliance in the 
crowns, so that the old man and the youth 
were haloed with a chill, supernal fire. 

The drumbeat ceased. The old man 
cried out. His hands plucked feebly at his 
head, then went to his breast and clenched 



QUEEN OF THE MARTI AN CATACOMBS 



there. Quite suddenly he fell forward 
over his knees. A convulsive tremor shook 
him. Then he lay still. 

The boy swayed and then fell forward 
also, with a clashing of chains. 

The light died out of the crowns. Kynon stood a moment longer, rigid as a 
statue, holding the rod which still flickered 
with blue lightning. Then that also died. 

Kynon lowered the rod. In a ringing 
voice he cried, "Arise, Grandfather!" 

The boy stirred. Slowly, very slowly, 
he rose to his feet. Holding out his hands, 
he stared at them, and then touched his 
thighs, and his flat belly, and the deep 
curve of his chest. 

Up the firm young throat the wondering fingers went, to the smooth cheeks, to 
the thick fair hair above the crown. A 
cry broke from him. 

With the perfect accent of the Drylands, the Earth boy cried in Martian, "I 
am in the youth's body! I am young 
again !" 

A scream, a wail of ecstasy, burst from 
the crowd. It swayed like a great beast, 
white faces turned upward. The boy fell 
down and embraced Kynon's knees. 

Eric John Stark found that he himself 
was trembling slightly. He glanced at 
Delgaun and the outlanders. The Valkisian wore a look of intense satisfaction under his mask of awe. The others were almost as rapt and open-mouthed as the 
crowd. 

Stark turned his head slightly and 
looked down at the litter. One white hand 
was already drawing the curtains, so that 
the scarlet silk appeared to shake with silent laughter. 

The serving girl beside it had not moved. 
Still she looked up at Kynon, and there 
was nothing in her eyes but hate. 

After that there was bedlam, the rush 
and trample of the crowd, the beating of 
drums, the screaming of pipes, deafening 
uproar. The crowns and the crystal rod 
were wrapped again and taken away. Kynon raised up the boy and struck off the 
chains of captivity. He mounted, with the 
boy beside him. Delgaun walked before 
him through the streets, and so did the 
outlanders. 

The body of the old man was disre


13 

garded, except by some of Kynon's barbarians who wrapped it in a white cloth 
and took it away. 

Kynon of Shun came in triumph to Delgaun's palace. Standing beside the litter, 
he gave his hand to the woman, who 
stepped out and walked beside him through 
the bronze door. 

The women of Shun are tall and strong, 
bred to stand beside their men in war as 
well as love, and this red-haired daughter 
of the Drylands was enough to stop a 
man's heart with her proud step and her 
white shoulders, and her eyes that were 
the color of smoke. Stark's gaze followed 
her from a distance. 

Presently in the council room were gathered Delgaun and the outlanders, Kynon 

and his bright-haired queen and no 

other Martians but those three. 

Kynon sprawled out in the high seat at 
the head of the table. His face was beaming. He wiped the sweat off it, and then 
filled a goblet with wine, looking around 
the room with his bright blue eyes. 

"Fill up, gentlemen. I'll give you a 
toast." He lifted the goblet. "Here's to 
the secret of the Ramas, and the gift of 
life!" 

Stark put down his goblet, still empty. 
He stared directly at Kynon. 

"You have no secret," said Stark deliberately. 

Kynon sat perfectly still, except that, 
very slowly, he put his own goblet down. 
Nobody else moved. 

Stark's voice sounded loud in the stillness. 

"Furthermore," he said, "that demonstration in the square was a lie from beginning to end." 

IV 

STARK'S WORDS HAD THE 
effect of an electric shock on the listeners. Delgaun's black brows went up, 
and the woman came forward a little to 
stare at the Earthman with profound interest. 

Kynon asked a question, of nobody in 
particular. "Who," he demanded, "is this 
great black ape?" 

Delgaun told him. 



14 



"Ah, yes," said Kynon. "Eric John 
Stark, the wild man from Mercury." He 

scowled threateningly. "Very well 

explain how I lied in the square!" 

"Certainly. First of all, the Earth boy 
was a prisoner. He was told what he had 
to do to save his neck, and then was carefully coached in his part. Secondly, the 
crystal rod and the crowns are a fake. 
You used a simple Purcell unit in the rod 
to produce an electronic brush discharge. 
That made the blue light. Thirdly, you 
gave the old man poison, probably by 
means of a sharp point on the crown. I 
saw him wince when you put it on him." 

Stark paused. "The old man died. The 
boy went through his sham. And that wa9 
that." 

Again there was a flat silence. Luhar 
crouched over the table, his face avid with 
hope. The woman's eyes dwelt on Stark 
and did not turn away. 

Then, suddenly, Kynon laughed. He 
roared with it until the tears ran. 

"It was a good show, though," he said 
at last. "Damned good. You'll have to 
admit that. The crowd swallowed it, 
horns, hoofs and hide." 

He got up and came round to Stark, 
clapping him on the shoulder, a blow that 
would have laid a lesser man flat. 

"I like you, wild man. Nobody else 
here had the guts to speak out, but I'll 
give you odds they were all thinking the 
same thing." 

Stark said, "Just where were you, Kynon, during those years you were supposed to be suffering alone in the desert ?" 

"Curious, aren't you? Well, Til let you 
in on a secret." Kynon lapsed abruptly 
into perfectly good colloquial English. "I 
was on Terra, learning about things like 
the Purcell electronic discharge." 

Reaching over, he poured wine for 
Stark and held it out to him. "Now you 
know. Now we all know. So let's wash 
the dust out of our throats and get down 
to business." 

Stark said, "No." 

Kynon looked at him. "What now?" 

"You're lying to your people," Stark 
said flatly. "You're making false promises, to lead them into war." 

Kynon was genuinely puzzled by Stark's 



PLANET STORIES 

anger, "But of course!" he said, 



Is there 

anything new or strange in that?" 

Luhar spoke up, his voice acid with 
hate. "Watch out for him, Kynon. He'll 
sell you out, he'll cut your throat, if he 
thinks it best for the barbarians." 

Delgaun said, "Stark's reputation is 
known all over the system. There's no 
need to tell us that again." 

"No." Kynon shook his head, looking 
very candidly at Stark. "We sent for you, 
didn't we, knowing that? All right." 

He stepped back a little, so that the 
others were included in what he was going 
to say. 

"My people have a just cause for war. 
They go hungry and thirsty, while the 
City-States along the Dryland Border hog 
all the water sources and grow fat. Do 
you know what it means to watch your 
children die crying for water on a long 
march, to come at last to the oasis and 
find the well sanded in by a storm, and go 
on again, trying to save your people and 
, your herd ? Well, I do ! I was born and 
bred in the Drylands, and many a time I've 
cursed the border states with a tongue like 
a dry stick. 

"Stark, you should know the workings 
of the barbarian mind as well as I do. 
The men of Kesh and Shun are traditional enemies. Raiding and thieving, open 
warfare over water and grass. I had to 

give them a rallying point a faith 

strong enough to unite them. Resurrecting the Rama legend was the only hope I 
had. 

"And it has worked. The tribes are 
one people now. They can go on and take 

what belongs to them the right to live. 

I'm not really so far out in my promises, 
at that. Now do you understand?" 

STARK studied him, with his cold cateyes. "Where do the men of Valkis 

come in the men of Jekkara and Bar
rakesh? Where do we come in, the hired 
bravoes?" 

Kynon smiled. It was a perfectly sincere smile, and it had no humor in it, only 
a great pride and a cheerful cruelty. 

"We're going to build an empire," he 
said softly. "The City-States are disorganized, too starved or too fat to fight. 



QUEEN OF THE 

And Earth is taking us over. Before long, 
Mars will be hardly more than another 
Luna. 

"We're going to fight that. Drylander 
and Low-Canaller together, we're going to 

build a power out of dust and blood 

and there will be loot in plenty to go 
round." 

"That's where my men come in," said 
Delgaun, and laughed. "We low-CanalIers live by rapine." 

"And you," said Kynon, "the 'hired 
bravoes', are in it to help. I need you and 
the Venusian, Stark, to train my men, to 
plan campaigns, to give me all you know 
of guerrilla fighting. Knighton has a fast 
cruiser. He'll bring us supplies from outside. Walsh is a genius, they tell me, at 
fashioning weapons. Themis is a mechanic, and also the cleverest thief this 
side of hell saving your presence, Delgaun! Arrod organized and bossed the 
Brotherhood of the Little Worlds, which 
had the Space Patrol going mad for years. 
He can do the same for us. So there you 
have it. Now, Stark, what do you say?" 

The Earthman answered slowly, "I'll 

go along with you as long as no harm 

comes to the tribes." 

Kynon laughed. "No need to worry 
about that." 

"Just one more question," Stark said. 
"What's going to happen when the people 
find out that this Rama stuff is just a 
myth?" 

"They won't," said Kynon. "The crowns 
will be destroyed in battle, and it will be 
very tragic, but very final. No one knows 
how to make more of them. Oh, I can 
handle the people! They'll be happy 
enough, with good land and water." 

He looked around then and said plaintively, "And now can we sit down and 
drink like civilized men?" 

They sat. The wine went round, and 
the vultures of Valkis drank to each 
other's luck and loot, and Stark learned 
that the woman's name was Berild. 

Kynon was happy. He had made his 
point with the people, and he was celebrating. But Stark noticed that though his 
tongue grew thick, it did not loosen. 

Luhar grew steadily more morose and 
silent, glancing covertly across the table at 



MARTIAN CATACOMBS 15 

Stark. Delgaun toyed with his goblet, and 
his yellow- gaze which gave nothing away 
moved restlessly between Berild and Stark. 

Berild drank not at all. She sat a little 
apart, with her face in shadow, and her 
red mouth smiled. Her thoughts, too, were 
her own secret. But Stark knew that she 
was still watching him, and he knew that 
Delgaun was aware of it. 

Presently Kynon said, "Delgaun and I 
have some talking to do, so I'll bid you 
gentlemen farewell for the present. You, 

Stark, and Luhar I'm going back into 

the desert at midnight, and you're going 
with me, so you'd better get some sleep." 

Stark nodded. He rose and went out, 
with the others. 

An attendant showed him to his quarters, in the north wing. Stark had not 
rested for twenty-four hours, and he was 
glad of the chance to sleep. 

He lay down. The wine spun in his 
head, and Berild's smile mocked him. 
Then his thoughts turned to Ashton, and 
his promise. Presently he slept, and 
dreamed. 

TTE was a boy on Mercury again, runrX ning down a path that led from a 
cave mouth to the floor of a valley. Above 
him the mountains rose into the sky and 
were lost beyond the shallow atmosphere. 
The rocks danced in the terrible heat, but 
the soles of his feet were like iron, and 
trod them lightly. He was quite naked. 

The blaze of the sun between the valley 
walls was like the shining heart of Hell. 
It did not seem to the boy N'Chaka that 
it could ever be cold again, yet he knew 
that when darkness came there would be 
ice on the shallows of the river. The gods 
were constantly at war. 

He passed a place, ruined by earthquake. 
It was a mine, and N'Chaka remembered 
dimly that he had once lived there, with 
several white-skinned creatures shaped 
like himself. He went on without a second 
glance. 

He was searching for Tika. When he 
was old enough, he would mate with her. 
He wanted to hunt with her now, for she 
was fleet and as keen as he at scenting 
out the great lizards. 

He heard her voice calling his name. 



16 



PLANET STORIES 



There was terror in it, and N'Chaka began to run. He saw her, crouched between 
two huge boulders, her light fur stained 
with blood. 

A vast black-winged shadow swooped 
down upon him. It glared at him with its 
yellow eyes, and its long beak tore at him. 
He thrust his spear at it, but talons hooked 
into his shoulder, and the golden eyes were 
close to him, bright and full of death. 

He knew those eyes. Tika screamed, but 
the sound faded, everything faded but 
those eyes. He sprang up, grappling with 
the thing . . . 

A man's voice yelling, a man's hands 
thrusting him away. The dream receded. 
Stark came back to reality, dropping the 
scared attendant who had come to waken 
him. 

The man cringed away from him. "Delgaun sent me. He wants you in the 

council room/* Then he turned and fled. 

STARJC shook himself. The dream had 
been terribly real. He went down to 
the council room. It was dusk now, and the 
torches were lighted. 

Delgaun was waiting, and Berild sat beside him at the table. They were alone 
there. Delgaun looked up, with his golden 
eyes. 

"I have a job for you, Stark," he said. 
"You remember the captain of Kynon's 
men, in the square today?" 

"I do." 

"His name is Freka, and he's a good 
man, but he's addicted to a certain vice. 
He'll be up to his ears in it by now, and 
somebody has to get him back by the 
time Kynon leaves. Will you see to it?" 

Stark glanced at Berild. It seemed to 
him that she was amused, whether at him 
or at Delgaun he could not tell. He asked, 

"Where will I find him?" 

"There's only one place where he can 

get his particular poison: Kala's, out on 

the edge of Valkis. It's in the old city, 
beyond the lower quays." Delgaun smiled. 
"You may have to be ready with your fists, 
Stark. Freka may not want to come." 

Stark hesitated. Then, "I'll do my best," 
he said, and went out into the dusky streets 
of Valkis. 

He crossed a square, heading away from 



the palace. A twisting lane swallowed 
him up. And quite suddenly, someone took 
his arm and said rapidly, 

"Smile at me, and then turn aside into 
the alley." 

The hand on his arm was small and 
brown, the voice very pretty with its accompaniment of little chiming bells. He 
smiled, as she had bade him, and turned 
aside into the alley, which was barely more 
than a crack between two rows of houses. 

Swiftly, he put his hands against the 
wall, so that the girl was prisoned between them. A green-eyed girl, with golden 
bells braided in her black hair, and impudent breasts bare above a jewelled girdle. 
A handsome girl, with a proud look to 
her. 

The serving girl who had stood beside 
the litter in the square, and had watched 
Kynon with such bleak hatred. 

"Well," said Stark. "And what do you 
want with me, little one?" 

She answered, "My name is Fianna. 
And I do not intend to kill you, neither 
will I run away." 

Stark let his hands drop. "Did you 
follow me, Fianna?" 

"I did. Delgaun's palace is full of hidden ways, and I know them all. I was 
listening behind the panel in the council 
room. I heard you speak out against Kynon, and I heard Delgaun's order, just 
now." 

"So?" 

"So, if you meant what you said about the 
tribes, you had better get away now, while 
you have the chance. Kynon lied to you. 
He will use you, and then kill you, as he 
will use and then destroy his own people." 
Her voice was hot with bitter fury. 

Stark gave her a slow smile that might 
have meant anything, or nothing. 

"You're a Valkisian, Fianna. What do 
you care what happens to the barbarians ?" 

Her slightly tilted green eyes looked 
scornfully into his. 

"I'm not trying to trap you, Earthman. 
I hate Kynon. And my mother was a 
woman of the desert." 

She paused, then went on sombrely, 
"Also, I serve the lady Berild, and I have 
learned many things. There is trouble 
coming, greater trouble than Kynon 



QUEEIV OF 

knows." She asked, suddenly, 
you know of the Ramas?" 

"Nothing," he answered, "except that 
they don't exist now, if they ever did." 

Fianna gave him an odd look. "Perhaps 
they don't. Will you listen to me, Earthman from Mercury? Will you get away, 
now that you know you're marked for 
death?" 

Stark said, "No." 

' 'Even if I tell you that Delgaun has 
set a trap for you at Kala's?" 

"No. But I will thank you for your 
warning, Fianna." 

He bent and kissed her, because she was 
very young and honest. Then he turned 
and went on his way. 



NIGHT CAME SWIFTLY. STARK 
left behind him the torches and the 
laughter and the sounding harps, coming 
into the streets of the old city where there 
was nothing but silence and the light of 
the low moons. 

He saw the lower quays, great looming 
shapes of marble rounded and worn by 
time, and went toward them. Presently 
he found that he was following a faint but 
definite path, threaded between the ancient 
houses. It was very still, so that the dry 
whisper of the drifting dust was audible. 
He passed under the shadow of the 
quays, and turned into a broad way that 
had once led up from the harbor. A little 
way ahead, on the other side, he saw a 
tall building half fallen in ruin. Its windows were shuttered, barred with light, 
and from it came the sound of voices and 
a thin thread of music, very reedy and 

evil. , 

Stark approached it, slipping through 
the ragged shadows as though he had no 
more weight to him than a drift of smoke. 
Once a door banged and a man came out 
of Kala's and passed by, going down to 
Valkis. Stark saw his face in the moonlight. It was the face of a beast, rather 
than a man. He muttered to himself as he 
went, and once he laughed, and Stark felt 
a loathing in him. 

He waited until the sound of footsteps 

2— Planet— Summer 



THE MARTIAN CATACOMBS 17 

"What do had died away. The rumed houses gave 
no sign of danger. A lizard rustled between the stones, and that was all. The 
moonlight lay bright and still on Kala's 
door. 

Stark found a little shard of rock and 
tossed it, so that it made a sharp snicking 
sound against the shadowed wall beyond 
him. Then he held his breath, listening. 

No one, nothing, stirred. Only the dry 
wind sighed in the empty houses. 

Stark went out, across the open space, 
and nothing happened. He flung open the 
door of Kala's dive. 

Yellow light spilled out, and a choking 
wave of hot and stuffy air. Inside, there 
were tall lamps with quartz lenses, each 
of which poured down a beam of throbbing, gold-orange light. And in the little 
pools of radiance, on filthy furs and cushions on the floor, lay men and women 
whose faces were slack and bestial. 

Stark realized now what secret vice 
Kala sold here. Shanga the goingback- the radiation that caused tem


porary artificial atavism and let men wallow for a time in beasthood. It was supposed to have been stamped out when the 
Lady Fand's dark Shanga ring had been 
destroyed. But it still persisted, in places 
like this outside the law. 

He looked for Freka, and recognized 
the tall barbarian. He was sprawled under one of the Shanga lamps, eyes closed, 
face brutish, growling and twitching in 
sleep like the beast he had temporarily become. 

A voice spoke from behind Stark's 
shoulder. "I am Kala. What do you wish, 
Outlander?" 

He turned. Kala might have been beautiful once, a thousand years ago as you 
reckon sin. She wore still the sweet chiming bells in her hair, and Stark thought of 
Fianna. The woman's ravaged face turned 
him sick. It was like the reedy, piping 
music, woven out of the very heart of evil 
Yet her eyes were shrewd, and he knew 
that she had not missed his searching look 
around the room, nor his interest in Freka. 
There was a note of warning in her voice. 
He did not want trouble, yet. Not until 
he found some hint of the trap Fianna had 
told him of. 



i 



18 



PLANET STORIES 



He said, "Bring me wine." 
"Will you try the lamp of Going-back, 
Outlander? It brings much joy." 
"Perhaps later. Now, I wish wine," 

SHE went away, clapping her hands 
for a slatternly wench who came between the sprawled figures with an earthen 
mug. Stark sat down beside a table, where 
his back was to the wall and he could see 
both the door and the whole room. 

Kala had returned to her own heap of 
furs by the door, but her basilisk eyes 
were alert. 

Stark made a pretence of drinking, but 
his mind was very busy, very cold. 

Perhaps this, in itself, was the trap. 
Freka was temporarily a beast. He would 
fight, and Kala would shriek, and the 
other dull-eyed brutes would rise and fight 
also. 

But he would have needed no warning 

about that and Delgaun himself had 

said there would be trouble. 

No. There was something more. 
He let his gaze wander over the room. 
It was large, and there were other rooms 
off of it, the openings hung with ragged 
curtains. Through the rents, Stark could 
see others of Kala's customers sprawled 
under Shanga-lamps, and some of these 
had gone so far back from humanity that 
they were hideous to behold. But still there 
was no sign of danger to himself. 

There was only one odd thing. The 
room nearest to where Freka sat was 
empty, and its curtains were only partly 
drawn. 

Stark began to brood on the emptiness 
of that room. 

He beckoned Kala to him. "I will try 
the lamp," he said. "But I wish privacy. 
Have it brought to that room, there." 
Kala said, "That room is taken." 
"But I see no one !" 
"It is taken, it is paid for, and no one 
may enter. I will have your lamp brought 
here." 

"No," said Stark. "The hell with it 
I'm going." 

He flung down a coin and went out. 
Moving swiftly outside, he placed his eye 
to a crack in the nearest shutter, and 
waited. 



Luhar of Venus came out of the empty 
room. His face was worried, and Stark 
smiled. He went back and stood flat 
against the wall beside the door. 

In a moment it opened and the Venusian came out, drawing his gun as he did 
so. 

Stark jumped him. 

Luhar let out one angry cry. His gun 
went off a vicious streak of flame across 
the moonlight, and then Stark's great hand 
crushed the bones of his wrist together 
so that he dropped it clashing on the stones. 
He whirled around, raking Stark's face 
with his nails as he clawed for the Earthman's eyes, and Stark hit him. Luhar 
fell, rolling over, and before he could 
scramble up again Stark had picked up 
the gun and thrown it away into the ruins 
across the street. 

Luhar came up from the pavement in 
one catlike spring. Stark fell with him, 
back through Kala's door, and they rolled 
together among the foul furs and cushions. 
Luhar was built of spring steel, with no 
softness in him anywhere, and his long 
fingers were locked around Stark's throat. 
Kala screamed with fury. She caught 

a whip from among her cushions a 

traditional weapon along the Low Canals 
and began to lash the two men impartially, her hair flying in tangled locks 
across her face. The bestial figures under 
the lamps shambled to their feet, and 
growled. 

The long lash ripped Stark's shirt and 
the flesh of his back beneath it. He 
snarled and staggered to his feet, with 
Luhar still clinging to the death grip on 
his throat. He pushed Luhar's face 
away from him with both hands and 
threw himself forward, over a table, so 
that Luhar was crushed beneath him. 

The Venusian's breath left him with a 
whistling grunt. His fingers relaxed. 
Stark struck his hands away. He rose 
and bent over Luhar and picked him up, 
gripping him cruelly so that he turned 
white with the pain, and raised him high 
and flung him bodily into the growling, 
beast- faced men who were shambling 
toward him. 

Kala leaped at Stark, cursing, striking him with the coiling lash. He turned. 



QUEEN OF THE 

The thin veneer of civilization was gone 
from Stark now, erased in a second by 
the first hint of battle. His eyes blazed 
with a cold light. He took the whip out 
of Kala's hand and laid his palm across 
her evil face, and she fell and lay still. 

He faced the ring of bestial, Shangasodden men who walled him off from what 
he had been sent to do. There was a reddish tinge to his vision, partly blood, 
partly sheer rage. He could see Freka 
standing erect in the corner, his head 
weaving from side to side brutishly. 

Stark raised the whip and strode into 
the ring of men who were no longer 
quite men. 



HANDS struck and clawed him. Bodies 
reeled and fell away. Blank eyes 
glittered, and red mouths squealed, and 
there was a mingling of snarls and bestial 
laughter in his ears. The blood-lust had 
spread to these creatures now. They 
swarmed upon Stark and bore him down 
with the weight of their writhing bodies. 

They bit him and savaged him in a blind 
way, and he fought his way up again, 
shaking them off with his great shoulders, 
trampling them under his boots. The lash 
hissed and sang, and the smell of blood 
rose on the choking air. 

Freka's dazed, brutish face swam before 
Stark. The Martian growled and flung 
himself forward. Stark swung the loaded 
butt of the whip. It cracked solidly on the 
Shunni's temple, and he sagged into 
Stark's arms. 

Out of the corner of his eyes, Stark 
saw Luhar. He had risen and crept around 
the edge of the fight. He was behind 
Stark now, and there was a knife in his 
hand. 

Hampered by Freka's weight, Stark 
could not leap aside. As Luhar rushed in, 
he crouched and went backward, his head 
and shoulders taking the Venusian low in 
the belly. He felt the hot kiss of the blade 
in his flesh, but the wound was glancing, 
and before Luhar could strike again, Stark 
twisted like a great cat and struck down. 
Luhar's skull rang on the flagging. The 
Earthman's fist rose and fell twice. After 
that, Luhar did not move. 

Stark got to his feet. He stood with 



MARTIAN CATACOMBS 19 

his knees bent and his shoulders flexed, 
looking from side to side, and the sound 
that came out of his throat was one of 
pure savagery. 

He moved forward a step or two, half 
naked, bleeding, towering like a dark 
colossus over the lean Martians, and the 
brutish throng gave back from him. They 
had taken more mauling than they liked, 
and there was something about the Outlander's simple desire to rend them apart 
that penetrated even their Shanga-clouded 
minds. 

Kala sat up on the floor, and snarled, 
"Get out." 

Stark stood a moment or two longer, 
looking at them. Then he lifted Freka to 
his feet and laid him over his shoulder like 
a sack of meal and went out, moving 
neither fast nor slow, but in a straight 
line, and way was made for him. 

He carried the Shunni down through 
the silent streets, and into the twisting, 
crowded ways of Valkis. There, too, the 
people stared at him and drew back, out 
of his path. He came to Delgaun's palace. 
The guards closed in behind him, but they 
did not ask that he stop. 

Delgaun was in the council room, and Berild was still with him. It seemed that they 
had been waiting, over their wine and 
their private talk. Delgaun rose to his feet 
as Stark came in, so sharply that his 
goblet fell and spilled a red pool of wine 
at his feet. 

Stark let the Shunni drop to the floor. 
"I have brought Freka/' he said. "Luhar is still at Kala's." 

He looked into Delgaun's eyes, golden 
and cruel, the eyes of his dream. It was 
hard not to kill. 

Suddenly the woman laughed, very clear 
and ringing, and her laughter was all for 
Delgaun. 

"Well done, wild man," she said to 
Stark. "Kynon is lucky to have such a 
captain. One word for the future, though 
— watch out for Freka. He won't forgive 
you this." 

Stark said thickly, looking at Delgaun, 
"This hasn't been a night for forgiveness." Then he added, "I can handle 
Freka." 

Berild said, "I like you, wild man." Her 



20 



PLANET STORIES 



eyes dwelt on Stark's face, curious, compelling. "Ride beside me when we go. I 
would know more about you." 

And she smiled. 

A dark flush crept over Delgaun's face. 
In a voice tight with fury he said, "Perhaps you've forgotten something, Berild. 
There is nothing for you in this barbarian, this creature of an hour!" 

He would have said more in his anger, 
but Berild said sharply. 

"We will not speak of time. Go now, 
Stark. Be ready at midnight." 

Stark went. And as he went, his brow 
was furrowed deep by a strange doubt. 

VI 

AT MIDNIGHT, IN THE GREAT 
square of the slave market, Kynon's 
caravan formed again and went out of 
Valkis with thundering drums and skirling 
pipes. Delgaun was there to see them go, 
and the cheering of the people rang after 
them on the desert wind. 

Stark rode alone. He was in a brooding mood and wanted no company, least 
of all that of the Lady Berild. She was 
beautiful, she was dangerous, and she belonged to Kynon, or to Delgaun, or perhaps to both of them. In Stark's experience, women like that were sudden death, 
and he wanted ao part of her. At any 
rate, not yet. 

Luhar rode ahead with Kynoa. He had 
come dragging into the square at the 
mounting, his face battered and swollen, 
an ugly look ia his eyes. Kynon gave one 
quick look from him to Stark, who had 
his own scars, and said harshly, 

"Delgaun tells me there's a blood feud 
between you two. I want no more of it, 
understand ? After you're paid off you can 
kill each other and welcome, but not until 
then. Is that clear?" 

Stark nodded, keeping his mouth shut. 
Luhar muttered assent, and they had not 
looked at each other since. 

Freka rode in his customary place by 
Kynon, which put him near to Luhar. It 
seemed to Stark that their beasts swung 
close together more often than was necessary from the roughness of the track. 

The big barbarian captain sat rigidly 



erect in his saddle, but Stark had seen his 
face in the torchlight, sick and sweating, 
with the brute look still clouding his eyes. 
There was a purple mark on his temple, 
but Stark was quite sure that Berild had 
spoken the truth — Freka would not forgive him either the indignity or the hangover of his unfinished wallow under the 
lamps of Shanga. 

The dead sea bottom widened away under the black sky. As they left the lights 
of Valkis behind, winding their way over 
the sand and the ribs of coral, dropping 
lower with every mile into the vast basin, 
it was hard to believe that there could be 
life anywhere on a world that could produce such cosmic desolation. 

The little moons fled away, trailing their 
eerie shadows over rock formations tortured into impossible shapes by wind and 
water, peering into clefts that seemed to 
have no bottom, turning the sand white 
as bone. The iron stars blazed, so close 
that the wind seemed edged with their 
frosty light. And in all that endless space 
nothing moved, and the silence was 'so 
deep that the coughing howl of a sandcat far away to the east made Stark jump 
with its loudness. 

Yet Stark was not oppressed by the wilderness. Born and bred to the wild and 
barren places, this desert was more kin to 
him than the cities of men. 

After a while there was a jangling of 
brazen bangles behind him and Fianna 
came up. He smiled at her, and she said 
rather sullenly, 

"The Lady Berild sent^tne, to remind 
you of her wish." 

Stark glanced to where the scarlet-curtained litter rocked along, and his eyes 
glinted. 

"She's not one to let go of a thing, is 
she?" 

"No." Fianna saw that no one was 
within earshot, and then said quietly, 
"Was it as I said, at Kala's?" 

Stark nodded. "I think, little one, that 
I owe you my life. Luhar would have 
killed me as soon as I tackled Freka." 

He reached over and touched her hand 
where it lay on the bridle. She smiled, a 
young girl's smile that seemed very sweet 
in the moonlight, honest and comradely. 



QUEEN OF THE MARTIAN CATACOMBS 

It was odd to be talking of death with smoke-grey eyes in the gloom, 
a pretty girl in the moonlight. 

Stark staid, "Why does Delgaun want 
to kill me?" 

"He gave no reason, when he spoke to 
the man from Venus. But perhaps I can 
guess. He knows that you're as strong as 
he is, and so he fears you. Also, the Lady 
Berild looked at you in a certain way," 
"I thought Berild was Kynon's woman." 
"Perhaps she is — for the time/' answered Fianna enigmatically. Then she 
shook her head, glancing around with 
what was almost fear. "I have risked 
much already. Please— don't let it be 
known that I've spoken to you, beyond 
what I was sent to say." 

Her eyes pleaded with him, and Stark 
realized with a shock that Fianna, too, 
stood on the edge of a quicksand. 

"Don't be afraid," he said, and meant 
it. "We'd better go." 

She swung her beast around, and «as 
she did so she whispered, "Be careful, 
Eric John Stark !" 

Stark nodded. He rode behind her, 
thinking that he liked the sound of his 
name on her lips. 

THE Lady Berild lay among her furs 
and cushions, and even then there 
was no indolence about her. She was relaxed as a cat is, perfectly at ease and 
yet vibrant with life. In the shadows of 
the litter her skin showed silver-white and 
her loosened hair was a sweet darkness. 

"Are you stubborn, wild man?" she 
asked. "Or do you find me distasteful?" 

He had not realized before how rich 
and soft her voice was. He looked down 
at the magnificent supple length of her, 
and said, 

"I find you most damnably attractive— 
and that's why I'm stubborn." 

"Afraid?" 

"I'm taking Kynon's pay. Should I 
take his woman also?" 

She laughed, half scornfully. "Kynon's 
ambitions leave no room for me. We have 
an agreement, because a king must have 
a queen — and he finds my counsel ^useful. 
You see, I am ambitious, too ! Apart from 
that, there is nothing." 

Stark looked at her, trying to read her 



21 
"And Delgaun t Ji 

"He wants me, but . . ." She hesitated, 
and then went on, in a tone quite different 
from before, her voice low and throbbing 
with a secret pleasure as vast and elemental as the star-shot sky. 

"I belong to no one," she said. "I am 
my own." 

Stark knew that for the moment she 
had forgotten him. 

He rode for a time in silence, and then 

he said slowly, repeating Delgaun's words, 

"Perhaps you have forgotten something, 

Berild. There is nothing for you in me, 

the creature of an hour." 

He saw her start, and for a moment 
her eyes blazed and her breath was sharply 
drawn. Then she laughed, and said, 

"The wild man is also a parrot. And an 
hour can be a long time — as long as eternity, if one wills it so." 

"Yes," said Stark, "I have often thought 
so, waiting for death to come at me out 
of a crevice in the rocks. The great lizard stings, and his bite is fatal." 

He leaned over in the saddle, his shoulders looming above hers, naked in the 
biting wind. 

"My hours with women are short ones," 
he said. "They come after the battle, when 
there is time for such things. Perhaps 
then I'll come and see you." 

He spurred away and left her without 
a backward look, and the skin of his back 
tingled with the expectancy of a flying 
knife. But the only thing that followed 
him was a disturbing echo bf laughter 
down the wind. 

Dawn came. Kynon beckoned Stark to 
his side, and pointed out at the cruel waste 
of sand, with here and there a reef of bassalt black against the burning white. 

"This is the country you will lead your 
men over. Learn it." He was speaking to 
Luhar as well. "Learn every water hole, 
every vantage point, every trail that leads 
toward the Border. There are no better 
fighters than the Dryland men when 
they're well led, and you must prove to 
them that you can lead. You'll work with 
their own chieftains — Freka, and the 
others you'll Maeet when we reach Sinharat." 



22 



PLANET STORIES 



Luhar said, "Sinharat?" 
"My headquarters. It's about seven 
days' march — am island city, old as the 
moons. The Rama cult was strong there, 
legend has it, and it's a sort of holy place 
to the tribesmen. That's why I picked it." 
He took a deep breath and smiled, looking out over the dead sea bottom- toward 
the Border, and his eyes held the same pitiless light as the sun that baked the desert. 
"Very soon, now," he said, more to himself than the others. "Only a handful of 
days before we drown the Border states 
in their own blood. And after that . . ." 
He laughed, very softly, and said no 
more. Stark could believe that what 
Berild said of him was true. There was a 
flame of ambition in Kynon that would 
let nothing stand in its way. 

He measured the size and the strength 
of the tall barbarian, the eagle look of his 
face and the iron that lay beneath his joviality.. Then Stark, too, stared off toward 
the Border and wondered if he would ever 
see Tarak or hear Simon Ashton's voice 
again. 

For three days they marched without 
incident. At noon they made a dry camp 
and slept away the blazing hours, and 
then went on again under a darkening sky, 
a long line of tall men and rangy beasts, 
with the scarlet litter blooming like a 
strange flower in the midst of it. Jingling bridles and dust, and padded hoofs 
trampling the bones of the sea, toward the 
island city of Sinharat. 

Stark did not speak again to Berild, 
nor did she send for him. Fianna would 
pass him in the camp, and smile sidelong, 
and go on. For her sake, he did not stop 
her. 

Neither Lunar nor Freka came near 
him. They avoided him pointedly, except 
when Kynon called them all together to 
discuss some point of strategy. But the 
two seemed to have become friends, and 
drank together from the same bottle of 
wine. 

Stark slept always beside his mount, 
his back guarded and his gun loose. The 
hard lessons learned in his childhood had 
stayed with him, and if there was a footfall near him in the dust he woke often before the beast did. 



TOWARD morning of the fourth night 
the wind, that never seemed to falter from its steady blowing, began to drop. 
At dawn it was dead still, and the rising 
sun had a tinge of blood. The dust rose 
under the feet of the beasts and fell again 
where it had risen. 

Stark began to sniff the air. More and 
more often he looked toward the north, 
where there was a long slope as flat as 
his palm that stretched away farther than 
he could see. 

A restless unease grew within him. 
Presently he spurred ahead to join Kynon. 
"There is a storm coming," he said, 
and turned his head northward again. 
Kynon looked at him curiously. 
"You even have the right direction," he 
said. "One might think you were a native." He, too, gazed with brooding anger 
at the long sweep of emptiness. 

"I wish we were closer to the city. But 
one place is as bad as another when the 
khamsin blows, and the only thing to do is 
keep moving. You're a dead dog if you 
stop — dead and buried." 

He swore, with a curious admixture of 
blunt Anglo-Saxon in his Martian profanity, as though the storm were a personal 
enemy. 

"Pass the word along to force it — dump 
whatever they have to to lighten the loads. 
And get Berild out of that damned litter. 
Stick by her, will you, Stark? I've got to 
stay here, at the head of the line. And 
don't get separated. Above all, don't get 
separated!" 

Stark nodded and dropped back. He 
got Berild mounted, and they left the litter 
there, a bright patch of crimson on the 
sand, its curtains limp in the utter stillness. 

Nobody talked much. The beasts wer£ 
urged on to the top of their speed. They 
were nervous and fidgety, inclined to break 
out of line and run for it. The sun rose 
higher. 
One hour. 

The windless air shimmered. The silence lay upon the caravan with a crushing hand. Stark went up and down the 
line, lending a hand to the sweating drovers with the pack animals that now carried 
only water skins and a bare supply of 



QUEEN OF THE MARTIAN 

food. Fianna rode close beside Berild. 
Two hours. 

For the first time that day there was a 
sound in the desert. 

It came from far off, a moaning wail 
like the cry of a giantess in travail. It 
rushed closer, rising as it did so to a dry 
and bitter shriek that filled the whole sky, 
shook it, and tore it open, letting in all 
the winds of hell. 

It struck swiftly. One moment the 
air was clear and motionless. The next, it 
was blind with dust and screaming as it 
fled, tearing with demoniac fury at everying in its path. 

Stark spurred toward the women, who 
were only a few feet away but already 
hidden by the veil of mingled dust and 
sand. 

Someone blundered into him in the 
murk. Long hair whipped across his face 
and he reached out, crying "Fianna! Fianna!" A woman's hand caught his, and 
a voice answered, but he could not hear 
the words. 

Then, suddenly, his beast was crowded 
by other scaly bodies. The woman's grip 
had broken. Hard masculine hands clawed at him. He could make out, dimly, the 
features of two men, close to his. 
Luhar, and Freka. 

His beast gave a great lurch, and sprang 
forward. Stark was dragged from the 
saddle, to fall backward into the raging 
sand. 

VII 

HE LAY HALF-STUNNED FOR A 
moment, his breath knocked out of 
him. There was a terrible reptilian screaming sounding thin through the roar of the 
wind. Vague shapes bolted past him, and 
twice he was nearly crushed by their trampling hoofs. 

Luhar and Freka must have waited their 
chance. It was so beautifully easy. Leave 
Stark alone and afoot, and the storm and 
the desert between them would do the 
work, with no blame attaching to any 



man. 



Stark got to his feet, and a human body 
struck him at the knees so that he went 
down again. He grappled with it, snarl


CATACOMBS 23 

ing, before he realized that the flesh between his hands was soft and draped in 
silken cloth. Then he saw that he was 
holding Berild. 

"It was I," she gasped, "and not Fianna." 

Her words reached him very faintly, 
though he knew she was yelling at the top 
of her lungs. She must have been knocked from her own mount when Luhar 
thrust between them. 

Gripping her tightly, so that she should 
not be blown away, Stark struggled up 
again. With all his strength, it was almost 
impossible to stand. 

Blinded, deafened, half strangled, he 
fought his way forward a few paces, and 
suddenly one of the pack beasts loomed 
shadow-like beside him, going by with a 
rush and a squeal. 

By the grace of Providence and his own 
swift reflexes, he caught its pack lashings, 
clinging with the tenacity of a man determined not to die. It floundered about, 
dragging them, until Berild managed to 
grasp its trailing halter rope. Between 
them, they fought the creature down. 

Stark clung to its head while the woman 
clambered to its back, twisting her arm 
through the straps of the pad. A silken 
scarf whipped toward him. He took it 
and tied it over the head of the beast so 
it could breathe, and after that it was 
quieter. 

There was no direction, no sight of anything, in that howling inferno. The caravan seemed to have been scattered like a 
drift of autumn leaves. Already, in the 
few brief moments he had stood still, 
Stark's legs were buried to the knees in a 
substratum of sand that rolled like water. 
He pulled himself free and started on, 
going nowhere, remembering Kynon's 
words. 

Berild ripped her thin robe apart and 
gave him another strip of silk for himself. 
He bound it over his nose and eyes, and 
some of the choking and the blindness 
abated. 

Stumbling, staggering, beaten by the 
wind as a child is beaten by a strong man, 
Stark went on; hoping desperately to find 
the main body of the caravan, and knowing somehow that the hope was futile. 



24 



PLANET STORIES 



The hours that followed were nightmare. He shut his mind to them, in a 
way that a civilized man would have found 
impossible. In his childhood there had 
been days, and nights, and the problems 
had been simple ones — how to survive one 
span of light that one might then struggle to survive the span of darkness that 
came after. One thing, one danger, at a 
time. 

Now there was a single necessity. Keep 
moving. Forget tomorrow, or what happened to the caravan, or where the little 
Fianna with her bright eyes may be. Forget thirst, and the pain of breathing, and 
the fiery lash of sand on naked skin. Only 
don't stand still. 

It was growing dark when the beast fell 
against a half-buried boulder and snapped 
its foreleg. Stark gave it a quick and 
merciful death. They took the straps from 
the pad and linked themselves togetherEach took as much food as he could carry, 
and Stark shouldered the single skin of 
water that fortune had vouchsafed them. 

They staggered on, and Berild did not 
whimper. 

Night came, and still the khamsin blew. 
Stark wondered at the woman's strength, 
for he had to help her only when she fell. 
He had lost all feeling himself. His body 
was merely a thing that continued to move 
only because it had been ordered not to 
stop. 

The haze ia his own mind had grown as 
thick as the black obscurity of the night. 
Berild had ridden all day, but he had walked, and there was an end even to his 
strength. He was approaching it now, 
and was too weary even to be afraid. 

He became aware at some indeterminate 
time that Berild had fallen and was dragging her weight against the straps. He 
turned* blindly to help her up. She was 
saying something, crying his name, striking at him so that he should hear her 
words and understand. 

At last he did. He pulled the wrappings from his face and breathed clean 
air. The wind had fallen. The sky was 
growing clear. 

He dropped in his tracks and slept, with 
the exhausted woman half dead beside 
him. 



THIRST brought them both awake in 
the early dawn. They drank from the 
skin, and then sat for a time looking at 
the desert, and at each other, thinking of 
what lay ahead. 

"Do you know where we are?" Stark 
asked. 

"Not exactly." Berild's face was shadowed with weariness. It had changed, and 
somehow, to Stark, it had grown more 
beautiful, because there was no weakness 
in it. 

She thought a minute, looking at the 
sun. "The wind blew from the north," 
she said. "Therefore we have come south 
from the track. Sinharat lies that way, 
across the waste they call the Belly of 
Stones." She pointed to the north and 
east. 

"How far?" 

"Seven, eight days, afoot." 
Stark measured their supply of water 
and shook his head. "It'll be dry walking." 
He rose and took up the skin, and 
Berild came beside him without a word. 
Her red hair hung loose over her shoulders. The rags of her silken robe had 
been torn away by the wind, leaving her 
only the loose skirt of the desert women, 
and her belt and collar of jewels. 

She walked erect with a steady, swinging stride, and it was almost impossible for 
Stark to remember her as she had been, 
riding like a lazy queen in her scarlet 
litter. 

There was no way to shelter themselves 
from the midday sun. The sun of Mars 
at its worst, however, was only a pale 
candle beside the sun of Mercury, and it 
did not bother Stark. He made Berild lie 
in the shadow of his own body, and he 
watched her face, relaxed and unfamiliar in 
sleep. 

For the first time, then, he was conscious of a strangeness in her. He had 
seen so little of her before, in Valkis, and 
almost nothing on the trail. Now, there 
was little of her mind or heart that she 
could conceal from him. 

Or was there? There were moments, 
while she slept, when the shadows of 
strange dreams crossed her face. Sometimes, in the unguarded moment of waking, he would see in her eyes a look he 



QUEEN &F THE MARTIAN CATACOMBS 



could not read, and his primitive senses 
quivered with a vague ripple of warning. 
Yet all through those blazing days and 
frosty nights, tortured with thirst and 
weary to exhaustion, Berild was magnificent. Her white skin was darkened by the 
sun and her hair became a wild red mane, 
but she smiled and set her feet resolutely 
by his, and Stark thought she was the most 
beautiful creature he had ever seen. 

On the fourth day they climbed a scarp 
of limestone worn in ages past by the sea. 
and looked out over the place called the 
Belly of Stones. 

The sea-bottom curved downward below 
them into a sort of gigantic basin, the farther rim of which was lost in shimmering waves of heat. Stark thought that 
never, even on Mercury, had he seen a 
place more cruel and utterly forsaken of 
gods or men. 

It seemed as though some primal glacier 
must have met its death here in the dim 
dawn of Mars, hollowing out its own 
grave. The body of the glacier had melted 
away, but its bones were left. 

Bones of basalt, of granite and marble 
and porphyry, of every conceivable color 
and shape and size, picked up by the ice 
as it marched southward from the pole 
and dropped here as a cairn to mark its 
passing. 

The Belly of Stones. Stark thought that 
its other name was Death.. 

For the first time, Berild faltered. She 
sat down and bent her head over her 
hands. 

"I am tired," she said, "Also, I am 
afraid." 

Stark asked, "Has it ever been 
crossed ?" 

"Once. But they were a war party, 
mounted and well supplied." 

Stark looked out across the stones. "We 
will cross it," he said. 

Berild raised her head. "Somehow I believe you." She rose slowly and put her 
hands on his breast, over the strong beating of his heart. 

"Give me your strength, wild man," she 
whispered. "I shall need it/* 

He drew her to him and kissed her, and 
it was a strange and painful kiss, for their 
lips were cracked a»d bleeding from their 



25 

terrible thirst. Then they went down together into the place called the Belly of 
Stones. 

VIII 

THE DESERT HAD BEEN A pleasant and kindly place. Stark looked 
back upon it with longing. And yet this 
inferno of blazing rock was so like the 
valleys of his boyhood that it did not occur to him to lie down and die. 

They rested for a time in the sheltered 
crevice under a great leaning slab of bloodred stone, moistening their swollen tongues 
with a few drops of stinking water from 
the skin. At nightfall they drank the last 
of it, but Berild would not let him throw 
the skin away. 

Darkness, and a lunar silence. The 
chill air sucked the day's heat out of the 
rocks and the iron frost came down, so 
that Stark and the red-haired woman must 
keep moving or freeze. 

Stark's mind grew clouded. He spoke 
from time to time, in a croaking whisper, 
dropping back into the harsh mother-tongue of the Twilight Belt. It seemed to 
him that he was hunting, as he had so 
many times before, in the waterless places 
— for the blood of the great lizard would 
save him from thirst. 

But nothing lived in the Belly of Stones. 
Nothing, but the two who crept and staggered across it under the low moons. 

Berild fell, and could not rise again. 
Stark crouched beside her. Her face 
stared up at him, white in the moonlight, 
her eyes burning and strange. 

"I will not die!" she whispered, not to 
him, but to the gods. "/ will not die!" 

And she clawed the sand and the bitter 
rocks, dragging herself onward. It was 
uncanny, the madness that she had for 
life. 

Stark raised her up and carried her. 
His breath came in deep sobbing gasps. 
After a while he, too, fell. He went on 
like a beast on all fours, dragging the 
woman. 

He knew dimly that he was climbing. 
There was a glimmering of dawn in the 
sky. His hands slipped on a lip of sand 
and he went rolling down a smooth slope. 



26 



PLANET STORIES 



At length he stopped and lay on his back 
like a dead thing. 

The sun was high when consciousness 
returned to him. He saw Berild lying near 
him and crawled to her, shaking her until 
her eyes opened. Her hands moved feebly 
and her lips formed the same four words. 
/ zvill not die. 

Stark strained his eyes to the horizon, 
praying for a glimpse of Sinharat, but 
there was nothing, only emptiness and 
sand. With great difficulty he got the 
woman to her feet, supporting her. 

He tried to tell her that they must go 
on, but he could no longer form the 
words. He could only gesture and urge 
her forward, in the direction of the city. 

But she refused to go. "Too far . . . 
die . . . without water . . ." 

He knew that she was right, but still 
he was not ready to give up. 

She began to move away from him, 
toward the south, and he thought that 
she had gone mad and was wandering. 
Then he saw that she was peering with 
awful intensity at the line of the scarp that 
formed this wall of the Belly of Stones. 
It rose into a great ridge, serrated like 
the backbone of a whale, and some three 
miles away a long dorsal fin of reddish 
rock curved out into the desert. 

Berild made a little sobbing noise in her 
throat. She began to plod toward the distant promontory. 

Stark caught up with her. He tried 
to stop her, but she would not be stopped, 
turning a feral glare upon him. 

She croaked, "Water!" and pointed. 

He was sure now that she was mad. 
He told her so, forcing the painful words 
out of his throat, reminding her of Sinharat and that she was going away from 
any possible help. 

She said again, quite sanely, "Too far. 
Two — three days without water/' She 
pointed. "Monastery — old well — a chance 

Stark decided that he had little to lose 
by trusting her. He nodded and went 
with her toward the curve of rock. 

The three miles might have been three 
hundred. At last they came up under the 
ragged cliffs — and there was nothing there 
but sand. 



Stark looked at the woman. A great 
rage and a deep sense of futility came over 
him. They were indeed lost. 

But Berild had gone a few steps farther. With a hoarse cry, she bent over 
what had seemed merely a slab of stone 
fallen from the cliff, and Stark saw that 
it was a carven pillar, half buried. Now 
he was able to make out the mounded 
shape of a ruin, of which only the foundations and a few broken columns were 
left. 

For a long while Berild stood by the 
pillar, her eyes closed. Stark got the uncanny feeling that she was visualizing the 
place as it had been, though the wall 
must have been dust a thousand years 
ago. Presently she moved. He followed 
her, and it was strange to see her, on the 
naked sand, treading the arbitrary patterns of vanished corridors. 

She came to a halt, in a broad flat space 
that might once have been a central courtyard. There she fell on her knees and began to dig. 

Stark got down beside her. They scrabbled like a pair of dogs in the yielding 
sand. Stark's nails slipped across something hard, and there was a yellow glint 
through the dusty ochre. Within a few 
minutes they had bared a golden cover six 
feet across, very massive and wonderfully 
carved with the symbols of some lost god 
of the sea. 

Stark struggled to lift the thing away. 
He could not move it. Then Berild pressa hidden spring and the cover slid back 
of itself. Beneath it, sweet and cold, protected through all these ages, water stirred gently against mossy stones. 

AN HOUR later, Stark and Berild 
lay sleeping, soaked to the skin, their 
very hair dripping with the blessed dampness. 

That night, when the low moons roved 
over the desert, they sat by the well, 
drowsy with an animal sense of rest and 
repletion. And Stark looked at the woman 
and said. 

"I know you now." 
"What do you know, wild man?" 
Stark said quietly, "You are a Rama." 
She did not answer at once. Then she 



qiUEEN OF THE MARTI AN 

said, "I was bred in these deserts. Is it 
so strange that I should know of this 
well?" 

"Strange that you didn't mention it before. You were afraid, weren't you, that 
if you led me here your secret would 
come out? But it was that, or die." 
He leaned forward, studying her. 
"If you had led me straight to the well, 
I might not have wondered. But you had 
to stop and remember, how the halls were 
built and where the doorways were that 
led to the inner court. You lived in this 
place when it was whole. And no one, 
not even Kynon himself, knows of it but 
you/' 

"You dream, wild man. The moon is in 
your eyes." 

Stark shook his head slowly. "I know." 
She laughed, and stretched her arms 
wide on the sand. 

"But I am young," she said. "And men 
have told me I am beautiful. It is good 
to be young, for youth has nothing to do 
with ashes and empty skulls." 

She touched his arm, and little darts of 
fire went through his flesh, warm from 
his fingertips. 

"Forget your dreams, wild man. They're 
madness, gone with the morning." 

He looked down at her in the clear pale 
light, and she was young, and beautifully 
made, and her lips were smiling. 

He bent his head. Her arms went round 
him. Her hair blew soft against his cheek. 
Then, suddenly, she set her teeth cruelly 
into his lip. He cried out and thrust her 
away, and she sat back on her heels, 
mocking hiw. 

"That," she said, "is because you called 
Fianna's name instead of mine, when the 
storm broke. 

Stark cursed her. There was a taste of 
blood in his mouth. He reached out and 
caught her, and again she laughed, a peculiarly sweet, wicked sound. 

The wind blew over them, sighing, and 
the desert was very still. 

For two days they remained among the 
ruins. At evening of the second day Stark 
filled the water skin, and Berild replaced 
the golden cover on the well. They began the last long march toward Sinharat. 



CATACOMBS 

IX 



27 



QTARK SAW IT RISING AGAINST 
k5 the morning sky — a city of gold and 
marble, high on an island of rose-red coral 
laid bare by the vanished sea. Sinharat, 
the Ever Living. 

Yet it had died. As he came closer to it, 
plodding slowly through the sand, he saw 
that the place was no more than a beautiful corpse, the lovely towers broken, the 
roofless palaces open to the sky. Whatever life Kynon and his armies might have 
foisted upon Sinharat was no more than 
the fleeting passage of ants across the perfect bones of the dead. 

"What was it like before?" he asked, 
"with the blue water around it, and the 
banners flying?" 

Berild turned a dark, calculating look 
upon him. 

"I told you before to forget that madness. If you talk it, no one will believe 
you." 

"No one?" 

"You had best not anger me, wild 
man," she said quietly. "I may be your 
only hope of life, before this is over." 

They did not speak again, going with 
slow weary steps toward the city. 

In the desert below the coral cliffs the 
armies of Kynon were encamped. The tall 
warriors of Kesh and Shun waiting, with 
their women and their beasts and their 
shining spears, for th<* pipers to cry them 
over the Border. The skin tents and the 
long picket lines were too many to count. 
In the distance, a convertible Kallman 
spacer that Stark recognized as Knighton's 
made an ugly, jarring incongruity. 

Lookouts sighted the two toiling figures 
in the distance. Men and women and 
children began to stream out across the 
sand, and presently a great cheering arose. 
Where he had looked on emptiness for 
days, Stark was smothered now by the 
press of thousands. Berild was picked up 
and carried on the shoulders of two chiefs, 
and men would have carried Stark also, 
but he fought them off. 

Broad flights of steps were cut in the 
coral. The throng flowed upward along 
them. Ahead of them all went Eric John 
Stark, and he was smiling. From time to 



28 



PLANET STORIES 



time he asked a question, and men drew 
back from that question, and his smile. 

Up the steps and into the streets of Sinharat he went, with a slow, restless stride, 
asking, 

"Where is Luhar of Venus?" 

Every man there read death in his face, 
but they did not try to stop him. 

People came out of the graceful ruins, 
drawn by the clamour, and the tide rolled 
down the broad ways, the rose-red streets 
of coral, until it spread out in the square 
before a great palace of gold and ivory 
and white marble blinding in the sun, 

Luhar of Venus came down the terraced 
steps, fresh from sleep, his pale hair tumbled, his eyes still drowsy. 

Others came through the door behind 
him Stark did not see them. They did not 
matter Berild didn't matter, calling his 
name from where she sat on the shoulders 
of the chiefs. Nothing, no one mattered, 
but himself and Luhar. 

He crossed the square, not hurrying, a 
dark ravaged giant in rags. He saw Luhar 
pause on the bottom step. He saw the 
sleep and the vagueness go out of the Venusian's eyes as they rested first on the 
red-haired woman, then on himself. He 
saw the fear come into them, and the undying hate. 

Someone got between him and Luhar, 
Stark lifted the man and flung him aside 
without breaking his stride, and went on. 
Luhar half turned. He would have run 
away, back into the palace, but there were 
too many now between him and the door. 
He crouched and drew his gun D 
Stark sprang. 

He came like a great black panther leaping, and he struck low. Luhar's shot went 
over his back. After that there was no 
more shooting. There was a moment, terribly short and silent, in which the two 
men lay entangled, straining against each 
other in a sort of stasis. Then Luhar 
screamed. 

STARK knew dimly that there were 
hands, many of them, trying to drag 
him away. He clung growling to the 
Venusian until he was torn loose by main 
force. He struggled against his captors, 
and through a red haze he saw Kynon's 



face, close to his and very angry. Luhar 
was not yet dead. 

"I warned you, Stark !" said Kynon furiously. "I warned you." 

Men were bending over Luhar. 
Knighton, Walsh, Themis, Arrod. Stark 
saw that Delgaun was among them. He 
did not question at the time how word 
had gone back to Valkis and sent Delgaun 
racing across the dead sea bottom with his 
hired bravos to search for the red-haired 
woman. It was right that Delgaun should 
be there. 

In short ragged sentences, Stark told 
how Luhar and Freka had tried to kill 
him, and how Berild had been lost with 
him. 

Kynon turned to the Venusian. Death 
was already glazing the cloud-grey eyes, 
but it had not quenched the hatred and the 
venom. 

"He lies," whispered Luhar. "I saw 
him — he tried to run away and take the 
woman with him." 

Luhar of Venus, taking vengeance with 
his last breath. 

Freka pushed forward, transparently 

eager to pick up his cue. "It is so," he 

said. *2 was with Luhar. I saw it also." 

Delgaun laughed. Cruel, silent laughter. 

He stood up, and looked at Berild. 

Berild's eyes were blazing. She ignored 
Delgaun and spoke to Kynon* 

"You fool. Can't you see that they hate 
him? What Stark says is true. And I 
would have died in the desert because of 
them, if Stark hadn't been a better man 
than all of you." 

"Strange words," said Delgaun, "coming from a man's own mate. Perhaps 
Luhar did lie, after all. Perhaps it was 
not Stark who tried to run away, but you." 
She cursed him, with an ancient curse, 
and Kynon looked at her sullenly. He said 
to the men who held Stark, "Chain him 
below, in the dungeons." Then he took 
Berild's arm and went with ker into the 
palace. 

Stark fought until someone behind him 
knocked him on the head with the butt of 
a spear. The last thing he saw was the 
face of Fianna, standing out from the 
crowd, wide-eyed with pity and love. 
He came to in a place of cold, dry stone. 



QWJEEN OF THE MARTI AN CATACOMBS 



There was an iron collar around his neck, 
and a fivo-foot chain ran from it to a 
ring in the wall. The cell was small. A 
gate of iron bars closed the single entrance. Beyond was an open well, with 
other cell doors around it, and above were 
thick stone gratings open to the sky. He 
guessed that the place was built beneath 
some inner court of the palace. 

There were no other prisoners. But 
there was a guard, a thick-shouldered barbarian who sat on the execution block in 
the center of the well, with a sword and a 
jug of wine. A guard who watched the 
captive Stark, and smiled. 
Freka. 

When he saw that Stark was awake, 
Freka lifted up the jug and laughed. 
"Here's to Death/' he said. 'Tor no one 
else comes here!" 

He drank, and after that he did not 
speak, only sat and smiled. 

Stark said nothing either. He waited, 
with the same unhuman patience he had 
shown when he waited for his captors 
under the tor. 

The dim daylight faded from the gratings. Darkness came, and the pale glimmer of the moons. Freka became a silvered statue of a man, sitting on the block. 
Stark's eyes glowed. 

The empty jug dropped and broke. 
Freka rose. He took the naked sword in 
his hand and crossed the open space to 
the cell. He lifted the outer bar away. It 
fell with a great echoing clang, and Freka 
entered. 

"Stand up, Outlander," he said. "Stand 
up and face the steel. After that you'll 
sleep in a coral pit, and not even the 
worms will find you/' 

"Beast of Shanga!" Stark said contemptuously, and set his back against the 
wall, to give himself all the slack of the 
chain. 

He saw the bright steel glimmer in the 
air, up and down again, but when the blow* 
fell he had leaped aside, and the point 
struck ringing, against the stone. Stark 
darted in to grapple. 

His fingers slipped on hard muscle, and 
Freka wrenched away. He was a fighting 
man, and no weakling. The iron collar dug 
painfully iato the Earthman's throat and 



29 

him backward, 
his chest. The 



the heavy chain threw 
Freka laughed, deep in 
sword glinted hungrily. 

THEN, as though she had taken shape 
suddenly from the shadows, Fianna 
was in the doorway. The little gun in 
her hand made a hissing spurt of flame. 
Freka screamed once, and fell. He did not 
move again. 

"The swine," Fianna said, without emotion. "Delgaun ordered him to wait, until it was sure that Kynon would not come 
down to talk to you. Then the story* was 
to be that you had escaped somehow, with 
Berild's aid." 

She stepped over the body and unlocked 
the iron collar with a key she took from 
her girdle. 

Stark took her slender shoulders gently 
between his hands. "Are you a witch-girl, 
that you know all things and always come 
when I need you?" 

She gave him a deep," strange look. In 
the dusk, her proud young face was unfamiliar, touched with something fey and 
sad. He wished that he could see her eyes 
more clearly. 

"I know all things because I must," she 
told him wearily. "And I think that you 
are my only hope — perhaps the only hope 
of Mars." 

He drew her to him, and kissed her, and 
stroked her dark head. "You're too young 
to concern yourself with the destinies of 
worlds." 

He felt her tremble. "The youth of the 
body is only illusion, when the mind is 
old." 

"And is yours old, little one?" 
"Old," she whispered. "As old as 
Berild's." 

He felt her tears warm against his skin, 
and she was like a child in his arms. 
"Then you know about her," said Stark. 
"Yes." 

He paused. "And Delgaun?'* 
"Delgaun also." 

"I thought so," Stark said. He nodded, 
scowling at the barred moonlight in the 
well. "There are things I must know, myself — but we'd best get out of here. Did 
Berild send you?" 

"Yes — as soon as she could get the key 



30 PLANET STORIES 

from Kynon. She is waiting for you, 



She stirred Freka's body with her foot. 
"Bring that. We'll hide it in the pit he 
meant for you." 

Stark heaved the body over his shoulder, and followed the girl through a twisting maze of corridors, some pitch dark, 
some feebly lighted by the moons. Fianna 
moved as surely as though she were in 
the main square at high noon. There was 
the silence of death in these cold tunnels, 
and the dry faint smell of eternity. 

At length Fianna whispered. "Here. 
Be careful." 

She put out a hand to guide him, but 
Stark's eyes were like a cat's in the dark. 
He made out a space where the rock with 
which the ancient builders had faced these 
subterranean ways gave place to the original coral. 

Ragged black mouths opened in the 
coral, entrances to some unguessed catacombs beneath. Stark consigned Freka to 
the nearest pit, and then reluctantly threw 
his sword in after him. 

"You won't need it," Fianna told him, 
"and besides, it would be recognized. This 
will be a bitter night enough, without rousing the men of Shun over Freka's death." 
Stark listened to the distant sliding 
echoes from the pit, and shivered. He had 
so nearly finished there himself. He was 
glad to follow Fianna away from that 
place of darkness and silent death. 

He stopped her in a place where a bar 
of moonlight came splashing through a 
great crack in the tunnel roof. 
"Now," he said, "we will talk." 
She nodded. "Yes. The time has come 
for that." 

"There are lies everywhere," said Stark. 
"I am tangled up in lies. You know the 
truth that is behind this war of Kynon's. 
Tell me." 

"Kynon's truth is simple," she answered, speaking slowly, choosing her words. 
"He wants land and power, conquest. He 
will pour out the blood of his people for 
that, and after that he plans to use the men 
of the Low-Canals under Delgaun to keep 
the tribesmen in line. It may be true, as 
he said, that they would be satisfied with 
grazing land and water — but they would 
lose their freedom, and their pride, and I 



think he has judged them wrongly. I 
think they would revolt." 

She looked up at Stark. "He planned to 
use your knowledge, and then destroy you 
if you became troublesome." 

"I guessed that. What about the 
others ?" 

"The outlanders? Use them, keep them 
as subordinates, or pay them off. Kill 
them, if necessary." 

"Now," said Stark. "What of Delgaun 
and Berild?" 

Fianna said softly, "Their truth, too, is 
simple. They took Kynon's idea of empire, and stretched it further. It was Delgaun's idea to bring the strangers in. They 
would use Kynon and the tribes until the 
victory was won. Then they would do 
away with Kynon and rule themselves— 
with the outlanders and their ships and 
their powerful weapons to oppress LowCanaler and Drylander alike. 

"That way, they could rape a world. 
More outland vultures would come, drawn 
by the smell of loot. The Martian men 
would fight as long as there was the hope 
of plunder— after that, they would be 
slaves to hold the empire. Their masters 
would grow fat on tribute from the CityStates and from the men of Earth who 
have built here, or who wish to build. An 
evil plan— but profitable." 

Stark thought about Knighton and 
Walsh of Terra, Themis of Mercury, Arrod of Callisto Colony. He thought of 
others like them, and what they would do, 
with their talons hooked in the heart of 
Mars. He thought of Delgaun's yellow 
eyes. 

He thought of Berild, and he was sick 
with loathing. 

Fianna came close to him, speaking in a 
different tone that had care and anxiety 
only for him. 

"I have told you this, because I know 
what Berild plans. Tonight oh, tonight is a black and evil time, and death 
waits in Sinharat! It is very close to me, 
I know. And you must follow your own 
heart, Eric John Stark. I cannot tell you 
more." 

He kissed her again, because she was 
sweet and very brave. Then she led him 
on through the dark labyrinth, to where 



QUEEN OF THE 

Bcrild was waiting, with her dangerous 
beauty and all the evil of the ages in her 
soul. 



X 



THEY CAME OUT OF THE 
darkness so suddenly that Stark 
blinked in the unaccustomed light of 
torches set in great silver sconces on the 
walls. 

The floor had been artificially smoothed, 
but otherwise this crypt was as the eroding action of the sea had shaped it out of 
the coral reef. It was not large, and it 
was like a cavern in a fairy tale, walled 
and roofed with the fantastic wreathing 
shapes of the rose-red coral. At one end 
there was a golden coffer set with flaming 
jewels. 

Berild was there. Her wonderful hair 
was dressed and shining, and her body 
was clothed all in white, her arms and 
shoulders warm bronze from the kiss of 
the desert sun. 

Kynon was there, also. He stood motionless and silent, and he did not so much 
as turn his head when Fianna and Stark 
came in. His eyes were wide open and 
blank as a blind man's. 

"I have been waiting/' said Berild, "and 
the time is short." 

She seemed angry and impatient, and 
Stark said, "Freka is dead. It was necessary to hide his body." 

She nodded and turned to the girl. "Go 
now, Fianna." 

Fianna bent her head and went away. 
She did not look at Stark: It was asi 
though she had no interest in anything 
that happened. 

Stark looked at Kynon, wko had not 
moved or spoken. 

"He is safe enough," said Berild, answering Stark's unspoken question. "I 
drugged his wine so that his mind was 
opened to mine, and he is my creature as 
long as I will it." 

Hypnosis, Stark thought. His nerves 
were beginning to do strange things. He 
wished desperately that he were back in 
the cell facing Freka's sword, which at 
least would deal with him openly and without guile or subterfuge. 



MARTIAN CATACOMBS 31 

Berild set her hands on Stark's shoulders, and smiled as she had done that 
night by the ancient well. 

"I offer you three things tonight, wild 
man," she said. Her eyes challenged him, 
and the scent of her hair was sweet and 
maddening. 

"Your life - and power and 

myself." 



Stark let his hands slip lightly down 
from her shoulders to her waist. "And 
how will you do this thing?" he asked. 

"Easily," she said, and laughed. She 
was very proud, and sure of her strength, 
and glad to be alive. "Oh, very easily. 

You guessed the truth about me 1 am 

of the Twice Born, the Ramas. I hold the 
secret of the Sending-on of Minds, which 
this great ox Kynon pretended to have. I 

can give you life now and forever. 

Remember, wild man forever!" 

He bent his dark face to hers, so that 
their lips touched, and murmured, "Would 
I have you forever, Berild?" 

"Until you tire of me or I of you." 

She kissed him, and then added mockingly, "Delgaun has had me for a thousand 
years, and I am weary of him. So very 
weary !" 

"A thousand years is a long time," said 
Stark, "and I am not Delgaun." 

"No. You're a beast, a savage, a most 
magnificent cold-eyed animal, and that is 
why I love you." She touched the muscle 
of his breast, and then his throat, and 
added, "It's a pity there will never be another body like this one. We must keep it 
as long as we can." 

"What is your plan?" Stark asked her. 

"Simply this. I will place your mind 
in Kynon's body. You will be Kynon, 
with all his power. You will be able then 

to keep Delgaun in check later, you 

can destroy him, but not until after the 
battle is won, for we need the men of Valkis and Jekkara. You can keep your own 
body safe from him, and at the worst, if 
by some chance he should succeed in slaying the man he believes to be you, you 
will still be alive." 

"And after the battle," said Stark softly. "What then, Berild?" 

"We will rule together." She held his 
palms against hers. "You have strong 






.. 



PLANET STORIES 



hands, wild man. Would you not like to 

hold a world between them and me?" 

She looked up at him, her eyes suddenly shrewd and probing, "Or do you still 
believe the nonsense you talked to Kynon, 
about the tribes ?" 

STARK smiled. "It's easy to have principles when there's no gain involved. 

No. I am as my name says a man 

without a tribe. I have no loyalties. And 
if I had, would I remember them now?" 

He held her, as she had said, between 
his hands, and they were very strong. 

But even then, Berild could warn him. 

"Keep faith with me, then! My wisdom is greater than yours, and I have 
powers you don't dream of. What I give, 
I can take away." 

For answer, Stark silenced her mouth 
with his own. 

When she drew away, she said rather 
breathlessly, "Let us hurry. The tribes 
are gathered, and Kynon was to have given 
the signal for war at dawn. There is much 
I must teach you between now and then." 

She paused with her hand on the lid of 
the golden coffer. "This is a secret place," 
she said quietly. "Since before the ocean 
died, it has been secret. Not even Kynon 
knew of it. I think only Delgaun and I, 

the last of the Twice-Born, knew and 

now you." 

"What about Fianna?" 

Berild shrugged. "She is only my servant. To her, this is only a little cavern 
where I keep my private wealth." 

She pressed a series of patterned bosses 
in intricate sequence, and there was the 
sharp click of an opening lock. A shiver 
ran up along Stark's spine. The beast in 
him longed to run, to be away from this 
whole business that smelled of evil. But 
the man in him knelt at Berild's wish, and 
waited, and did not flinch when the blankeyed Kynon came like a moving corpse beside him. 

Berild raised the golden lid. And there 
was a great silence. 

On the slave block of Valkis, Kynon 
had brought forth two crowns of shining 
crystal, and a rod of flame. As glass is to 
diamond, as the pallid moon to the light 
of the sun, were those things to the reality. 



In her two hands Berild held the ancient crowns of the Ramas, the givers of 
life. Twin circlets of glorious fire, dimming the shallow glare of the torches, 
putting a nimbus of light around the whiteclad woman so that she was like a goddess 
walking in a cloud of stars. Stark's whole 
being contracted to a point of icy pain at 
the beauty and the wonder and the terror 
of them. 

She set one crown on Kynon's head, 
and even the drugged automaton shivered 
and sighed at its touch. 

Stark's mind veered away from the incredible thing that was about to happen. 
It spoke words to him, hurried desperate 
words of sanity, about the electrical patterns of the mind, and the sensitivity of 
crystals, and conductors, and electro-magnetic impulses. But that was only the top 
of his brain. At base it was still the brain 
of N'Chaka that believed in gods and demons and all the sorceries of darkness. 
Only pride kept him from cowering abjectly at Berild's feet. 

She stood above him, a creature of 
dreams in the unearthly light. She smiled 

and whispered, "Do not fear," and she 

placed the second crown upon his head. 

A strange, shuddering fire swept 
through him. It was as though some chip 
of the primal heart of all creation had been 
set by an unguessed magic into the cells 
of the crystal. The force that shaped the 
universe and scattered forth the stars, and 
set the great suns to spinning. There was 
something awesome about it, something 
almost holy. 

And yet he was afraid. Most shockingly afraid. 

His brain was set free, in some strange 
fashion. The walls of his skull vanished. 
His mind floated in a dim vastness. It 
was like a tiny sun, glowing, spinning, 
swelling . . . 

Berild lifted a crystal rod from the coffer, a wand of sorcerous fire. And now 
Stark's thoughts had lost all track of science. A cloud of misty darkness flowed 
around him, thickened . . . 

A great leaping flare of light, a distant 
echo of a cry that he did not recognize as 
his own, and then . . . 

Nothing. 



QUEEN OF THE MARTiAN CATACOMBS 33 

XI It made no protest when it was left, locked 

safely in. 

"Only I can give it back to you," said 
Berild softly. "Remember that/' 
Stark said, "I will remember/' 
He went with Berild to Kynon's quarters in the palace. He sat among Kynon's 
possessions, clothed in Kynon's flesh, and 
learned how Kynon's mind had planned to 
loose a red tide upon the peaceful cities 
of the Border. 

Only a small part of his mind was attentive to this, The rest of it was concerned with the redness of Berild's hair 
and the warmth of her lips, and with the 
heady knowledge that it was possible to be 
alive and young forever. 

Never to lose the pride of strength, 
never to know the dimming sight and failing mind of age. To go on, like a child in 
an endless playground, with no fear of 
tomorrow. 

It was nearly dawn. 
Berild rose. She had told him much, 
but not the things Fianna had told him, 
of the secret treachery she had planned 
with Delgaun. She helped Stark to clothe 
Kynon's body in the harness of war, with 
the longsword and the shield and the shining spear. Then she set her lips to his so 
that his borrowed heart threatened to choke 
him with its pounding, and her eyes were 
wondrously bright and beautiful. 
"It is time," she whispered. 
She walked beside him, as he had seen 
her beside Kynon in Valkis, stepping like 
a queen. 

They came out of the palace, onto the 
steps where Luhar had died. There were 
beasts waiting, trapped for war, and an 
escort of tall chiefs, with pipers and drummers and link-boys to light the way. 

Stark mounted Kynon's beast. It sensed 
the wrongness in him, hissing and rearing, 
but he held it down, and imperiously raised 
his hand. 

Throbbing drums and skirling pipes, 
tossing flames where the link-boys ran 
with the torches, a clash of metal and a 
cheer, and Kynon of Shun rode down 
through the streets of Sinharat to the 
coral cliffs, with the red-haired woman at 
his side. 

They were waiting. 



HE WAS LYING ON HIS FACE, 
his cheek pressed against the cool 
coral. He opened his eyes, his mind groping for the shreds of some remembered 
terror. He saw, vaguely at first and then 
with terrible clarity as his vision became 
clear, a man lying close beside him. 

A tall man, very strongly built, with 
skin burned almost to blackness by exposure. A man who looked at him with eyes 
that were startlingly light in his dark 
face . . . 
His own eyes. His own face. 
He cried out and struggled to his feet, 
trembling, staggering, and his body felt 
strange to him. He looked down upon the 
strangeness of another man's limbs, the 
alien shaping of flesh and sinew upon 
alien bones. 

The face of the dark giant who lay 
upon the coral mocked him. It watched, 
but did not see. The eyes were blank, 
empty, without soul or intelligence. 

The mind of Eric John Stark fought, 
in its alien prison, for sanity. 

Berild's voice spoke to him. Her hand 
was on his shoulder Kynon's shoulder . . . 

"All is well, wild man. Do not fear. 
Kynon's mind is in your body, still sleeping at my command. And you are Kynon 
now." 

It was not an easy thing to accept, but 
he knew that it was so, and he knew that 
he had wished it to be so. It was easier to 
be calm after he turned his back on the 
other. 

Berild took him in her arms and held 
him until he had stopped shuddering, oddly like a mother with a frightened child. 
Then she kissed him, smiling, and said, 
"The first time is hard. I can remember 

and that was very long ago." She 

shook him gently. "Now come. We'll 
take your body to a place of safety. And 
then I must tell you all of Kynon's plans 
for those outside." 

She spoke to the thing that lay upon 
the coral, saying, "Get up," and it rose 
obediently and followed where Berild led, 
to a tiny barred niche in a side passage. 

3— Planet— Summer 



34 



PLANET STORIES 



THE men of Kesri and the men of 
Shun were gathered below the cliffs, 
waiting. Stark led the way, as Berild had 
told him to, onto a ledge of coral above 
them. Delgaun was there, with the outlanders and a handful of Valkisians. He 
looked tired and ill-tempered. Stark knew 
that he had been busy for hours with lastminute preparations. 

The first pale rays of dawn broke across 
the desert. A vast ringing cry went up 
from the gathered armies. After that there 
was silence, a taut expectant hush. 

There was no fear in Stark now. He 
was past that. Fear was too small an 
emotion for what was about to be. 

He saw Delgaun's golden eyes, hot with 
a cruel excitement. He saw Berild's secret triumph in her smile. He looked down 
upon the warriors, and let the magnificent 
voice of Kynon ring out across the soundless air. 

"There will be no war," he said. "You 
have been bet rayed." 

In the moment that was left to him, he 
confessed the lie of the Rama crowns. 
And then Berild, who was behind him 
now, had moved like a red-haired fury to 
drive her dagger into his heart. 

In his own body, Stark might have escaped the blow. But the reflexes of Kynon were not as his. They were swift 

enough to postpone death the blade bit 

deep, but not where Berild had wished it. 
He turned and caught her by the wrists, 
and said to Delgaun, 

"She has betrayed you, too. Freka lies 

in a coral pit and I am not Kynon." 

Berild tore away from him. She spurred 
her beast toward the Valkisian. She would 
have broken past him, through the escort, 
and up the cliffs to safety in the tunnels 
under Sinharat. But Delgaun was too 
quick. 

One hand caught in the masses of her 
hair. She was dragged screaming from 
the saddle, and even then her screams were 
not of fear, but of fury. She clawed at 
Delgaun, and he fell with her to the 
ground. 

The tall chieftains of the escort came 
forward, but they were dazed, and confused by the anger that was rising in them. 
Delgaun's wiry body arched. He flung the 



woman over the ledge, and what happened 
to her after that Stark did not see, nor 
wish to see. 

He was shouting again to the barbarians, the tale of Delgaun's treachery. 

Behind him on the ledge there was turmoil where Delgaun ran on foot between 
the beasts, and the outlanders made their 
try for safety. Below him in the desert, 
where there had been silence, a great deep 
muttering was growing, like the first 
growling of a storm, and the ranks of 
spears rippled like wheat before the wind. 
And Stark felt the slow running out of 
Kynon's blood inside him, where Berild's 
dagger stood out from his back. 

They had headed Delgaun away from 
the path up the cliff. The two loose mounts 
had been caught and held. They had tried 
to catch Delgaun, but he was light and 
fast and slipped away from them. Now he 
broke back, toward Kynon's great beast. 

Knock the dying man from the saddle, 
charge through the milling chieftains, who 
were hampered by their own numbers in 
that narrow space . . . 

He leaped. And the arms of Kynon, 
driven by the will of Eric John Stark, 
encircled him and held him and would not 
let him go. 

The two men crashed to the ledge. Stark 
let out one harsh cry of agony, and then 
was still, his hands locked around the Valkisian's throat, his eyes intent and strange. 
Men came up, and he gasped, "He is 
mine," and they let him be. 

Delgaun did not die easily. He managed to get his dagger out, and gashed 
the other's side until the naked ribs showed 
through. But once again Stark's mind 
was free in some dark immensity of its 
own. He was living again the dream he 
had in Valkis, and this was the end of the 
dream. N'Chaka had a grip at last on the 
demon with yellow eyes that hungered for 
his life, and he would not let go. 

The yellow eyes widened. They blazed, 
and then they slowly dimmed until the last 
flicker of life was gone. The strength 
went out of N'Chaka's hands. He fell 
forward, over his prey. 

Below, on the sand, Berild lay, and her 
outspread hair was as red as blood in the 
fiery dawn. 



qVEEN OF THE 

The men of Kesh and the men of Shun 
flowed in a resistless tide up over the coral 
cliffs. The chieftains and the pipers and 
the link-boys joined them, hunting the outlanders and the wolves of Valkis through 
the streets of Sinharat. 

Unnoticed, a dark-haired girl ran down 
the path to the ledge. She bent over the 
body of Kynon, pressing her hand to its 
heart. Tears ran down and mingled with 
the blood. 

A low, faint moan came from the man's 
lips. Weeping like a child, Fianna drew a 
tiny vial from her girdle and poured three 
drops of pale liquid on the unresponsive 
tongue. 

XII 

HE HAD COME A LONG WAY. 
He had been down in the deep black 
valleys of the Place of Darkness, and the 
iron frost was in his bones. He had 
climbed the bitter mountains where no 
creature of the Twilight Belt might go and 
live. 

There was light, now. He had been 
lost and wandering, but he had won back 
to the light. His tribe, his people would 
be waiting for him. But he knew that he 
would never see them. 

He remembered, then, with the old terrible loneliness, that they were not truly 
his people. They had raised him, but they 
were not of his blood. 

And he remembered also that they were 
dead, slain by the miners who had needed 
all the water of the valley for themselves. 
Slain by the miners who had taken 
N'Chaka and put him in a cage. 

With a start of terror, he thought he 
was again in that cage, with the leering 
bearded faces peering in at him. But in 
the blinding dazzle of light he could see 
no bars. 

There was only one face. The anxious, 
pitying face of a girl. 

Fianna. 

His brain began to clear. Memory returned bit by bit, the fragments fitting 
themselves gradually into place. 

Kynon. Delgaun. Berild. Sinharat, 
the Ever-Living. 

He remembered now with perfect clar


MARTIAN CATACOMBS 35 

ity that he was dying, and it seemed a terrible thing to die in the body of another 
man. For the first time, fully, he felt the 
separation from his own flesh. It seemed 
a blasphemous thing, more terrible than 
death. 

Fianna was weeping. She stroked his 
hair, and whispered, "I am so glad. I was 
afraid afraid you would never wake." 



He was touched, because he knew that 
she loved him and would be sad. He 
lifted his hand to touch her face, to comfort her. 

He saw the fingers of that hand, dark 
against her cheek. Dark . . . 

His own fingers. His own hand. 

He was not on the ledge. He was back 
in the coral crypt beneath the palace. The 
light that had dazzled his eyes was not the 
sun, but only the flare of torches. 

He sat up, his heart pounding wildly. 

Kynon of Shun lay beside him on the 
coral. He was quite dead, his head encircled by a crown of fire, his side open to 
the white bone where Delgaun's blade had 
struck. 

The wound that Kynon himself had 
never felt. 

The golden coffer was open. The second crown lay near Fianna, with the rod 
beside it. 

Stark looked at her, deep into her eyes. 
Very softly he said, "I would not have 
dreamed it." 

"You will understand, now many 

things," she said. "And I was glad of my 
power today, because I could truly give 
you life!" 

She rose, and he saw that she was very 
tired. Her voice was dull, as though it 
counted over old things that no longer 
mattered. 

"You see why I was afraid. If they 
had ever suspected that I, too, was of the 
Twice-Born . . . Berild or Delgaun, each 
alone, I might have destroyed, but I could 
not destroy both of them. And if I had, 
there was still Kynon. You did what I 
could not, Eric John Stark." 

"Why were you against them, Fianna? 
How were you proof against the poison 
that made them what they were ?" 

She answered angrily, "Because I am 
weary of evil, of scheming for power and 



36 

shedding the blood of men as though they 
were sheep! I am no better than Berild 
was. I, too, hare lived a long time, and 
my hands are not clean. But perhaps, by 
what you helped me do, I have made up a 
little for my sins." 

She paused, her thoughts turned darkly 
inward, and it was strange to see the 
shadow of age touching her sweet young 
face. Then she said, very slowly, like an 
old, old woman speaking, 

"I am weary of living. No matter 
where I go, I am a stranger. You can understand that, though not so well as I. 
There is an end to pleasure, and after that 
only loneliness is left. 

"I have remembered that I was human 
once. That is why I set myself against 
their plan of empire. After all these ages 
I have come round full circle to the starting point, and things seem to me now as 
they seemed then, before I was tempted 
by the Sending-on of Minds. 

"It is a wicked thing !" she cried suddenly. "Against nature and the gods, and 
it has never brought anything but evil !" 

She caught up the rod and held it in her 
hands. 

"This is the last," she said. "Cities die, 
and nations perish, and material things, 
even such as these, are destroyed. One 
by one the Twice-Born have perished also, 
through accident or swift disease or murder, as Berild would have slain Delgaun. 
Now only this, and I, are left/* 

QUITE SUDDENLY, she flung the 
rod against the coral, and it broke 
in a cloudy flame and a tinkling of crystal 
shards. Then, one by one, she broke the 
crowns. 

She stood still for a long moment. Then 
she whispered, "Now only I am left/' 

Again there was silence, and Stark was 
shaken by the magnitude of the thing that 
she had done. Her slim girl's body somehow took on tke stature of a goddess. 



PLANET STOMES 

After a while he Went to her and said 
awkwardly, "I have not thanked you, Fianna. You brought me here, you saved 
me . . ." 

"Kiss me once, then," she answered, 
and raised her lips to his. "For I iove you, 

Eric John Stark and that is the pity 

of it. Because I am not for you, nor for 
any man." 

He kissed her, very tenderly, and there 
was the bitter taste of tears on her soft 
lips. 

"Now come," she whispered, and took 
his hand. 

She led him back through the labyrinth, 
into the palace, and then out again into 
the streets of Sinharat. Stark saw that it 
was sunset, and that the city was deserted. The tribes of Kesh and Shun had 
broken camp and gone. 

There was a beast ready for him, supplied with food and water. Fianna asked 
him where he wished to go, and pointed 
the way to Tarak. 

"And you ?" he asked. "Where will you 
go, little one?" 

"I have not thought." She lifted her 
head, and the wind played with her dark 
hair. She did not smile, and yet suddenly 
Stark knew that she was happy. 

"I am free of a great burden," she 
whispered. "I shall stay here for a while, 
and think, and after that I shall know 
what to do. But whatever it is there will 
be no evil in it, and in the end I shall 
rest." 

He mounted, and she looked up at him, 
with a look that wrung his heart although 
it was not sad. 

"Go now," she said, "and the gods go 
with you." 

"And with you." He bent and kissed 
her once again, and then rode away, down 
to the coral cliffs. 

Far out on the desert he turned and 
looked back, once, at the white towers of 
Sinharat rising against the larger moon. 




A fiction House Magazine 




I 



The Madcap Metalloids 

By W. V. ATHANAS 




"Squad, Right Face! Forward MARCH! HALT!" 



Plucked from the space-lanes by its ravening magnetism, the 
tw© intrepid Terrans defied the death of this deadly radioactive worldlet hy playing games with the roly-poly natives! 



JONATHAN DRAKE SWAM BACK 
to consciousness as a bubble rises 
through molasses slowly, and with 

great effort. His arms lay heavily on the 
padded rests of the shock-chair, and his 
lids drooped persistently despite the shouted commands of his brain. A bubble of 



air rose reluctantly up his throat to operate his paralyzed vocal cords. 

"Doc," he croaked. "Doc?" The words 
bounced off the polished metal walls of the 
room. There was no sound after that but 
the soft purr of the control board. 

Jonathan walked his hand along the arm 

37 



38 PLANET 

rest like a spider, each finger a leg drawing- the weighted hand a step further like 
a tremendous body. Finally a finger found 
the cup of the release button, and the pneumatic pads fell free of thigh, belly and' 
chest. He slid the button forward and the 
shock-seat tilted him forward and decanted 
him gently onto the floor. 

He could hear Doc breathing now, the 
sound* of it harsh above the quiet humming of the dynamics, and he rolled on 
over and heaved his body off the floor with 
both arms. 

"Puny," he muttered to himself. "Weak 
as a baby. Must have been a rough landing." 

He fought his way to his hands and 
knees, but his body rebelled at the task of 
rising to his feet. 

This is getting to where it ain't funny, 
he thought, and scrambled with great effort 
to the control board. 

He had a look at the G-gauge and 
whistled softly. 3.4! Leaping Luna, no 
zvonder! He forced his hand to the knurled 
knob of the control lever and clicked it 
down four notches. He held it there a 
moment, then eased it back a fraction by 
twisting the knob. The dynamics' hum 
rose a note and the weight began to fall 
from him. 

He stepped swiftly to the other shockchair and released the restrainers with one 
impatient stabbing finger. Doc had a bluish tinge about his mouth and his breathing was a bit ragged. 

"Doc," said Jon sharply. He thumbed 
one of Doc's eyes open and studied the 
pupil. "Too much deceleration," he muttered, and wheeled to the black kit on the 
wall. 

His eye caught the visi-plate over the 
control panel in passing, and he gave the 
bleak plain it showed a casual glance. 
Something round and black traveled across 
the field of vision, but was gone almost as 
soon as it caught his attention. He flicked 
a quick look to see that the automatic 
cameras were recording, and returned to 
Doc. 

Doc made no response to the jab of the 
needle, but within ten seconds the color 
flooded to his face and he snapped his 
head up with alert attention. 



STORIES 

"We made it," said Doc with instant 
comprehension. Doc was bald as an egg, 
though he was not yet thirty-five, and his 
lips were red and full and smiled easily. 

Behind those twinkling blue eyes as 

Jon knew full well — — was a brain that 
operated at its peak during stress, a mind 
that knew neither dismay nor panic. 

His eyes twinkled now with sharp inquiry. "How does it look, Jon?" 

^pHE lean dark-haired pilot shrugged. 
± "I haven't seen much of it yet. Instruments show that we aren't cracked


outer and inner hulls still holding pressure. 
Tremendous gravity, no atmosphere. Entire area slightly radio-active. Haven't 
had time to check the recording tapes yet. 
I blacked out about the same time you 
did." 

Doc caught his lower lip between his 
white even teeth for a moment. Then he 
tilted himself out of the shock-chair and 
rolled the stiffness out of his broad shoulders. "Tapes first," he said. 
Jon clipped another reel into the recorder and stopped the whirring of the one he 
wanted. He slipped it onto the reversing 
spindle, pulled out the tag-end inside and 
fed it into the slot. Then he tapped two 
cigarettes alight on his thumbnail, gave 
one to Doc and stepped back to watch. 

The asteroid showed up with surprising 
suddenness out of the void that was deep 
space. Its outlines were blurry at first, 
but sharpened as the spotter focussed on 
it. It was traveling at tremendous speed, 
for the star patterns behind it changed even 
as they watched The metallic voice of 
the sound track came in now, recording 
the instrument readings. 

"Ship's course Z-point RD 3784. Object's course Z-point AD 1892." The 
speaker droned on with data, speed of 
ship, computed speed of object, drive ratings. Then: "Collision course. Collision 
course. Repeating. Collision course." 

The black mass of the asteroid shifted on 
the screen and momentarily went out of 
focus as the ship spun on its axis and 
the rear viewers took over. Then the scene 
was streaked with flame as the main jets 
put on full emergency deceleration. 



THE MADCAP 

The rest of the recording tape was 
nightmarish. The flaring of the jets stuttered then stopped. The dispassionate 

mechanical voice of the speaker reported 
the main converter feed jammed, and almost instantly reported that auxiliary units 
were operating. 

Doc shuddered reminiscently at this. He 
recalled the tortuous crawl through the 
tunnel into the converter room, the shoving of the screen ahead of him in the flickering blue glow of the room, the un jamming of the 'foolproof feeding reel that 
had been installed especially for this exploration. 

The twenty minutes it took had been 
enough. The ship lurched to the pull of 
this concentrated hulk of God-knew-what, 
and went into a tight orbit around the asteroid. 

They were just too close. They came in 
lower and lower, and finally Jon threw 
on full power. Hobson's choice. Fall into 
the mass or kill themselves with high-G 
deceleration. Jon chose deceleration. 

Both pairs of eyes watched the changing 
pictures with fascinated gaze. This was 
where they had blacked out. 

It was sheer luck. The tape showed 
that they had gone tumbling across the 
bleak land below in a crazy pinwheeling 
motion. The nose dropped forward into 
the line of flight just as the belly of the 
ship slammed into the plain. For perhaps 
fifty Earth miles the ship cut its screaming swath across the bosom of the naked 
plain. Then motion stopped, and the tape 
showed nothing but the dead land for 
minute after minute, 

"All right," said Doc, and Jon reached 
for the switch. 



THEN motion showed* on the screen. 
A sphere came out of the side, rolled 
up to the nose of the ship, hesitated, then 
rolled on almost out of the range of the 
lens. Then it simply disappeared. The 
tape whirred on to its end, and the machine clicked off. 

"Now what in the name of the Sacred* 
Blick of Venus," said Jon, "was that?" 

"I pass," replied Doc. "Let's see that 
again." 

They saw it again. And again. What 



METALLOIDS 39 

appeared to be a solid sphere of shiny 
black metal rolled across the plain, paused 

before the nose of the ship, rolled on 

and simply disappeared! 

"Well," said Doc at last, "this is still 
Exploration Unit X-3. First we eat, then 
we start getting this all down on tapes. 
Then we check the ship, and maybe we 
take a look-see around. Then we get the 
hell out of here. But first we eat." 

Jon busied himself breaking out the rations. This consisted of picking two tins 
out of the locker, rapping them sharply on 
the rod that protruded from the case and 
setting them aside. In about thirty seconds 
the tins emitted a tired sigh and the lids 
raised slightly. The portions of food, each 
in its own clear plastic bag, were hot and 
ready. 

Doc dropped his postprandial cigarette 

into the disposal slot and came to his feet. 

'"On your feet, Flyboy," he ordered. 

"Plenty workee, so chop chop, up and at 

it" 

"Slave driver," sneered Jon. He 
squirmed into his antirad suit. He poised 
the helmet and fired his blast. "I gotta 
sweat my head off, back there, and you 
play with tapes up here. Talk about your 
men and boys. Hah!" And he dogged 
down the helmet. He could see Doc's lips 
moving and grinned pleasantly. He made 
motions to show that he wasn't hearing a 
word. 

He was still grinning when he undogged 
the tunnel lock and closed it behind him. 
Between the double doors, he twisted his 
body in the cramped space to undog the 
second door. When it swung open, he had 
to crawl through the narrow opening into 
the tunnel. He thrust head and shoulders 
into the opening, and the weight of the 
world fell on him. He was jammed against 
the floor with an unbearable weight, and* 
the threshold of the lock-door was slowly 
cutting him in two. 

"Doc !" he screamed into the mouthpiece 
in his helmet. "Doc, give me a hand!" 
Then a cold hand closed over his heart. 

The transmitter was off! In his horseplay he had not turned the knob, and now 
his hands were welded to the floor by the 
crushing weight. 

He lashed out frantically with his lead


40 PLANET 

soled feet, for they could still move. He 
tried to pound the lead sqles in the distress code, but the pain of his crushed ribs 
was telegraphing -down his nerves and the 
rhythm was erratic. 

Here it comes, he thought bleakly, and 
a black wave curled over his thoughts. 

He caught his breath and gagged. He 
looked up into Doc's anxious eyes and 
pulled the mask that was feeding him 
oxygen off his face. 

"Whoosh/' he said. "What was that?" 
"Just plain gravity," replied Doc. "The 
Stable-G unit just covers the flight-compartment here, as you well know. When , 
you stuck your head into the tunnel, you 
went over the edge, and the part of you 
that was in the tunnel must have weighed 
tons. I had to put a power winch on you to 
drag you out. Wonder it didn't pull you 
in two. We'd have thought of that if we 
both hadn't been trying to be funny." They 
considered this soberly for some minutes. 
"Well," said Jon, raising a soothing 
hand to his aching neck, "that takes care 
of that. The drive compartment is out of 
bounds for us until we can get Stable-G 
into that tunnel." 

"Yes," said' Doc shortly. He turned to 
the rack where he had been working. He 
tossed the correlation tapes to Jon. 

"Read 'em and weep," he said grimly. 
Jon skimmed the tapes quickly. Twice 
he went back and checked the cold merciless facts. Finally he looked up and took 
a deep breath. It was unescapable fact, 
this asteroid was radioactive. It was only 
a matter of time until the ship would be 
contaminated. 

"How long?" He forced his voice into 
steadiness. 

Doc tapped a cigarette alight and took 
a deep lungful of smoke. He pursed his 
lips and gazed at the glowing end with 
deep distaste. "Between three and four 
days," he said slowly. "Say seventy-two 
hours to be safe." 

"Weil," said Jon, "let's see about getting 
this can the hell out of here." He settled 
himself in his 9eat and' his experienced 
hands ran smoothly over the multitude of 
controls. 

The amber READY light slowly slid 
through the spectrum until it reached 



STORIES 

green. Then the red warning lights came 
on above the firing switches. 

"Set," he said over his shoulder, and 
. Doc slid into his shock-chair and clicked 
the switch. "Right," said Doc. 

Jon flipped the three toggle switches and 
shoved the red power lever full ahead. The 
ship quivered, and the tiny shudders of 
strain telegraphed their way up to Jon's 
sensitive nerves. But the ship moved not 
at all. Jon cursed softly and threw the 
auxiliaries on. The sense of strain grew 
until it was nearly unbearable. The ship 
edged ahead, six inches, six more, then the 
# warning lights began to pop on above the 
control panel. 

Jon groaned, and' cut power. He swivel ed around. 

"That's all," he said, "unless you want 
to get out and push." They unstrapped 
silently and lighted cigarettes without looking at each other. Unconsciously their eyes 
went to the Geiger. It clicked softly, and 
the sensitive needle jumped half across the 
dial and fell back. The needle of the accumulator dial was already lifting off the 
pin. Again the Geiger clicked and the 
needle jumped. 

"Well," said Doc tiredly, "let's start 
getting it down on record tape. It may do 
some good someday." 

THE transmitter was set on automatic, 
and was tirelessly throwing out its 
XER, XER, XER, in Interplanetary Code. 
But only a hissing roar came from the 
speaker tuned to the Explocenter channel. 
Doc got up and turned the volume down. 
He rubbed his hands together briskly 

"Let's go out and have a look-see," he 
suggested. 

"You nuts?" inquired Jon sourly. "We'd 
be squashed like a couple of bugs the second we step off Stable-G." 

"Ole Doc thought about that. We put 
a small Stable-G unit on each foot of a 
space suit and run them off the dynamics 
in the suit. By coupling the secondary off 
the S-G unit on the right foot to the metal 
suit, and the primary of the left one ditto, 
we can convert the whole suit into a S-G, 
and be as safe as if we were in church. 
Just to be safe, we'll hook up a suit and 
shove it into the air-lock to test it." 



THE M ABCAP 

It worked. 

Doc insisted on being the first out. He 
ran a loop of eighth-inch shielded warping 
line through the towing rings on the shoulders of his suit and grounded the shielding to the suit with a dab of welding metal. 
"If I get stuck, Jon," his voice came 
tinnily through the phones, "haul me back 
with the winch. And whatever you do, 
watch the weld on your end of the shielding. There should be enough juice in it to 
keep it inert." Jon nodded, and Doc broke 
the seal on the outer door. 

For a split-second the air glittered with 
pinpoints of light as the moisture in t% 
airlock solidified. Then the crystals 
blinked out as the further cold broke the 
solids into their separate gasses and dispersed them. Doc slowly descended the ladder to the ground. His voice kept up a 
steady drone, feeding information to Jon 
and to the recorders tuned in on the control panel. 

"I am clear of the ship now, by about 
twenty meters. Surface seems to be a sort 
of metallic sand — granulated at least — 
but solid as steel. My relative weight 
seems to be about 1.5, with S-G unit at 
maximum. The area seems to be absolutely barren, without even a hummock or 
dune in sight. The . . . Whup! There's 

one of those things those spheres 

just ahead, about thirty degrees off the 

ship's nose. Stand by I'm coming back 

to the airlock." 

Jon swiftly hauled in the slack in the 
line, "hand over hand, and pressed the 
winch control to feed the slack onto the 
drum. 

"Hoki it," came Doc's voice. "It's disappeared again. Whup! Now there's one 
over here on my right, at about a hundred 
meters. Spherical shape, black, about five 
and a half or six meters in diameter . . . 
now it seems to be settling into the surface ; 
assuming a hemispherical form . . . Whup ! 
Disappeared again! Reel me in, Jon. 
We've got to get some high-speed shots 
of this." 

It never occurred to either of them that 
there was no point in making these recordings. Explocenter hand-picked' its men, 
and insatiable curiousity was the first requisite. Quick judgment and moral stamina 



METALLOiBS 41 

came next. And first, last, and always 

'get it down on records'. 

The Geiger clicked softly on the bulkhead* and the needle of the accumulator was 
working toward the red area, but neither 
paused to consider these things now. They 
had made their try, exhausted their resources. 

BUT in the back of their minds was the 
knowledge that within a few months a 
statistician at Explocenter would mark Explounit X-3 "missing", and» at the end of 
the year two more names would be added 
to the column at Explocenter; that shaft 
of gray venustron that stood beside the 
main entrance, whereon was the long, long 
scroll of names. Simple monument to the 
men of Explocenter who never came back. 
"We can't take the big tele-lens outside," mused Doc, "so well have to record 
off the visi-plate. I'll go outside again, and 
spot for you, and you can line the 'plate on 
my. bearings." 

"Huh-uh. My turn," retorted jon. 
"Why should you have all the fun? I'm 
going out this time, and you can shoot pictures to your little heart's content. Besides, I'm going to tuck my little personal 
camera into my helmet under my chin and 
get some shots on the spot." 

"All right," snorted Doc. "But don't 
come crying to papa if you stub your toe. 
And look both ways before you cross the 
street. Here— let me blow your nose 
before you go out in the cold." 

"Aw go to Helios, you retort-smasher. 
If I run into a ground squirrel, I'll skin 
him and bring you some hair." 

Jon eased down the ladder and shuffled 
across the smooth surface until he was well 
clear of the ship. 

"Nothing yet," he reported, and swept 
the horizon with his glance. 

"I could have iold you," said Doc nastily. "Your ugly face scared them away." 
"Yeah,"" snorted Jon. "Every stenotyper 
at Explo has your beautiful mug pasted in 
the top drawer of her desk." 
"Sure!" agreed Doc smugly. 
"Well," said Jon impatiently, and under 
his breath. "Come on, you black boogers 

1 ain't got all day." Then he gulped. 

For a huge black sphere materialized 



42 



about fifty meters to his left and rolled 
swiftly toward him. Jon beat a hasty retreat. He backed toward the ship, and 
jogged the camera under his chin to start 
it operating. The sphere paused a second, 
then rolled slowly after him. 

"Steady," came Doc's voice in the 
phones. "I got a dis-ray on it." 

Jon felt better, though he knew that a 
dis-ray blast this close to him would fricassee *him too. He told Doc so. 

"What's the difference?" inquired Doc, 
the. first note of their doom in his voice. 

"Fast or slow take your choice." 

"Take your pictures, ground-hog," 
grunted Jon. "I'll do the heavy thinking 
around here." 

"Don't sprain your neck with it, Flyboy." 

It was that dull black hopelessness in 
the back of Jon's mind that gave him the 
bravado that he showed then. He took a 
quick step toward' the sphere. 

"Scat," he snarled savagely, and waved 
his arms. "Shoo! Get lost!" 

Then his mouth gaped. It was gone! 
Vanished ! 

"Doc!" he yelled, "did you see that?" 
"Yup," came Doc's matter-of-fact voice. 
"Got it all here on the tape. Blip ! Gone, 
just like before." 

"That isn't what I mean?," protested Jon. 
His brain was staggered by the halfformed thoughts that crowded it. "Now 
get this, Doc." 

He shouted, "Come back here! Right 
here in front of me." For the space of 
three slow heartbeats nothing happened. 
Then, with the air of having been there 
all the time, the sphere materialized. 

Breathing carefully, Jon said, "Roll toward me." The sphere hesitated a second, 
then came obediently toward him. 

"Stop!" said Jon. The sphere was stockstill in the instant. 

"Doc," cried Jon, excitement cracking 
his voice, "these star-blasteci boogers can 
think!" 

"Come on in out of the sun, Fly-boy," 
said Doc wearily. "The heat's getting you. 
It's coincidence. Or you moved to attract 
it, or something." 

"No," protested Jon. "Now look. I'm 
going to cut off my trans, but I'll call my 



PLANET STORIES 

shots first I'm going to have it roll left, 



then right, then back to center. Got that ? 
Left, right, and back to center. Over and 
out." And Jon cut off his transmitter. 

HE stood stock-still and formed the impression in his min<& Now roll to 
my left, he thought. The blank sphere 
moved to the spot indicated. Now to my 
right The huge sphere obeyed the mental 
commands with the joyous precision of a 
rookie Space Patrolman who has just 
learned his Parade Manual. 

For fifteen minutes Jon put the hulking 
£ill through its paces, and then as suddenly as it had appeared, the rapport was 
lost. The sphere trundled off across the 
plain, oblivious to Jon's commands, and 
finally settled to a hemisphere in the distance. Jon opened his trans. 

"Yah," came Doc's disgusted voice. "He 
never jumped' through no rfoop." 

"Drop it," retorted Jon curtly. "He got 
tired of it. Did you get it all down?' 

"Every bit of it. Better come on in now, 
and we'll look it over." 

Jon was suddenly tired, and he thought 
of the soft chairs in the Flight Room. 
But there would be that damned Geiger 
clicking, and the accumulator needle working into the red. 

Jon knew suddenly that he was not going back to the ship. Whafs the percentage in waiting for it, he thought, when I 
might as well be taking a look-see over the 
hill? Oh, come now Jon-me4ad, what hill? 
Into the trans he said, "Put a lamp in 
the window, Mother Dear. I'm going to 
look the sitchy-ation over. I'll hold on 
the line of the ship to the horizon, then 
bear right on the circle till I get back. 

Have supper ready and please, no 

horse-radish in the broccoli." 

Doc's voice came through with a trace 
of worry in it. "We shouldn't separate 
until we know more about this." 

"To quote an outstanding authority," 
said Jon, "one Randall E. 'Doc' Martin, 

'what's the difference? Fast or slow 

take your choice'. End of quote." 

"All right," agreed Doc tiredly. "But 
Jon, don't <k>, uh, anything rash." 

"G'bye, Clabberhead," retorted Jon 
fondly. "Over and out." 



THE MADCAP 

Black depression settled on Jon as he 
trudged toward the horizon. Unwilling 
impressions returned to his brain. He remembered the crew of the XP-H. Their 
converter had been cracked in a jet blowout. The commander was in the Rest Home 
on Venus. His head and shoulders looked 
like a mushroom. Colloids. Lucky, everybody said, just a light burn. His brain 
was still good. 

So he carried his obscenity of a head 
around and found his way with a radar 
rod. Some of the others weren't so lucky ; 
the flesh melted off their bones. Some of 
them had glowed before they died. 

Til stick with it until the time limifs up, 
he thought, then I'll blast my suit or cut 
the S-G circuit. Quick and easy. 

He approached the sphere— hemisphere 
now — a nd wondered casually why it assumed that shape. Feeding, probably. But 
what would a metal ball eat? On the other 
hand, how did it receive his mental commands? Drop it, Jonny, you re just going 
in circles. 

The sphere popped back into shape at 
his approach and circled coquettishly about 
him. It stopped before him and seemed to 
be waiting. Jon grinned. 

"Booger, you ear-banger, you're bucking 
for stripes. All right ... To the rear, 
MARCH !" Booger spun on his axis and 
trundled briskly away, 

"Halt ! By the right oblique, MARCH ! 
RIGHT! . . . WHEEL! Halt! At Ease!" 
Booger came patiently to rest. 

THE fancy came over Jon that it would 
indeed be a sight to organize a drill 
team of these spheres. "Booger/' he 
thought suddenly, "where are your friends? 
You can't be the only one on this Godforsaken world. Go get 'em, Booger/' Booger 
sat for a bit and then rolled playfully to 
and fro. 

Jon phrased his thoughts carefully. He 
visualized a double row of Boogers, five to 
the row, before him. Go get the rest of 
them, Booger, he thought. Booger quivered, and then like snapping off a light 
tube, he was gone. 

Within ten seconds, he popped back. 
Beside him a twin materialized, then two 
more. 



METALLOIDS 43 

Finally all ten of them were there, in 
two rows of five. 

"Squad, Right Face!" ordered Jon. 
"Forward MARCH ! HALT ! Hey, dress 
up those ranks there." The right-end 
sphere in the front rank was at least two 
meters out of position. Booger broke 
ranks without orders and trundled*swiftly 
to the side of the offending one, wheeled 
in a short arc and vigorously hunched him 
into position. Jon applauded with spacegloved hands. 

"All right, Booger, you win. You are 
hereby promoted to Corporal of the Drake 
Irregulars. Now let's see some snappy 
close-order drill." 

They drilled for some minutes, and then 
in a particularly tricky maneuver, the squad 
went to pieces. Two of them simply vanished. Three of them squatted— that was 

the only word Jon could find to fit 

into hemispheres, and the rest either 
stopped or trundled about aimlessly. 

"Well all rights said Jon with dignity. 
"Squad dismissed." He turned away to 
continue his tramp, and stopped with a 
startled gasp. There were spheres all about 

him. Ten, fifteen, twenty, thirty there 

must be at least fifty of them, he calculated. 

"Well, this is cozy," he said. "If I'd 
known I was working before an audience, 
I'd shown you some real drilling. Some 
audience, sitting on your hands." 

He walked through the throng of them, 
giving them plenty of leeway in case one 
of them decided to roll his way. One, he 
thought it must be the one he had named 
Booger, followed him slowly. He got a 
good close-up look at several of them. 

Smooth sleek balls they were, with shiny 
metallic surfaces, unbroken by any mark. 
No eyes, no feeding orifices, just smooth 
spheres. 

What a bunch of bowling balls you'd 
make, he thought, if we just had some 
pins. Then he gasped. 

At least six of them had extruded necks 
and were huge bowling pins! 

"Now wait a minute," he gasped*. "Do 
that again," They did. It seemed to be 
contagious. Within a few, seconds he was 
surrounded by a veritable gallery of bowling pins, ten meters high ! 



44 PLANET 

He closed his eyes and counted to 

twenty slowly. Then he snapped his 

eyes open quickly. They were still there. 

"Doc was right," he groaned "The 
heat's getting me." Then his whimsical 
humor made him think, Booger, come here! 

One of the anonymous pins sprang back 
into a sphere and trundled to him. Jon 
made a sweeping gesture. 

"Knock 'em down," he ordered. Booger 
took a rolling start and smashed into the 
ranks of pins with the enthusiasm of a 
runaway space tug. The earth-quaking 
impact shook Jon off his feet. He lay 
stretched on his belly laughing hysterically 
at the ludicrous sight. 

Steady lad, some sane corner of his brain 
whispered. Steady. This is no time to go 
to pieces. 

What the hell, he retorted to himself. At 
least the condemned man had a- hearty 
laugh. But he pulled himself to his feet 
and trudged back to the ship. 

DOC silently busied himself with the 
storage of the new reels after they 
had eaten. 

"I found out how they do that disappearing act," he said finally. "It showed 
up on the high-speed shots. They shoot 

out a long pseudopod like a wire. Then 

they snap back into a sphere at the other 
end. It's simply darned fast locomotion." 

"Yes," agreed Jon, "and they can shape 
themselves into bowling pins and stuff too. 
And hold it. Their shape, I mean." 

A thought was uncurling in Jon's mind. 
"Doc, do you suppose ... by golly, it's got 
to work !" 

And Doc was watching with astonished 
red-rimmed eyes as Jon slid through the 
neck of his space suit in its stand in the 
corner. Jon's voice faded out and came in 
over the speaker as the wrench settled the 
helmet in its seat and fell away. 

"Warm up the converter, Doc. You'll 
have to handle that end this time. When I 

give the word, throw everything on 

mains, auxiliaries, steering, everything. I'll 
have to do my end from the air-lock. And 
whatever you do, don't cut acceleration until we're out of orbit and on course away. 
Chop chop, chum." 



STORIES 

Doc gaped at the door Of the air-lock 
for a second, then shrugged and started 
closing switches. If the hottest spaceman 
of Explocenter said "try" . . . well, what 
could you lose? 

Jon's voice came in over the speaker 
again. "Booger! Booger, you big lump, 
come here. Doc, I'm cutting off trans for 
a minute, it seems to work better when I 
think it to him." 

The seconds ticked off into minutes, and 
the READY light was full green. Doc's 
hand trembled a bit on the firing levers, 
and he checked the restrainers in his shock 
chair for the third time. 

Thirty seconds dragged by, and sweat 
budded on his forehead. "What in Helios 
is he . . ." he muttered, and then the 
speaker crackled with the one word: 
"NOW!" 

Doc slammed the firing levers home, 
and instantly was driven deep into his 
shock-chair. Blackness washed out his 
trailing thought, Leaping Luna, what is 
this doing to Jon? There is no shock- pad 
in the air-lock. 

It did plenty. It took all of Doc's skill 
and three weeks at Venusenter before the 
brash spaceman was clamoring for active 
duty. 

"You see, Doc," he answered the question, "Booger and the rest were telepathic 

one way at least. I had him gather 

about fifty of them, so if one or two quit 
on the job, it wouldn't make too much 
difference. Then I had them extrude themselves into cables clear over the horizon. I 
had them hook their . . . well, tail ends 
onto the fins of the ship. Then I gave them 

the word to get over the hill fast. With 

our power, and their catapult action, it 
worked just like a Plutonian Cradle. Gave 
us that extra boost we needed." 

"But what was their incentive?" inquired 
Doc. "What made them take your orders?" 

Jon grinned broadly. "They ain't very 
smart. And life there is pretty monotonous. 
It tickled them to have some one give them 
something to do. Besides that, just before 
I passed the word to Booger, I commissioned him Commander-in-Chief of Drake's 
Irregulars. Authority-crazy, that Booger." 



S. O. S. APHRODITE! 

By STANLEY MUIXEN 




Coran struck her aside and lunged at Hamlin* 

No wonder that signal stabbed out Into tbe ley void. For it was 

a ship of hate and evil, and IP patrolman Steve Coran trusted 

only one person — after strapping her in her bunk! 



ON THE HIGH METALLIC 
wall across the street was a big 
sign: VENUS TRANSPORT 
and a smaller sign which read contamination area — keep out/ Steve Coran 



turned away from the window and faced 
the ISP official across the desk, 

"From the time you leave this office, 
you'll be in deadly danger/' the official 
said. "We aren't dealing with sporadic 

45 






46 PLANET 

cases of space piracy. This is a well-organized group of saboteurs, pirates and assassins backed by a ring of powerful and 
unscrupulous men, some of them in high 
places. They have more on their minds 
than mere looting. They have certain political objectives — and will stop at nothing to cause unrest, even war or revolution, to gain their ends. Fishers in 
troubled waters . . ." 

Coran laughed harshly. "Doesn't sound 
like a rest cure. Why'd you pick me for 
the job?" 

The official opened a file drawer and 
riffled the cards. "You were recommended by the Ministry of Transport. I confess 
that I was dubious, because of your record. However, you were transferred from 
the Mars-Jupiter sector for the one reason that you're not known here. Any of 
our regular security agents or the ISP 
men would be recognized at once. Our 
original idea was to place you aboard a 
rocket transport as a crewman to spy out 
the weak links in our defensive measures. 
But a matter of graver importance has 
come up. The assignments will overlap, 
but we can no longer give you official 
backing." 

"You'd better bring me up to date/* 
Coran said bluntly. 

'The pattern is usually the same. Barratry. Three of the Venus transports 
have been deliberately wrecked and looted. 
Of plutonium, for the most part Members 
of this criminal group have infiltrated the 
crew. Even trusted officers have been 
forced, by blackmail or other methods, to 
aid the plotters. We can trust no^one, not 
even the captain." 

"I see. What is this other matter you 
spoke about?" 

"Two days ago we arrested a man. The 
charge was barratry. We had no name, 
only a heliophoto from Venus. In his possession we found documents relating to 
political matters of vital importance. Release of the information contained in his 
portfolio would be disastrous at this time. 
It could cause chaos, perhaps even war." 

Coran grunted. "Such documents have 
no right to exist." 

"I agree. Unfortunately, this one does 
exist And it's no longer in our custody. 



STORIES 

A woman, obviously an accomplice, got a 
blaster gun to him. Two ISP men were 
killed, and the prisoner escaped. The documents went with him. I don't have to 
tell you that both of these fugitives must 
be apprehended or killed And those 
papers must be brought back or destroyed. 
That's your job." 
"I don't like it." 

"Tact isn't your long suit, is it, Lieutenant? You weren't asked if you liked it. 
With two black marks against your record, you can't afford an opinion. One 
more and you're through as an officer in 
the space patrol — " 

"I don't like working out of uniform." 

" and I wouldn't count too much on 

a friendship with Paul Jomian, if I were 
you, Coran. He's through here . . . even 
if he was kicked upstairs into the transport ministry. We no longer approve his 
methods. His rough-shod, undisciplined 
methods may get by in a frontier civilization like that of the outer planets, but 
nowadays we require efficiency and complete co-operation in the ISP, The time 
is past when an ISP officer can forget to 
change his uniform and go without shaving 
for days at a time." 

Coran's eyes glittered. "There was more 
to Paul Jomian than gold braid and pretty 
uniforms. He was a man. And he got 
things done so a lot of yoti pretty-boys 
could sit on your fat chairs and keep your 
hair unmussed. For your information, 
those black marks on my record are for 
tearing apart superior officers who made 
cracks about Paul Jomian. Do you want 
me to turn in my badge?" 

The official smiled poisonotuly. "That 
would be the easy way out for you, Coran. 

What's the matter the job too tough 

for you?" 

"I can't stand the smell of perfume 
around here. And the jobs don't come 
too tough. Relax, big shot. I'll run your 
stinking little errand for you. But it's the 
last one. When I hand your two-vikdal 
bad man over to you, I'm through. Make 
out my resignation that way, and I'll sign 
it before I leave," 

THE official laughed and stood up. 
"Resignation accepted upon com


s.o.s. aphrodite: 



47 



pletion of assignment. You're a hard case, 
Coran. Up to a point, you're even right. 
But you don't belong any more, not in this 
part of the universe. It took pioneers like 
you and Jomian to bang the holes in our 
fishbowl world, but we need men with dull 
routine minds to bring order into it. Unofficially, I'm sorry to see you go. Nowadays a man conforms or he gets out." 

"Skip the bouquets and the funeral oration. What's the layout on the job you 
want done?" 

The official threw a file card across the 
desk. "There's the man you want. The 
picture won't help you much, since he'll 
probably be wearing a plastic face-mask." 

Coran glanced at it and shrugged. "Not 
much to go on. Any other leads?" 

"Yes." The official glanced at his wristchron. "We know that he will be on the 
Venus transport X-1143 — the Aphrodite — 
which leaves in three hours. Probably the 
woman, too. Whatever happens, they must 
not reach Venus alive." 

CORAN caught an implication in the 
words. "What do you mean 'Whatever happens ?' " 

"The Aphrodite is an emigrant ship. It's 
a government secret that she's carrying 
plutonium for the power plants on Venus, 
but we're afraid the information may have 
leaked out. You may as well know that 
we're on the spot. It's too late to cancel 
the shipment without serious economic repercussions. And we haven't found any 
way to protect the passenger-carrying 
ships. Even if we armed them, which is 
against Interplanetary Law, they're too 
slow to run and too unwieldy to maneuver. 
Too much mass." 

"What about convoy?" 

"We tried that last time. The ship was 
disabled and driven off-orbit. Then a 
group of fast cruisers of unusual design 
showed up. The space patrol drove them 
off and gave chase. It was a trick, of 
course, to decoy our ships into space, then 
the main body of pirates moved* in and 
cleaned out the ship." 

Coran laughed. 'When you're catching 
rabbits you have to be smarter than the 
rabbits." 

The official flushed. "We're handi


capped by lack of ships and lack of competent personnel. This is your chance to 
be smarter than the rabbits. The man you 
want is obviously a member of the same 
group. If there is trouble, he will try to 
contact his friends. It's up to you to find 
him first, and if you fail that, to make 
sure that he does not escape or turn over 
the documents to anyone else. We'll have 
an ISP squadron following six hours behind the Aphrodite. If you need help, get a 

signal to them by helioflash, if you 

can. I suggest you find the man first, and 
through him, locate the woman. From 
there on, you know what to do . . ." 

"It's a dirty job. Even with frosting, 
it's simple butchery no trial, no evidence. Now I know why the Martians 
consider an ISP man just a hired thug." 
"That's all he is. You have your orders 
and, whatever your private opinions may 
be, I'm sure you'll agree that lives are unimportant when we're playing for such 
stakes." 

"Lives never are when politicians start 
dealing from the bottom of the deck," 
Coran snarled bitterly. 

The official shrugged. "I wouldn't know 
about that. I'm just a yes-man. You can 
discuss it with Paul Jomian your politician friend when you see him. He'll 

be on the Aphrodite/' 

"Have you figured out how I'm to get 
on the Aphrodite ? If she's an emigrant ship, 
they'll take only married couples. The 
altruistic Company wants settlers to colonize Venus and build up their plague-spot 
plantations for them." 

"That's your problem. Marry someone 
if you have to, or hire a fake wife. It's 
been done. Anything, just so you don't 
give away your official position. Now get 
going. You've less than three hours till 
take-off time." 

Coran bent over the desk and signed his ■ 
resignation with an elaborate flourish, put 
aif inked thumbprint beside the name, then 
stalked to the door clothespinning his nose 
between thumb and forefinger. "That's 
time enough to blow this stink off me," 
he said carelessly, wiping the inky thumb 
on his uniform jacket. 

The official laughed. "You're right. It 
does stink." 



48 PLANET 

STEVE CORAN was conscious of the 
girl merely as an obstacle between hirn 
and the ticket window. She was young, 
expensively dressed and too well-groomed, 
with blue-white hair, a haughty manner, 
and an icy stare in her violet eyes. 
"I was here first/' she said coldly. 
Coran bowed mockingly. "I don't like 
you either. Besides, I never hit a lady in 
public. I hope this won't lead to one of 
those shipboard romances." 

The beehive activity of the ticket office 
slackened as take-off time drew near. 
Coran studied her 'back as she stood ahead 
of him in the line and repressed a desire 
to pinch her and find out if she were real. 
The weasel-faced clerk was tired and his 
tone of long-suffering patience had worn 
to a thread of annoyance. 

"I've told you before, miss. I can't sell 

single tickets the company rules do not 

permit any but married couples aboard an 
emigrant transport. We feel that unattached women are trouble makers in a 
frontier society." 

The girl made an arrogant gesture. "It's 
important. I must get to Venus. I don't 
care what it costs." 

''Don't tell me. See the manager. I 
don't make the rules. Third office on the 
left. But you'd better hurry. I've only 
one double passage left." 

•Coran tapped the girl on her shoulder. 
She glared at him.- "Take a tip from me, 
babe. See the boss. If he's a man, you'll 
get the tickets." 

As she left the line, he pushed to the 
window. "I'll take those two tickets, bud." 
"Do you have your marriage certificate?" 

Coran reached through the window, 
snagged a coat lapel and had the man 
dragged half through the window in a 
flash. "Now I'll talk, punk, and you listen. Because I don't have a ring in my 
nose, don't get the idea I'm not married. 
Do I get those tickets, or do you give up 
mirrors for the next six weeks?" 

The clerk looked at the gnarled fist under his nose and gave a wild nod of his 
head. "You get them." 

The steel fingers relaxed and the clerk 
slid back inside his cage. "I'll report this," 
he stormed, shaking himself like a wet ani


8TORMES 

mal. "You'd better have your papers when 
you try to get past the purser." He handed out the tickets. 

The girl followed Coran from the office. 
'Til give you a thousand vikdals for those 
tickets." 

Coran grinned savagely. "Not even if 
you said please." 

"Please, and two thousand." 

"Stop it you're getting near my 

price. Besides, they wouldn't do you any 
good. You need a husband to go with 
'em. Take the express rocket next month. 
It's a shorter orbit and you'll only lose two 
weeks." 

"You take it then*. My business won't 
wait. Three thousand." 

Coran whistled. "What's your problem?" 

"None of your business." 

"Have it your own way. My business 
won't wait either. Now, if you don't mind, 
I'm in a hurry. I've less than two hours 
to find a honky-tonk and get myself a 
bride. I don't suppose you'd know where 
the nearest dive is. No, you wouldn't." 

He turned away toward the elevators, 
but the girl clutched his arm desperately. 
"Six thousand . . . It's all I have." 

Coran stared at her. "I'm sorry for you, 
but you'd have to kill me to get these away. 
And I'm hard to kill. I'll make a deal 
though. I'll sell you half of my double 
for three thousand. You'd have to marry 
me, though." 

"Marry you!" There was a word of 
loathing in her tone. 

"It's "been done. I'm on my way out 
now to look up a floozy. I'll even marry 
her, if she's dope enough to want it that 
way. I don't like the idea any better than 
you do, but I'd 4iock grandma's faJse teeth 
to get to Venus. Forget I mentioned it. 
If I'm to be stuck with a dame for four 
months, it might as well -be a flamethrower 
as an icicle." 

He buzzed for the elevator before she 

called after him. "I I've changed my 

mind." She was pale, with a look of suppressed fury about her. "I guess I'd do 
even that." 

Coran laughed wickedly. "Don't flatter 
yourself. You're just a ticket to Venus 
to me. Meet me at the marriage bureau 



S.O.S. APHRODITE t 



49 



in half an hour. We haven't much time, 
and you'll have to be psychographed. We 
really should? know each other. I'm Steve 
Goran/' 

'Tm Gerda Mors. In half an hour." 

THE purser stopped at a door marked 
No. 200. He was a young, inadequate-looking man. 

''You won't have to carry me over the 
threshold," Gerda said crisply. She went 
inside and shut the door. In shocked silence, he re-checked the sheaf of papers in 
his hand. 

"She's shy around strangers," Coran 
explained. "When do we take off?" 

"In five minutes. We're making these 
emigrant runs under very crowded conditions. All passengers are expected to remain in their own staterooms most of the 
time. A certain amount of exercise is permitted, of course, once free flight is attained and the A-orbit corrections made. 
Until then, we recommend that everyone 
remain out of the crew's way. The safest 
place during acceleration is in bed*." 

Coran winked ponderously. "I'll make 
out all right. One thing, though. I believe I have a friend on board. Am I 
permitted to examine the passenger lists ?" 
"Of course, they're public property. See 
the captain. His office is up near the bow, 
just aft of the control rooms. But wait 
till we're out in space." 

Coran knocked and entered the stateroom. Gerda was brushing her hair. She 
glanced up irritably. "This is my room," 
she told him shortly. "Find yourself another." 

He laughed grimly. ''The psychographs 
warned we were incompatible, but you'd 
better get used to me. It's 146 days to 
Venus, and we've only this stateroom between us. They practically lock us in, you 
know. We're going to be very good friends 
or most uncomfortable before we reach 
Venus." 

Angry sparks shot from her violet eyes. 
"Did you know all this before?" 
Coran nodded. 

"You are a swine, aren't you ? It won't 
do you any good. I'll tell the captain we're 
not married. I'll say it was all a fake, the 

4— Planet— Summer 



certificate was a forgery, that you're a . . ." 

"Go ahead. I wish for your sake it 
would help, but they'd only check and find 
out it was genuine. Even if it weren't, 
you'd only be forced to go through the 
ceremony again. The rules are very specific to cover just such situations." 

Fear and anger blended unpleasantly in 
her voice. "I'll think of something . . ." 

Warning alarms blared through the ship. 
Ripples of soundless shock stirred the bulk. 

"We're getting under way," Coran 
warned. "You'd better come to bed." 

"I'd rather die," she said sullenly. 

''Suit yourself. But it's pretty unpleasant." 

>T*HE rocket transport left its runway 
JL at an angle of 45 degrees, slanting 
up into the Sahara night with a blossom 
of pink-white flame flowering round its 
stern jets. A series of jarring vibrations 
smoothed to a muffled burr. The girl was 
flung heavily to the floor and lay there 
beside the porthole of fused quartz, retching feebly as the acceleration built up. 
Outside the port, what seemed the flank 
of a titanic mountain of moonlit sand fell 
rapidly astern. It tilted at an incredible 
angle. 

Coran hunched himself off the bed and 
crawled to her. Gerda grimaced weakly 
and struck at him, then lapsed into unconsciousness. He picked her up and carried her to the bed, dumped her like a 
limp sack and clasped the straps about her. 
She did not rouse. 

Her purse lay where she had 'dropped it. 
Coran went through it methodically. A 
small blaster gun of the type women thugs 
carry in their handbags. It appeared to 
have been used recently. Four Lumipencils. The usual cosmetics. A pillbox with 
a poison label. And, in an ivory frame, a 
small colorphoto miniature of the man 
whose face was on the Security Headquarters dossier card. Coran neutralized 
the charge in the blaster and set it on 
safety, then carefully replaced everything. 
He wished he had a pocket magnascope to 
study the miniature in detail, but that 
could wait. He must check the passenger 
lists and find out where Paul Jomian's 
room was located. Paul should be warned', 



50 PLANET 

so that his surprise at seeing Coran would 
not give the show away. 

The girl stirred and moaned feebly. 
Coran found the emergency medical locker 
and forced an anti-acceleration capsule between her tight-clenched teeth, following 
it with a water concentrate capsule. She 
would be wildly thirsty when she came 
out of it, and real water would have some 
unpleasant effects during A-shock. He 
leaned over and checked the straps. They 
were tight enough so she would never get 
.out of that tie without help. Her eyes 
blinked open and she stared at him in 
panic. 

"Just relax," he cautioned. "And don't 
get impatient. I'll be right back. Have to 
see a man about a . . ." 

He went outside and made his way with 
difficulty up the bleak passage forward. 
The distorted gravity made walking extremely difficult. Once outside the main 
gravity field of Earth, artificial gravities 
would be turned on. Until then, only an 
experienced spaceman could get around 
safely. Coran was grateful for the rigorous training of the ISP. 

A staccato bark of unintelligible verbal 
commands came through the half-opened 
doorway of the control room ahead. The 
captain's office should be somewhere about 
here. On Coran's right was a closed door 
marked CAPTAIN. Coran knocked twice 
without receiving any answer, then tried 
the door. It slid* easily open. He stepped 
over the high threshold. Lights were flaring and dying away as if the generators 
were running unevenly. He peered about 
him, and at first the Spartan-like accommodations seemed unoccupied. He wondered if he should sit down and wait for 
the captain. A second look convinced him 
he would have a long wait. 

Sprawled forward, half across the desk, 
was the captain's body. The upper part 
of his head had been blown away by a 
blaster gun, evidently fired at close quarters. 

A cry behind him swung Coran around. 
In the frame of the opened doorway stood 
the purser, mouth open, pointing at the 
dead man with a trembling finger. Instinctively, Coran started for the door. The 
purser sprang into action, leaped on Coran 



STORIES 

and caught him in a surprisingly strong 
grip for so slight a man. Coran made no 
attempt to struggle. In a moment the office 
was full of people. The burly first mate 
pulled the purser away from Coran. 

"What is all this, Hamlin?" the mate 
demanded. 

Coran had taken time to study the identification files on all the Aphrodite's officers at headquarters before coming aboard. 
He recognized- the three officers instantly 

as Harriman, first mate Hamlin, the 

purser and Nalson, the navigator or 

astronaut but was careful not to give 

himself away. 

"I heard a sound in the captain's office, 
and when I came in to investigate, I found 
him," Hamlin explained. "The captain's 
been murdered." 

Mate Harriman looked Coran up and 
down. "Where's the gun ?" he asked. 

"How should I know? I just came in a 
minute ago. He was like this when I got 
here." 

Harriman drove a fist into Coran's 
mouth. ''Come now, you don't expect us 
to believe a yarn like that. Where is that 
gun?" 

Coran spat blood from his mangled lips. 
"I don't know anything about it. The purser can tell you why I wanted to see the 
captain." 

Hamlin spoke up. "I told him to wait 
till we were out in space," he snapped. "He 
said he wanted* to check the passenger list." 

"I demand to see the first mate," Coran 
said. 

The words seemed to recall Harriman to 
his duties. "I am the first mate," he said. 
"I haven't time to bother with you now. 
I'll take care of you later. Throw him in 
the cells till we get out in space. I'll have 
to take over for the Old Man." 

CORAN was hustled roughly to the 
lower part of the ship and flung into 
the cramped quarters of the transport's 
brig. He settled back on the bunk and 
tried to straighten things out in his mind. 

"At least I got a room to myself," he 
mused grimly. This was going to complicate things. 

His wrist-chron had stopped, so he had 
no way of telling time, but thev fed him 



S.O.S. APHRODITE! 



51 



four times an*! he slept twice before they 
came for him. Two crew men waited in 
the passage while Hamlin came in and 
sat down. 

''You're in a bad spot, Coran. It's customary in cases of civilian infractions of 
ship's rules to appoint an .officer as counsel for their defense. I'm yours. Sorry 
you got pushed around, but you were lucky 
at that. Harriman's a pretty tough character. You'd have got worse if Nalson 
and I hadn't been there. He's been disciplined for brutality before now. They're 
giving you a hearing in the wardroom. I'd 
suggest you co-operate with me by telling 
me anything that will help with your case. 
I don't mind telling you your story's too 
weak to hold up. I'll do all I can for you, 
but you'll have to help." 

"What am I supposed to do?" Coran 
grunted. 

"You might tell me the truth. We 
know the captain must have been killed 
just as the ship took off. Otherwise, someone would have heard the shot. If you 
could prove you were somewhere else at 
the time " 

"I was with my wife. She'll bear witness for me." 

"It won't do, Coran. I should have told 
you that your wife is ill and won't be able 
to testify. I found her myself, strapped 
to the bunk in your cabin, Martian plague ! 
I called the doctor who examined her, then 
quarantined the cabin. We left concentrated food and water, warned her not to 
leave, then locked and sealed the cabin. 
'No one can see her." 

Coran went cold with anger. "Someone 
must really be trying to foul me up," he 

raged. "She couldn't have the plague 

she's never been off the earth." 

"Your papers read that you just came 
from Mars," objected Hamlin. 

"I did. We were married just before 
the ship left. If I were carrying the 
plague, I'd have it myself. She couldn't 
have it " 

Hamlin laughed nervously. "I wish you 
could convince the doctor of that. He's 
been taking blood tests of me ever since 
we left her. I'm sorry for you, Coran, but 
she has it. I saw the grey rash myself. 
It's horrible, horrible . . * 



Coran's mind worked like lightning. She 
had said she would think of something. 
Something to keep the stateroom to herself. There might even be a more sinister 
motive than that. After that picture of the 
man he wanted in her purse, he could believe anything Qf her. Maybe she even 
knew about him. \ She was faking, but how ? 
How, since she had been securely tied 
when he left her? Had he started his quest 
at the wrong end? She must have been 
the woman accomplice who had got a gun 
through the security police guarding the 
prisoner. 

"What am I charged with ?" he asked. 

"Deliberate murder and plotting against 
the welfare of the ship. If the officers 
agree on your guilt, you can be put to 
death immediately. They put you through 
an airlock. The regulations have to be 
pretty stringent on a spaceship." 

Coran stood up. "Let's go up and get 
it over with," he said. "We'll see about 
your regulations." 

Manacled between the two brawny crewmen, a sullen Coran rode up in the elevators. Outside the wardroom, the group 
stopped while Hamlin knocked*. "I wish 
you'd let me help you," he said in a final 
attempt. 

Coran shook his head. "I know what 
I'm doing." 

Hamlin shrugged. ''I hope you do." 

THE assembled officers stared at 
Coran curiously. His lip was still 
bruised and swollen. He stared insolently 
at the group and tried to thrust all other 
considerations out of his mind. The girl 
and his quest would have to wait. His immediate hurdle was to get out of this mess. 

Harriman wet his lips and opened the 
hearing. 

"I won't waste words when we all know 
why we're here. There is no need for formality in a hearing of this kind. The captain of the Aphrodite was foully murdered, 
and this man who calls himself Stephen 
Coran was found standing over his body. 
There was no gun in the room and none 
on the prisoner. Coran's papers seem to 
be in order. They show him to be a prospector from Mars, en route to Venus, but 
may be forgeries. That can be checked. 



52 



PLANET STORIES 



His wife is in quarantine, and will be 
unable to testify one way or the other." 

Coran broke in. "I demand to hear the 
formal charge against me." 

"As acting captain of the Aphrodite, I officially charge you, Stephen Coran, with 
the wilful murder of Captain Joseph 
Shalm, late master of 4his ship. Also, 
since the murder must have taken place at 
the exact moment of take-off, with the 
deliberate intent to delay and endanger the 
safety of the ship and all the lives on 
board." 

"Good. Now I make formal demand 
that my wife be called as witness to the 
fact that I could not have been in the captain's office at the time of take-off." 

"You heard me say. that your wife is in 
quarantine. She will not be able to testify. 
If you have anything else to say in your 
defense, speak up." 

"I make no defense. Since the court is 
so obviously prejudiced, I will stand on 
my civilian rights as a technicality. This 
court has no jurisdiction over me. The 
most you can do is to confine me to the 
area of this ship until a charge can be 
brought against me in the admiralty court 
on Venus. Also, under Security Law No. 
F 1720, since the one witness I asked to 
have called in my defense has not been 
brought to court, I demand that the whole 
proceedings be dropped as illegal, unjustified, and prejudicial to civilian rights. 
Since I obviously cannot escape from the 
ship, you cannot even require the customary bond for reappearance." 

Harriman's mouth dropped open. "Do 
you expect to get away with this?" 

''More than that." Coran grimaced unpleasantly. "I wish to file charges with 
the nearest official of the ministry of 
transport that I was mishandled and held 
under restraint without formal charges being brought against me. If there is such 
an official on board, I demand to see him." 

Nalson, the astronaut, hid a smile behind his sleeve, then leaned forward and 
whispered earnestly to Harriman. Harriman nodded, then turned to consult with 
the ship's doctor. 

"Is this your doing, Hamlin?" the acting captain rasped sourly. 

The purser shifted uneasily. "No, sir. 



But, since the prisoner chooses this defense, I have no choice but to repeat his 
demands, officially. There is an official 
aboard, Paul Jomian of the transport ministry. I suggest you send for him and 
turn this hearing over to him. He will 
have whatever authority is necessary to 
deal with it." 

In momentary desperation, Harriman 
glanced round the room at the circle of 
faces and saw that Coran had him over a 
barrel. The hard-faced navigator, Nalson, 
spoke up. "Better send for Jomian. In 
theory, we have the right of assessing the 
death penalty, but in practice, it's not so 
simple. The admiralty will review the 
case and, if your foot slips on some technicality, you might even have to face the 
disintegrators yourself." 

Harriman gave in and sent for Jomian. 

A RED BULB flashed and the buzzer 
sounded, then Paul Jomian stepped 
into the wardroom. He was a lean man, 
greying into his late fifties, with the bleakness of outer space in his eyes and a face 
badly scarred by spaceburns. His eyes 
stared as they fell upon the manacled figure 
of Coran standing in the center of the 
harsh-lit stage. Steve Coran stared back 
at him with insolently expressionless face. 

The difficulty was rapidly explained by 
Captain Harriman in a monotonously leveled tone of repressed fury. Jomian studied the prisoner with politely casual interest while the harangue went on. When 
Harriman finished, the transport official 
considered briefly before giving his verdict. 

"Well, gentlemen, much as I sympathize 
with your feelings in this matter, I'm 
afraid the prisoner is within his rights. 
Even if the circumstances are somewhat 
unusual, we have no choice but to release 
him. However, in view of the possible 
menace involved to the safety of the ship, 
I recommend that he be under constant 
surveillance by some competent and responsible officer, preferably the one appointed for his defense, who will see to it 
that he has no opportunity to perpetrate 
further violence. Once Venus is reached 
the man can be turned over to the proper 
authorities." 



S.O.S. APHRODITE! 



53 



Coran broke in roughly. "Does all this 
monkey talk mean I'm free?" 

Harriman was maliciously official. "I'm 
afraid it does. But don't try anything 
funny. Hamlin, Nalson, I'm detailing you 
two to watch over Coran in shifts. Don't 
let him out of your sight, day or night. If 
he attempts to steal a lifeboat and escape, 
or makes the slightest untoward move to 
hinder the operation- of the ship or molest 

anyone on board, shoot him that's all. 

Since he has no room, he will share yours 
for the remainder of the voyage." 

Hamlin got a key and released Coran 
from his manacks. 

Jomian glanced at him with an odd expression. "If you don't mind, Coran, I'd 
like a word with you in private. If the 
captain has no objection." 

Harriman was curious, but nodded. 
"Are you sure you'll be safe with him ?" 

Jomian smiled. "That's my worry. Send 
your men to my cabin in an hour. After 
twelve years in the Space Patrol, I'm used 
to handling bad boys." 

NINE days out the Aphrodite ran into 
trouble. 

Proximity alarms Wared wildly. It was 
only a small asteroid, not more than a 
quarter of a mile in diameter, just a jaggedr 
piece of rock and fused metal. But it came 
out of a direct line with the sun, moving 
fast, and discipline had been dangerously 
lax on the Aphrodite after Harriman took 
over command. 

At 9:05 ship time, there came the 
sound of a rending crash up forward, followed by a nauseating sense of shock and 
withering waves of motion energy transformed into heat. Fortunately, the collision was a glancing one, but enough. The 
Aphrodite was a shattered wreck. Her bow 
and the control room were carried away 
bodily, and only the spacetight bulkheads 
of the waist saved the passengers and crew 
from instant death. 

At 9 :20, feeling far off course, leaking 
air dangerously from sprung seams, the 
doomed transport and the asteroid circled 
each other like wary wrestlers awaiting an 
opening. Sooner or later, as the initial 
force of the spin died down, they would 
crash together in flaming holocaust. In 



the meantime, everything that could be 
done was being done. 

Orders went out to abandon ship. Of 
the original complement of four hundred 
and eighty passengers and crew, nineteen 
were dead or missing, and eighty others 
more or less seriously injured. The heaviest casualties were among the rocket crew 
and officers, some of whom were fatally 
burned by premature atomic discharge. 
Rocket jets were set roaring at full capacity in a vain effort to break the wreck 
away from the deadly vicinity of the circling asteroid. Surviving crew members 
labored heroically to load and launch the 
lifeboats from three airlocks, two of which 
were so badly jammed as to be almost 
unworkable. 

The forward compartments were a scene 
from inferno. Coran, who had been with 
Nalson in the chartroom when the crash 
occurred, picked himself out of the jumble 
of broken lockers and scattered metal-leaf 
charts and crawling through the glare and 
heat to a pitiable huddle of pulped flesh 
pinned beneath the wreckage of a berylium 
table. Nalson's skull was fractured, blood 
pulsed from his ears, and he was gasping 
out his life as Coran pried the table off 
him. His eyes seemed bursting from his 
head. 

"No excuse for wreck," he got out. "Fm 
. . . Security Police. Sent me in case you 
fumbled. Watch Harriman . • . Hamlin." 

A spurt of blood from his mouth and 
nose stopped his words. The navigator 
spat savagely. "Think . . . Hamlin's . . . 
the man you want." His lips moved weakly, then hung open as he died. 

USING a leg of the ruined table as a 
wrecking bar, Coran pried open the 
door and got into the passageway. A blast 
of sickening heat rushed to meet him. Forward was a lurid glare of white hot metal, 
and he could hear air shrieking through 
the leaks where seams had started. He 
fought his way aft to a bank of elevators, 
but they were hopelessly jammed. 

Descending the spiral stairway, he encountered Paul Jomian. 

"I thought you were gone," Jomian said. 
"The entire forward part of the ship seems 
to be carried away." 



54 



PLANET STORIES 



"It is. I'm hard to kill. Nalson's dead. 
And so are the men in the control room." 

A kind of exhiliration moved in Coran. 
The endless waiting and watching, under 
constant surveillance, had gotten on his 
nerves. He was not used to intrigue. Now 
that a need for his kind of action had 
arisen, he felt better already. 

Jomian's left arm had compound fractures above and below the elbow. It hung 
useless at his side, with splinters of bone 
thrusting through mangled skin and flesh. 
Coran broke open a locker and gave him 
emergency first aid, binding the limb with 
metal splints. 

"That'll hold it till you can get it cared 
for. You'd better get to the lifeboats. I'm 
going to find my wife. As I told you, she 
may be in this racket, but I can't be sure. 
In any case, she's my responsibility." 

"Can't I help?" Jomian asked. 

"Not now. If I make it, we'll discuss 
it there. If not, you can take a message 
for me. There's an ISP squadron six hours 
behind us. Get a helioflash to them. Tell 
them to come a-running. I've an idea 
they'll find something interesting." 

"I'll get word to them," Jomian promised. "Take care of yourself, boy." 

The door of stateroom No. 200 was still 
locked and sealed. Coran opened a locker 
and got out a wrench to work off the lugs 
on the lock. A voice from behind jarred 
him. 

"I've been looking for you," Hamlin 
sneered. "I thought you'd be up to something." In the dimming and flaring light, 
Coran got a glimpse of the blaster-gun in 
Hamlin's hand. Coran's fingers tightened 
on the wrench. He spun around and 
hurled the wrench in one motion. Hamlin 
pressed the trigger, but the wrench spoiled 
his aim. Coran dodged under the gun and 
dragged him down in a flying tackle. The 
gun went rattling down the corridor. 

"Come away from there, you fool," Hamlin screamed as he broke away. "D'you 
want the plague?" He edged toward the 
gun, but Coran cut him off. Both lunged 
for it. Coran got it, but before he could 
use it, Hamlin kicked him in the stomach. 
He rolled on the floor in agony. Hamlin 
kicked again viciously. Coran fumbled 
with the gun. 



A warning alarm sounded. The boats 
were about to leave. 

Coran got his breath back. "Help me 
get her out. She has no more plague than 
you have. Besides, she's your " 

"You're mad," Hamlin shrieked. 
"They'd never let her into the boats. I 
won't risk the lives of innocent people on 
your sayso." He leaned across Coran to 
snatch at the gun. Coran clawed at his 
face and layers of plastic came off in his 
fingers. Hamlin screamed as the stuff 
came loose from his flesh. Then he turned 
and ran. 

He darted up the companion stairs. By 
the time Coran could reach the gun, it was 
too late. The man had vanished to the 
upper deck. 

Coran got to his knees and aimed the 
blaster at the jammed lock on the stateroom door. The mechanism and half the 
door disappeared in ravening violence. The 
shock knocked Coran flat. 

Gerda stepped through the shattered 
doorway. 

"What's going on ?" she wailed hysterically. It was apparent that she had been 
crying, although she had tried to efface the 
marks. 

"Never mind that. We've got to get 
you out of here. Are you all right?" 

She laughed wildly. "Of course I am! 
Has everyone gone crazy? You look a 
fright. D'you want to carry me, or should 
I carry you ?" 

"Get to the lower decks. Find the doctor. Show him you're not sick. And hurry 

the lifeboats are leaving." Coran made 

a vague gesture and slumped weakly 
against the wall while spirals of nausea 
raged through him. She was halfway to 
the companion stair before she noticed that 
he was not following. Coran had fainted. 

/^QLD water splashing in his face reV> vived him. His head was nestled in 
her lap. 

"What are you doing here?" he raged. 
"If you don't hurry, it will be too late." 

She answered with quiet assurance. 
"Listen, tough guy, you didn't have to 
come back for me. D'you think I'd leave 
you to save my skin after that ?" 

Coran shook his head to clear the mist 



S.O.S. APHRODITE I 



55 



of dizzy weakness, and she helped him to 
his feet. 

"Let's get going/' he urged. If the lifeboats leave before we reach the airlock, 
you'll really be in a jam." 

With the girl's arm tight around his 
waist to support him, he managed to make 



explain about the picture, but the other I 
had nothing to do with. While you had 
me tied up, someone came into the room ; 
naturally I thought it was you coming 
back. I was still dazed from shock and 
only half awake. First thing I knew, a man 
in uniform had jammed a pillow over my 



it to the sally port. The airlock door was face. I thought |ie was trying to kill me, 

i _ j vrtA nparlv cmntherpfl TTp nibbed some


closed, 

"The boats have gone," he said. He sat 
down hopelessly on a casket-like metal 
toolbox. 

"Maybe someone will come," she said. 
"That's what I'm afraid of," he snapped. 
"In the meantime, I think we need some 
coffee ... if I can find an unopened can." 
Coran waved toward a locker where supplies were kept on clipshelves. She found 
a can with built-in heat unit and opened 
it, pouring coffee for them. He sipped 
his slowly, while she gulped down a scalding draft. 

"You seem very calm about all this," 
Coran said grimly. 

"Hysterics won't help. Besides, you 
seem to be expecting someone. What did 
you mean, that's what you're afraid of? 
Who would come back?" 
"Don't you know?" 

She shook her head in bewilderment 
"How should I know? I'm a stranger here 
myself." 

"You may as well stop playing innocent. 
In case you don't already know, I'm an 
officer in the space patrol. This wreck 
was deliberate, planned by some of the 
crew. There are two possibilities. Either 
they'll come back and try to salvage the 
plutonium cargo, or they have confederates 
waiting in space to close in as soon as the 
ship is abandoned. I don't look forward 
to either one." 

"You act as if I knew something about 
all this," Gerda said irritably. "I don't 
know why you should think so, but you're 
way off the track. Why suspect me?" 

"How can I help it, with that picture in 
your purse, and that phoney deal you 
pulled by playing sick?" 

Gerda flushed, whether from anger or 
guilt Coran would have given much to 
know. 

"I don't know how you know about 
that," she answered evenly. "I 1 can't 



and nearly smotliered. He rubbed something on my elbows and down the cords 
of my neck, then left. It seemed like a 
nightmare. I blamed you vaguely till I 
remembered the gold braid on his sleeves 
and knew it must have been a ship's officer. Later, an officer came in with the 
doctor, who took one look at me and 
seemed scared to death. Too scared to 
examine me. They wouldn't listen to anything, just untied me enough so I could 
work loose eventually, left some stuff, and 
locked me in. That's all I knew till you 
let me out just now. 

CORAN considered. "It sounds plausible. I'd like to believe you, but that 
photograph is too damning. You'll have a 
lot of explaining to do . . . if we get out 
of this alive." 

"What about the photograph? What's 
he wanted for ?" 

"There's another one of him in the Security Police headquarters. He's the. man 
I was sent to get. Both ISP and the Security Police want him. The original 
charge was barratry, but " 

"What's barratry ?" she asked. 

"It's the deliberate wrecking of a ship, 
for the insurance or to salvage the cargo 
illegally. I don't know what your connection is with this man, but " 

"It's very simple," she said. "He's my 
brother. I knew he was in trouble, but 
didn't know it was so serious. Our family 
broke up years ago. Mother married again. 
That was fifteen years ago. I was ten, and 
Ken was thirteen. We took our stepfather's name, but Ken and he never got 
along very well. Ken ran away to Venus 
when he was seventeen. Mother died a 

year ago. I 1 wanted to find Ken and 

help him. My stepfather had him traced 
for me and we found out he was in 
trouble with the police. I thought if I 
could talk to him, maybe he'd give himself 



56 



PLANET STORIES 



up, take his just punishment, and we could 
start over again together. Ken's all I have 
left. He's not bad. A little wild, but not 
bad." 

Coran stood up and stared into the black 
gulf of space through the visiplate. He felt 
a sudden bleak distaste for his profession. 

Tin afraid it's a little late for that," he 
said gently. "He's wanted for barratry, 
murder, and perhaps treason. The penalty 
for any one of them is death. I'm sorry." 

Gerda sat silently, brooding over the information. "You think I'm going to cry, 
don't you? And you hate emotional 
women. You can relax. I think I've known 
all along that it was hopeless. It does 
hurt, but I'm beyond crying any more." 

FAR out in the void a clustered blur of 
faint, needle-sharp lights etched itself 
against the star-patterned darkness. Spaceships, coming up fast under rocket power. 
Coran glanced quickly at the wall-chron. 
It was too soon for the space patrol. Even 
under full acceleration, they could not 
make it in less than three hours. 

"I'll have to trust you," he said grimly 

"Brace yourself company's coming." 

Gerda snapped out of her black revery. 
"What are you going to do?" 
"We'd better work out a plan of action." 
Working like mad, Coran dumped the contents of the metal toolbox onto the floor. 
With a wrench, he smashed the handoperated controls which worked the airlock from the interior of the ship into a 
tangle of twisted machinery. Then he 
scooped up the rest of the tools and threw 
them down a waste disposal chute. 

"Get inside the toolbox," he ordered. 
"Try it once to make sure you can raise 
the lid from inside. Then keep out of 
sight. When they get here, I'll try to draw 
them away into the after part of the ship. 
If I succeed in drawing them off, you slip 
out and get into the airlock. Close the door 
and lock it from inside. If I manage to 
circle around and get back here, I'll signal 
you with three soft taps on the door, followed by three hard ones. Don't open for 
anyone else. It'll take them over an hour 
to cut through that door from in here. 
You'll have a gambler's chance." 
"Good luck," said Gerda softly. She 



climbed into the toolbox while Coran recharged the blaster gun and stuffed his 
pockets with extra ammunition. 

Gerda raised the box lid slightly. "It 
works, Steve," she said. "Take care of 
yourself." 

He grinned. "One thing more. When 
you're into the airlock, get into a spacesuit and get one ready for me. They're on 
racks at the left side, inside a locker." 
She nodded. The lid slammed down. 
Coran re-arranged the stowage of boxes 
in the next compartment into a series of 
defensive barricades, then crouched beside 
the half-opened door of the sally-port. He 
had not long to wait. 

The airlock door swung open and three 
rough-looking men in space suits came cautiously through. They were followed by 
a dozen others not wearing the heavilyinsulated space armor. The pirates must 
have run a gangway tube between the ships 
and fastened it with magnetic grapnels. 
The outer doors of the airlock would open 
automatically as the pressure equalized. He 
wondered if Gerda would have sense 
enough to close and bolt the outers as well 
as the inward doors. It was too late to 
worry about that now. 

Coran took careful aim and fired his 
blaster beam into the crowd of men. Four 
were killed by the first discharge. The 
others broke for cover. Blaster beams 
interlaced, and the room jarred with repeated concussion. Men poured through 
the opened airlock door. The temperature 
rose sharply with the release of energy. 
The pirates rushed the door and Coran 
was forced to fall back to his line of barricades. 

He retreated cautiously, firing as he 
went. From behind the last of his barricades, he burned down three of his foes, 
then broke and ran for the engine room 
shaft, leaping across it to the spiralled 
stair. Just as he reached the upper loft of 
engines a beam cut down the shaft. He 
dodged behind a massive generator, but 
three blaster beams concentrated- on it. The 
force of their tripled discharge tore it from 
its moorings. Artificial gravity combined 
with its mass to send it crashing into a 
tangle of the intricate machinery below. 
To avoid being crushed, Coran was 



S.O.S. APIiRODMTE! 



57 



forced to plunge down the second shaft. 
He lost himself in the spiderweb of inner 
support beams. The pirates scattered- and 
climbed into the maze of beams, probing 
with their blaster rays as shadows moved 
uneasily in the eery darkness. The lumibulbs waxed and waned as the unsteady 
current fluctuated. 

FURTHER and further Coran led them, 
always away from the sally-port and 
the airlock, darting chance beams at his 
pursuers whenever opportunity presented. 
He had the advantage of knowing that 
they were all enemies. Their forces were 
divided and confused. In the weird and 
uncomfortable lofts of the engine-room, 
clear targets were impossible. 

A wild half-plan occurred to Coran. He 
headed in the direction of the main engine-room switch box and with his % beam 
burned' out all the fuses. 

Pit-like darkness enveloped the lofts as 
the lumibulbs went out. It was touch and 
go sliding down the long beams in the pall 
of utter blackness. He reached a catwalk, 
and cautiously made his way toward the 
elevators. Once he collided with a heavy 
body and a man swore savagely. 

He missed the elevators, but by some 
miracle found a hatchway leading to the 
cargo holds. Sliding through, he cut down 
the intensity of his blaster beam and melted the plastic and metal hatchcover into a 
fused mass. That should delay them a few 
minutes. He scuttled -down a deserted 
passageway and began climbing flights of 
stairs. If he could only find his way back 
to the sally-port from this other direction. 
He came suddenly into the room of his 
hasty barricades next to the sally-port. It 
was occupied. 

Two men had been left behind as guards. 
He caught them unawares, and burned 
both down with one sweep of his beam. 

The sally-port was empty. The box lid 
lay on the floor and the airlock door was 
closed tight. 

With the butt of his blaster, "he tapped 
out the signal on the airlock door. 

There was a smooth hiss of releasing 
metal parts and the airlock door came open. 
He slipped through and slammed the door, 
spinning the lockbolts tight. 



"Thank heavens, you made it," Gerda 
said. Pale and shaken, she handed him 
the heavy space-armor. "I was afraid 
you'd run into those others in the next 
room. They almost caught me. I had the 
lid half -raised when they came into the 
sally-port to check." 

"Put on your helmet/' he ordered roughly, as she handed him the fishbowl-like 
contrivance. 

She laughed. "The air's bad in here. 
I could hardly breathe, and I didn't know 
how to work the valves in the helmet." 

Coran swore briefly, then adjusted her 
helmet and put on his own. He set the 
microphones and the space communicators. 

"I shut the outside door," she complained. "I even bolted it, but it won't 
stay locked." 

"It's automatic," he told her. "When 
the air pressure's equal on both sides, it 
opens. I'll show you." 

Just as he reached for the controls, the 
door came open with a violent crash. Hamlin stood framed in the doorway, blaster 
gun in hand. 

f T hadn't counted on you, Coran," he 
said. The gun did not waver. "Don't reach 
for that gun." 

CORAN relaxed and stared at his opponent. "You look quite different 
without the plastic mask," he observed. 
Hamlin was older than he had looked in 
the photographs, but noticeably the same 
man, despite lines of strain which did not 
show in either pictura 

Hamlin smiled wolfishly. "My pictures 
don't flatter me, do they? The problem 
is what you've done with my men. You 
are becoming a nuisance, Coran. I'll have 
to kill you, of course, but I'd like to know 
how you managed this switch." 

Coran was playing for time. "I'll make 
a deal with you,'' he said. "I'm curious to 
know why you pulled that Martian plague 
stunt with Gerda." 

Hamlin laughed. "I recognized her at 
once, even though she had changed since I 
last saw her. Ten years is a long time 
when you're kids, but I'd seen a picture 
of her since then. When I saw you with 
her, I knew you were up to something. I 
wanted to keep you away from her till I 



58 



PLANET STORIES 



could deal with you. The rest was easy, 
just a little grease and aluminum powder. 
The doctor was scared to death ..." 

Gerda was staring at her brother through 
through the space helmets. "You did know 
me, Ken?" 

Hamlin shot her a contemptuous glance. 
"You little fool," he snapped. "You should 
never have come here. I don't know what 
I'm going to do with you." 

Gerda cringed as if he had struck her. 
"We'll have plenty of time for old home 
week later," Hamlin went on. "Now tell 
me what's happened to my men, Coran. I 
haven't much time to waste on you." 

Coran bit his lip. "I just lured them 
into the engine room and tangled them up 
in the lofts, then blew out the lights. It 
was a good trick while it worked. Some 
of them got weeded out on the way." 

"Now it's your turn, Coran," Hamlin 
said brutally. His finger tightened on the 
trigger. Gerda stood looking from one to 
the other with a look of anguish on her 
face. "Don't do it, Ken," she said, moving 
in front of Coran. 

"Stay out of this, Gerda," Coran 
warned. 

"I'm not kidding," Hamlin said, "if you 
get in my way, I'll kill both of you" 

Coran struck her helmet so heavily she 
fell against the wall. In the same movement, he lunged at Hamlin. The blaster 
beam raked the ceiling, and in that confined space concussion was unbearable, 
even inside the space suits. Goran's blow 
knocked Hamlin through the doorway into 
the connecting tube. Coran swung about 
and caught up his gun. 

"Don't shoot, Steve," Gerda wailed. 
The shock of the first blaster discharge 
had loosened the magnetic grapnels which 
held the ships together. The pirate's craft 
began to drift away, tearing loose the end 
of the tube. 

Hamlin was on his feet, trying to fire 
his blaster, but the charge was burned out. 
It only flickered feebly. He leaped the 
widening distance between the ships and 
went up the side like a spider, gripping the 
shell of the Erania with the magnetic soles 
of his space-boots. Coran climbed round 
the doorway and went up after him, gun 
in hand. 



Hamlin had disappeared round the curve 
of the hull. It was rough, dangerous work 
climbing round the outer shell of a spaceship. One slip meant a plunge into the 
awesome emptiness of the void. Gravity 
was practically non-existent, but the grip 
of the soles was slight, and only one 
foot could be moved at a time. 

From the vantage point of his cover behind a dead rocket tube, Hamlin waited. 
He knew that his time was short. Off 
across the black gulf of space three flakes 
of gleaming light resolved themselves into 
fast patrol cruisers, racing toward the 
derelict Erania. Coran had not seen them, 
but came on steadily, determined to see 
his assignment through. Hamlin waited, 
gun resting on the rocket tube, hoping for 
a clear shot. Mad with hatred, he blamed 
Coran for the failure of his whole life, 
and was viciously resolved to take his 
enemy with him. 

The patrol ships moved in close and 
warped alongside the Aphrodite. Men in 
space suits poured out of the access hatch 
and guns were trained on the rocket tube 
behind which Hamlin held out. 

Sick fury possessed Hamlin. With the * 
gesture of a trapped rat, he rammed his 
blaster gun up the vents of the rocket 
tube. If he could ignite the remaining 
fuel, they would all blow to Kingdom 
Come in a roaring atomic holocaust. 

Coran saw his intent and stood up to 
fire. His beam went wildly into the darkness as he lost his balance and toppled into 
space. Another beam whipped out from 
the patrol cruiser and caught Hamlin full 
force as he stood up to fire into the tube. 
He vanished in a glittering cloud of 
particles, dispersed instantly by their own 
radiation. 

Lines with magnetic grapnels looped out 
and snatched Coran reeling him back to 
the patrol ship like a grotesque fish. For 
three days, he lay unconscious from spaceshock . . . 

BACK on the Moon, at Luna Station, 
three people were waiting for the 
Martian Express to take off. 

"You see, Steve, Gerda's really my 
daughter," Paul Jomian explained. "Her 
mother divorced me fifteen years ago, and 



S.O.S. APHRODITE ! 



59 



a year later married Gartan Mors. She 
took the children, of course, and Mors 
raised them as his own. Gerda was young 
enough to conform but Ken was always 
wild. He took it for three or four years, 
then ran away to Venus. Gerda always 
idolized him, but really she scarcely knew 
him. If anyone's at fault in all this, I am 
the one to blame. I was a stubborn fool, 
and Nell could never stand my job." 

Gerda offered her hand to Coran. "I 
hate long goodbyes," she said. "I'm sorry 
about everything. I— I don't really blame 
you for Ken's death. Goodbye, and good 
luck." 

Steve decided it was safe to play out a 
fond and corny farewell. He took her 
hand lingeringly. "Don't worry about 
things, Gerda. I know how you feel. It 
wouldn't have worked out anyhow. Just 
let me know when you get the divorce. 
Let's break this up. I thought that I 
hated Mars-station, but now that I'm 
through with the Space Patrol, I can't 
wait to get back." 

Paul Jomian put his arm around his 
daughter as they watched Coran turn and 
wave before climbing aboard the express 
cruiser. On Coran's face was the smug 
complacency of a man who has neatly 
avoided being stuck with a dame. He 
grinned and vanished up the gangplank. 
Jomian muttered something inaudibly. 

"You're a sucker to let a man like Steve 
get away ... for any reason," he told 
her. "Such men are hard to find, and 
still harder to hook once you've found 
them." 



"I know it," she said firmly, though 
tears brimmed in her eyes. "But I just 
couldn't love the man who'd killed my 
brother. I couldn't." 

"That's the biggest mistake you ever 
made. Steve didn't want me to tell you, 
but he didn't shoot Ken. His beam went 
wild." Jomian nerved himself for an 
ordeal "I killed him." 

"Why didn't you tell me — why?" she 
wailed. 

"I should have told you before, but I 
couldn't. I didn't want you to hate me, 
now that I'd just found you." 

Gerda clung to her father fiercely. "I 
couldn't hate you, dad. But we musn't 
let him go. I might have a chance to 
win him, but how can I if he's on Mars 
and I'm here?" 

"I'm afraid that's out of our hands. 
Steve doesn't know it, but he's not through 
with the space patrol. They refused his 
resignation. He's just been appointed commander of the Mars-Jupiter sector. Do 
you think you have the guts to be a spaceman's wife?" 

"I know I have. But how'll I ever convince Steve? You heard him. He said it 
wouldn't ever work out." 

"That's your problem. He's a stubborn 
man." 

Sudden determination shone in her face. 
"And I'm a stubborn woman," she called 
back, blowing her father a kiss. She 
reached the gangplank just in time to grab 
it and be dragged up with it. 

Jomian grinned. "She's my kid. I'll 
bet she trims his wings, the rat." 



ATTENTION •• •PLANET FANS! 

OLD FRIENDS • • . AND NEW! 

f%j IBAT do you think of the VIZIGRAPH? It's our regular readers 9 
l/%y own section, where we've been printing the best of your letters, the 
bitter with the sweet. We think it's been worthwhile, but every so often 
we get complaints about it. Some readers would rather have an extra 
story in the space taken up by the VIZIGRAPH. Why don't you grab a 
penny postcard and let us know what yo» think? Ho you want the VIZIGRAPH? ©r do you want more of the swell stories jamming our files? 
Just a postcard — but let u* know! 



THE STARBUSTERS 

By ALFRED COPPEt, JR. 

A bunch of kids in bright new uniforms, transiting the eon. 

SI ? sIla i 1 S ns ^ ,,, a ^sreputable old bucket of a spaceship why 

should the leathery-tentacled, chlorine-breathing Eridanstake 

them seriously? 



HO 



TELWING CSN 30 JAN 
27 TO CMDR DAVID 
FARRAGUT STRYKALSKI VII CO TRS CLEOPATRA 
FLEET BASE CANALOPOLIS MARS 
STOP SUBJECT ORDERS STOP 
ROUTE LUNA PHOBOS SYRTIS 
MAJOR TRANSSENDERS PRIORITY AAA STOP MESSAGE FOLLOWS STOP TRS CLEOPATRA AND 
ALL ATTACHED AND OR ASSIGNED PERSONNEL HEREBY RELIEVED ASSIGNMENT AND DUTY 
INNER PLANET PATROL GROUP 
STOP ASSIGNED TEMP DUTY BUREAU RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT STOP SUBJECT VESSEL 
WILL PROCEED WITHOUT DELAY 
FLEET EXPERIMENTAL SUBSTATION PROVING GROUNDS TETHYS SATURNIAN GROUP STOP 
CO WILL REPORT UPON ARRIVAL 
TO CAPT IVY HENDRICKS ENGINEERING OFFICER PROJECT 
WARP STOP SIGNED H. GORMAN 
SPACE ADMIRAL COMMANDING 
STOP END MESSAGE END MESSAGE END MESSAGE. 

"Amen! Amen! Amen! Stop/' Commander Strykalski smoothed out the 
wrinkled flimsy by spreading it carefully 
on the wet bar. 

Coburn Whitley, the T.R. Cleopatra's 
Executive, set down his Martini and leaned 
over very slowly to give the paper a 
microscopic examination in the mellow 
light. 

"Maybe," he began hopefully, "It could 
be a forgery?" 

Strike shook his head. 

Lieutenant Whitley looked crestfallen. 
"Then perhaps old Brass-bottom Gorman 
means some other guy named Strykalski?" 
60 



To Cob, eight Martinis made anything possible. 

"Could there be two Strykalskis ?" demanded the owner of the name under discussion. 

"No." Whitley sighed unhappily. "And 
there's only one Tellurian Rocket Ship 
Cleopatra in the Combined Solarian 
Navies, bless her little iron rump ! Gorman 
means us. And I think we've been had, 
that's what I think!" 

"Tethys isn't so bad," protested Strike. 
Cob raised a hand to his eyes as though 
to blot out the sight of that distant moonlet. "Not so bad, he says! All you care 
about is seeing Ivy Hendricks again, I 
know you ! Tethys !" 

Strike made a passing effort to look 
stern and failed. "You mean Captain Hendricks, don't you, Mister Whitley? Captain Hendricks of Project Warp?" 

Cob made a sour face. "Project Warp, 
yet! Sounds like a dog barking!" He 
growled deep in his throat and barked 
once or twice experimentally. The officer's 
club was silent, and a silver-braided Commodore sitting nearby scowled at Whitley. 
The Lieutenant subsided with a final small, 
"Warp!" 

An imported Venusian quartet began to 
play softly. Strike .ordered another round 
of drinks from the red-skinned Martian 
tending bar and turned on his stool to 
survey the small dance floor. The music 
and the subdued lights made him think 
of Ivy Hendricks. He really wanted to 
see her again. It had been a long time 
since that memorable flight when they had 
worked together to pull Admiral Gorman's 
flagship Atropos out of a tight spot on a 
perihelion run. Ivy was good to work 
with . . . good to be around. 

But there was apparently more to this 
transfer than just Ivy pulling wires to 



62 PLANET STORIES 

see him again. Things were tense in the 



System since Probe Fleet skeeterboats had 
discovered a race of group-minded, nonhuman intelligences on the planets of 40 
Eridani C. They lived in frozen worlds 
that were untenable for humans. And 
they were apparently all parts of a single 
entity that never left the home globe . . . 
a thing no human had seen. The group 
mind. They were rabidly isolationist and 
they had refused any commerce with the 
Solar Combine. 

Only CSN Intelligence knew that the 
Eridans were warlike . . . and that they 
were strongly suspected of having interstellar flight . . . 

So, reflected Strike, the transfer of the 
Cleopatra to Tethys for work under 
the Bureau of Research and Development 
meant innovations and tests. And Commander Strykalski was concerned. The 
beloved Old Aphrodisiac didn't take kindly 
to innovations. At least she never had 
before, and Strike could see no reason to 
suppose the cantankerous monitor would 
have changed her disposition. 

"There's Celia!" Cob Whitley was waving toward the dance floor. 

Celia Graham, trim in her Ensign's 
greys, was making her way through the 
crowd of dancers. Celia was the Cleopatra's Radar Officer, and like all the rest, 
bound with chains of affection to the 
cranky old warship. The Cleopatra's crew 
was a unit ... a team in the true sense 
of the word. They served in her because 
they wanted to . . . would serve in no other. 
That's the way Strike ran his crew, and 
that's the way the crew ran Lover-Girl. 
Old Aphrodisiac's family was a select 
community. 

There was a handsome Martian Naval 
Lieutenant with Celia, but when she saw 
the thoughtful expression on her Captain's 
face, she dismissed him peremptorily. Here 
was something, apparently, of a family 
matter. 

"Well, I can't see anything to worry 
about, Skipper," she said when he had 
explained, '1 should think you'd be glad 
of a chance to see Ivy again." 

Cob Whitley leaned precariously forward on his bar-stool to wag a finger 
under Celia's pretty nose. "But 'he doesn't 



know what Captain Hendricks has cooked 
up for Lover-Girl, and you know the old 
carp likes to be treated with respect." He 
affected a very knowing expression. "Besides, we shouldn't be gallivanting around 
testing Ivy's electronic eyelash-curlers 
when the Eridans are likely to be swooshing around old Sol any day!" 
"Cob, you're drunk !" snapped Celia. 
"I am at that," mused Whitley with 
a foolish grin. "And I'd better enjoy it. 
There'll be no Martinis on Tethys, that's 
for sure ! This cruise is going to interfere 
with my research on ancient twentieth century potables . . ." 

Strike heaved his lanky frame upright. 
"Well, I suppose we'd better call the crew 
in." He turned to Cob. "Who is Officer 
of the Deck tonight?" 
"Bayne." 

"Celia, you'd better go relieve him. He'll 
have to work all night to get us an orbit 
plotted." 

"Will do, Skipper," Celia Graham left. 

"Cob, you'd better turn in. Get some 

sleep. But have the NPs round up the 

crew. If any of them are in the brig, 

let me know. I'll be on the bridge." 

"What time do you want to lift ship?" 

"0900 hours." 

"Right." Cob took a last loving look 
around the comfortable officer's club and 
heaved a heavy sigh. "Tethys, here comes 
Lover-Girl. It's going to be a long, long 
cruise, Captain." 

How long, he couldn't have known . . . 
then. 

THE flight out was uneventful. Uneventful, that is for the T.R.S. 
Cleopatra. Only one tube-liner burned 
through, and only six hours wasted in 
nauseous free-fall. 

Lover-Girl wormed her way through 
the asteroid belt, passed within a million 
miles of Jupiter and settled comfortably 
down on the airless field next to the glasssteel dome of the Experimental Substation 
on Tethys. But her satisfied repose was 
interrupted almost before it was begun. 
Swarms of techmen seemed to burst from 
the dome and take her over. Welders and 
physicists, naval architects and shipfitters, 
all armed with voluminous blueprints and 



THE STARBVSTERS 



63 



atomic torches set to work on her even 
before her tubes had cooled. Power lines 
were crossed and re-crossed shunted and 
spliced. Weird screen-like appendages 
were welded to her bow and stern. 
Workmen and engineers stomped through 
her companionways, bawling incomprehensible orders. And her crew watched in 
mute dismay. They had nothing to say 
about it . . . 



IVY HENDRICKS rose from her desk 
as Strike came into her Engineering 
Office. There was a smile on her face as 
she extended her hand. 

"It's good to see you again, Strike." 
Strykalski studied her. Yes, she hadn't 
changed. She was still the Ivy Hendricks 
he remembered. She was still calm, still 
lovely, and still very, very competent. 

"I've missed you, Ivy/' Strike wasn't 
just being polite, either. Then he grinned. 
"Lover-Girl's missed you, too. There never 
has been an Engineering Officer that could 
get the performance out of her cranky 
hulk the way you used to!" 

"It's a good thing," returned Ivy, still 
smiling, "that 111 be back at my old job 
for a while, then." m g 

Strykalski raised his eyebrows inquisitively. Before Ivy could explain, Cob and 
Celia Graham burst noisily into the room 
and the greetings began again. Ivy, as a 
former member of the Cleopatra's crew, 
was one of the family. 

"Now, what I would like to know, 
Cob demanded when the small talk had 
been disposed of, "is what's with this 
'Project Warp'? What are you planning 
for Lover-Girl? Your techmen are tearing into her like she was a twenty-day 

leave!" 

"And why was the Cleopatra chosen t 
added Celia curiously. 

"Well, 111 make it short," Ivy said. 
"We're going to make a hyper-ship out 
of her." 

"Hyper-ship?" Cob was perplexed. 

Ivy Hendricks nodded. "We've stumbled on a laboratory effect that warps 
space. We plan to reproduce it in portable 
form on the' Cleopatra . . . king size. 
Shell be able to take us through the 
hyper-spatial barrier." 



"Golly!" Celia Graham was wide-eyed. 
"I always thought of hyperspace as a . . . 
well, sort of an abstraction." 

"That's been the view up to now. We 
all shared it here, too, until we set up 
this screen system and things began to 
disappear when they got into the warped 
field. Then we rigged a remote control 
and set up telecameras in the warp . . ." 
Ivy's face sobered. "We got plates of 
star-fields . . . star-fields that were utterly 
different and . . . and alien. It seems that 
there's at least one other space interlocked 
and co-existent with ours. When we realized that we decided to send a ship 
through. I sent a UV teletype to Admiral 
Gorman at Luna Base . . . and here you 
are." 

"Why us?" Cob asked thoughtfully. 
"Ill answer that," offered Strike, 
"Lover-Girl's a surge circuit monitor, and 
it's a safe bet this operation takes plenty 
of power." He looked over to Ivy. "Am 
I right?" 

"Right on the nose, Strike," she returned. Then she broke into a wide smile. 
"Besides, I wouldn't want to enter an alien 
cosmos with anyone but Lover-Girl's family. It wouldn't be right." 

"Golly!" said Celia Graham again. 
"Alien cosmos ... it sounds so creepy 
when you say it that way." 

"You could call it other things, if you 
should happen to prefer them," Ivy Hen-, 
dricks said, "Subspace . . . another plane 
of existence. I . . ." 

She never finished her sentence. The 
door burst open and a Communications 
yeoman came breathlessly into the office. 
From the ante-room came the sound of a 
Ultra Wave teletype clattering imperiously 
... almost frantically. 

"Captain Hendricks!" cried the man 
excitedly, "A message is coming through 
from the Proxima transsender . . . they're 
under attack!" 

Strykalski was on his feet. "Attack!' 
"The nonhumans from Eridanus have 
launched a major invasion of the solar 
Combine! All the colonies in Centaurus 
are being invaded !" 

Strike felt the bottom droping out of his 
stomach, and he knew that all the others 
felt the same. If this was a war, they 



64 



were the ones who would have to fight it. 
And the Eridans ! Awful leathery creatures with tentacles . . . chlorine breathers! 
They would make a formidable enemy, 
welded as they were into tme fighting unit 
by the functioning of the group mind 

He heard himself saying sharply into 
Ivy's communicator: "See to it that my 
ship is fueled and armed for space within 
three hours !" 

"Hold on, Strike!" Ivy Hendricks intervened, "What about the tests?" 

"I'm temporarily under Research and 
Development command, Ivy, but Regulations say that fighting ships cannot be 
held inactive during wartime! The Cleopatra's a warship and there's a war on now. 
If you can have your gear jerry-rigged in 
three hours, you can come along and test 
it when we have the chance. Otherwise 
the hell with it!" Strykalski's face was 
dead set. "I mean it, Ivy." 

"All right, Strike. Til be ready," Ivy 
Hendricks said coolly. 

Y? XACTLY three hours and five minutes 
J - / later,- the newly created hyper-ship 
that was still Old Aphrodisiac lifted from 
the ramp outside the Substation dome. 
She rose slowly at first, the radioactive 
flame from her tubes splashing with sunbright coruscations over the loading pits 
and revetments. For a fleeting instant she 
was outlined against the swollen orb of 
Saturn that filled a quarter of Tethys' sky, 
and then she was gone into the galactic 
night. 

Aboard, all hands stood at GQ. On the 
flying bridge StrykaJski and Cobura 
Whitley worked steadily to set the ship 
mto the proper position in response to the 
steady flood of equations that streamed 
into their station from Bayne in the dorsal 
astrogation blister. 

An hour after blasting free of Tethys 
was pointed at the snaking river of stars 
below Orion that formed the constellation 
of Eridanus. 

When Cob asked why, Strike replied 
that knowing Gorman, they could expect 
orders from Luna Base ordering them 
either to attack or reconnoiter the 40 
Eridani C system of five planets. Strykalski added rather dryly that it was likely 



PLANET STORIES 



to be the former, since Space Admiral 
Gorman had no great affection for either 
the Aphrodite or her crew. 

Ivy Hendricks joined them after stowing 
her gear, and when Whitley asked her 
opinion, she agreed with Strike. Her experiences with Gorman had been as unfortunate as any of the others. 

"I was afraid you'd say that," grumbled 
Cob, "I was just hoping you wouldn't." 

The interphone flashed. Strike flipped 
the switch. 

"Bridge." 

"Communications here. Message from 
Luna Base, Captain." 

"Here it is," Strykalski told Cob. "Right 
on time." 

"Speak of the devil," muttered the 
Executive. 

"From the Admiral, sir," the voice in 
the interphone said, "Shall I read it?" 

"Just give me the dope," ordered Strike. 

"The Admiral orders us to quote make 
a diversionary attack on the planet of 40 
Eridani C II unquote," said the squawkbox flatly. 

^Acknowledge," ordered Strykalski. 
"Wilco. Communications out." 
Strike made an I-told-you-so gesture to 
his Executive. Then he turned toward the 
enlisted man at the helm. "Quartermaster?" 

The man looked up from his auto-pilot 
check. "Sir." 

"Steady as she goes." 
"Yes, sir." 

"And that," shrugged Ivy Hendricks, 
Is that." 



PHREE weeks passed in the timeless 
A limbo of second order flight. Blast 
tubes silent, the Cleopatra rode the curvature of space toward Eridanus. At eight 
and a half light years from Sol, the 
second-order was cut so that Bayne could 
get a star sight. As the lights of the 
celestial globe slowly retreated from their 
unnatural grouping ahead and astern, brilliant Sinus and its dw^rf companion showed definite disks in the starboard ports At 
a distance of 90,000,000 miles from the 
Dog Star, its fourteen heavy-gravity 
planets were plainly visible through the 
electron telescope. 



THE 



Strykalski and Ivy Hendricks stood beside Bayne in the dorsal blister while the 
astrogator sighted Altair through his polytant. His long, horse face bore a look of 
complete self-aprobation when he had completed his last shot. 

U A perfect check with the plotted 
course ! How's that for fancy dead reckoning?" he exclaimed. 

He was destined never to know the 
accolade, for at that moment the commuicator began to flash angrily over the chart 
table. Bayne cut it in with an expression 
of disgust. 

"Is the Captain there?" demanded Ceha 
Graham's voice excitedly. 

Strike took over the squawk-box. "Right 
here, Celia. What is it?" 

"Radar contact, sir 1 The screen is crazy 
with blips !" 

"Could it be window?" 
"No, sir. The density index indicates 
spacecraft. High value in the chlorine 
tines . . ." 

"Eridans!" cried Ivy. 
"What's the range, Celia?" demanded 
Strike. "And how many of them are 
there?" 

The sound of the calculator came 
through the grill. Then Celia replied: 
"Range 170,000 miles, and there are more 
than fifty and less than two hundred. 
That's the best I can do from this far 
away. They seem to have some sort of 
radiation net out and they are moving into 
spread formation." 

Strike cursed. "They've spotted us and 
they want to scoop us in with that force 
net ! Damn that group mind of theirs . . . 
it makes for uncanny co-ordination!" He 
turned back to the communicator. "Cob! 
Are you on?" 

"Right here, Captain," came Cob Whitley's voice from the bridge. 

"Shift into second-order! We'll have to 
try and run their net !" 

"Yes, sir," Whitley snapped. 
"Communications!" called Strike. 
"Communications here." 
"Notify Luna Base we have made contact. Give their numbers, course, and 
speed !" 

Ivy could feel her heart pounding under 
5— PUnet-trSuromer 



STARBVSTERS 65 

her blouse. Her face was deadly pale, 
mouth pinched and drawn. This was the 
first time in battle for any of them . . . 
and she dug her fingernails into her palms 
trying not to be afraid. 

Strykalski was rapping out his orders 
with machine-gun rapidity, making ready 
to fight his ship if need be . . . and against 
lop-sided odds. But years of training were 
guiding him now. 
"Gun deck!" 

A feminine voice replied. 
"Check your accumulators. We may 
have to fight. Have the gun-pointers get 
the plots from Radar. And load fish into 
all tubes." 

"Yes, sir!" the woman rapped out. 
"Radar!" 

"Right here, Skipper!" 
"We're going into second order, Celia.. 
Use UV Radar and keep tabs on them." 
"Yes, Captain." 

Strike turned to Ivy Hendricks. "Let's 
get back to the bridge, Ivy. It's going to 
be a hell of a rough half hour!" 

As they turned to go, all the pin-points 
of light that were the stars vanished, only 
to reappear in distorted groups ahead and 
behind the ship. They were in second order 
flight again, and traveling above light 
speed. Within seconds, contact would be 
made with the advance units of the alien 
fleet. 

Old Aphrodisiac readied herself for war. 



LIKE a maddened bull terrior, the old 
monitor charged at the Eridan horde. 
Within the black hulls strange, tentacled 
creatures watched her in scanners that 
were activated by infrared light. The 
chlorine atmosphere grew tense as the 
Tellurian warship drove full at the pulsating net of interlocked force lines. Parsecs 
away, on a frozen world were a dull red 
shrunken sun shone dimly through fetid 
air, the thing that was the group mind 
of the Eridans guided the thousand leathery tentacles that controlled the hundred 
and fifty black spaceships. The soft quivering bulk of it throbbed with excitement 
as it prepared to kill the tiny Tellurian 
thing that dared to threaten its right to 
conquest. 

Old Lover-Girl tried gallantly to pierce 



66 



PLANET STORIES 



the strange trap. She failed. The alien 
weapons were too strange, too different 
from anything her builders could have 
imagined or prepared her to face. The 
net sucked the life from her second-order 
generators, and she sjowed, like the victim of a nightmare. Now rays of heat 
reached out for her, grazing her flanks as 
she turned and twisted. One touched her 
atmospheric fins and melted them into 
slowly congealing globes of steel glowing 
with a white heat. She fought back withwhorls of atomic fire that sped from her 
rifles to wreak havoc among her attackers. 
Being non-entities in themselves, and 
•nly limbs of the single mentality that 
rested secure on its home worid, the Eridans lacked the vicious will to live that 
drove the Tellurian warship and her crew. 
But their numbers wore her down, cutting 
her strength with each blow that chanced 
to connect. 

Torpedoes from the tubes that circled 
her beam found marks out in space and 
leathery aliens died, their black ships burst 
asunder by the violence of new atoms being 
created from old. 

But there were too many. They hemmed 
bar in, heat rays ever slashing, wounding 
her. Strykalski fought her controls, cursing her, coaxing her. Damage reports 
were flowing into the flying bridge from 
every point in the monitor's body. LoverGirl was being hurt . . , hurt badly. The 
second order drive was damaged, not beyond repair, but out of commision for at 
least six hours. And they couldn't last 
six hours. They couldn't last another ten 
minutes. It was only the practiced hands 
of her Captain and crew that kept the 
Cleopatra alive . . . 

"We're caught, Ivy!" Strike shouted to 
the girl over the noises of battle. "She 
can't stand much more of this l" 

Cob was screaming at the gun-pointers 
through the open communicator circuit, 
his blood heated by the turbulent cacophony of crackling rays and exploding 
torpedoes. "Hit 'em ! Damn it ! Damn it, 
hit 'em now! Dead ahead! Hit 'em 
again! . . ." 

Ivy stumbled across the throbbing deck 
to stand at Strykalski's side. "The hyper 
drive!" she yelled, "The hyper drive!" 



It was a chance. It was the only chance 
... for Lover-Girl and Ivy and Cob and 
Celia ... for all of them. He had to 
chance it. "Ivy !" he called over his shoulder, "Check with Engineering ! See if the 
thing's hooked into the surge circuit!" 

She struggled out of the flying bridge 
and down the ramp toward the engine 
deck. Strike and Cob stayed and sweated 
and cursed and fought. It seemed that 
she would never report. 

At last the communicator began to flash 
red. Strike opened the circuit with his 
free hand. "All right?" he demanded with 
his heart in his throat. 

"Try itT Ivy shouted back. 
Strykalski lurched from his chair as 
another ray caught the ship for an instant 
and heated a spot on the wall to a cherry 
red. Gods! he prayed fervently. Let it 
work ! 

A movement of the ship threw him to 
the deck. He struggled to his feet and 
across to the jerry-rigged switchboard 
that controlled the hyper drive's warp 
field. With a prayer on his lips, he slapped 
at the switches with wild abandon . . . 

THE sudden silence was like a physical 
blow. Strike staggered to the port 
and looked out. No alien ships filled the 
void with crisscrossing rays. No torpedoes 
flashed. The Cleopatra was alone, floating in star-flecked emptiness. 

There were no familiar constellations. 
The stars were spread evenly across the 
ebony bowl of the sky, and they looked 
back at him with an alien, icy disdain. 

The realization that he stood with a tinyshell, an infinitesimal human island lost in 
the vastness of a completely foreign cosmos 
broke with an almost mind-shattering intensity over his brain! 

He was conscious of Cob standing beside 
him, looking out into this unknown universe and whispering in awe: "We're the 
aliens here . . ." 

Ivy Hendricks came into the bridge then, 
a haggard look around her eyes. "I came 
up through the ventral blister," she said, 
"Bayne is down there and he's having fits. 
There isn't a star in sight he recognizes 
and the whole hull of the ship is glowing!" 
Cob and Strykalski rushed back to the 



THE STARBUSTERS 



67 



port, straining to see the back-curving 
plates of the hull. Ivy was right. The 
metal, and to a lesser extent, even the 
leaded glassteel of the port was covered 
with a dim, dancing witchfire. It was as 
though the ship were being bombarded by 
a continuous shower of microscopic fire 
bombs. 

Whitley found refuge in his favorite 
expression. "Ye gods and little catfish !" 
Strike turned to Ivy. "What do you 
think it is?" 

"I ... I don't know. Matter itself 
might be different . . . here." 

Strykalski found himself at the port 
again, looking out into the vast stretch of 
alien void. Terror was seeping like dampness through him, stretching cold fingers 
into his heart and mind. He realized that 
everyone on board must feel the same way. 
It was the old human devil rising from the 
pit of the primeval past. Fear of the unknown, of the strange. And there was 
loneliness. From the dark corners of his 
mind, the terrible loneliness came stealing 
forth. Never had a group of human beings 
been so frighteningly apart from their 
kind. He felt rejected, scorned and lost. 
The others felt it, too. Ivy and Cob 
drew closer, until all three stood touching 
each other; as though they could dispel 
the loneliness of the unnatural environment 
by the warmth of human, animal contact. 
Celia came into the bridge softly ... just 
to be near her friends. 

It was only the fact that they could 
return at will to their own space , . . and 
the danger of the questing Eridans . . . 
that kept one or all from crying out in 
utter childish fear. Celia Graham whimpered softly and slipped her hand into 
Cob's. He squeezed it to give her a reassurance he did not feel. 

Then Strike broke the spell. The effort 
was great, but it brushed away the shadows 
that had risen to plague them from the 
tortured abyss of racial memory. It 
brought them back to what they were: 
highly civilized people, parts of an intricately technological culture. Their ship 
was a part of that culture. The only part 
they could cling to. The Cleopatra demanded attention and service, and her 
demanding saved them. 



"Cob," Strike directed with forced briskness, 'Take over Damage Control. See 
what can be done about the second order 
drive." 

Cob pulled himself together, smiling as 
all the accustomed pieces of his life began 
to fit together again. It didn't matter 
that they were in an unknown cosmos. 
Damage Control was something he knew 
and understood. He smiled thankfully and 
left the bridge. 

"Maintain a continuous radar-watch, 
Celia. We can't tell what we may encounter here." 

"Yes, Captain," replied Celia gratefully. 
Strykalski reached for the squawk-box 
and called Bayne. 

"Astrogation here," came the shaky reply. In the exposed blisters the agoraphobia must be more acute, reasoned 
Strike, and Bayne must have been subconsciously stirred up by the disappearance 
of the familiar stars that were his stockin-trade. 

"Plot us a course to 40 Eridani C, 
Bayne," Strykalski directed. "On gyroheadings." 

"What?" The astrogator sounded as 
though he thought Strike had lost his 
mind. "Through this space?" 

"Certainly," Strykalski insisted quietly. 
"You're so proud of your dead-reckoning. 
Here's a chance for you to do a real 
job. Get me an orbit." 

"I . . . all right, Captain," grumbled 
Bayne. 

Strike turned to Ivy Hendricks. "Well, 
Captain Hendricks, this is some gadget 
you have dreamed up out of your Project 
Warp," he breathed shakily. "At least 
the fat's out of the fire for the time 
being . . ." 

Ivy looked out of the port and back 
with a shudder. "I hope so, Strike. I 
hope so." 

They fell silent, seeking comfort in each 
other's presence. J 

THE second order drive repaired, Old 
Aphrodisiac moved out through the 
alien space toward the spot where 40 
Eridani C existed on the other side of 
the barrier. 

The ship's tactical astrophysicist brought 



68 PLANET STORIES 

in some disturbing* reports on the stars 



that shone brightly all around her. They 
fitted the accepted classifications in all 
particulars . . . except one. And that 
one had the scientist tearing his hair. 
The mass of every iobservable body except the ship herself was practically nonexistent. Even the two planetary systems 
discovered by the electron telescope flouted 
their impossible lack of mass . 

Ivy suggested that since the Cleopatra 
and her crew were no part of this alien 
cosmos, no prinae-spacc instruments could 
detect the errant mass. Like a Microscopic 
bull in a gargantuan china shop, the Tellurian warship existed under a completely 
different set of physical and physical laws 
than did the heavenly bodies of this strange 
space. 

It was pure conjecture, but it seemed 
well supported by the observable facts. 
The hull continued to glow with its unnatural witchfire, and soon disturbing reports were coming in from the Damage 
Control section that the thickness of the 
outer hull was actually being reduced. The 
rate was slow, and there was no immediate 
danger, but it was nevertheless unnerving 
to realize that Lover-Girl was being dissolved by something. Also, the outside 
Geigs recorded a phenomenal amount of 
short radiation emanating from the ship 
herself. The insulation kept most of it 
from penetrating, but tests shov/ed that the 
strange radiation's source was the glow 
that clung stubbornly to the spacer's skin. 
A tense week passed and then the ship 
neared the spot where a change over to 
prime space could be effected. According 
to Bayne's calculations, 40 Eridani C would 
be within 40,000,000 miles of them when 
the ship emerged from hyper space. 

And then the Radar section picked up 
the planetoids. Millions of them, large 
and small, lay in a globular cluster dead 
ahead. They spread out in all directions 
for more than half r la parsec . . . dull, 
rocky little worlds without a gram of detectable mass. 

All that waited for the Cleopatra in her 
own cosmos was a hot reception at the 
hands of the defenders of 40 Eridani C II, 
while here was mystery at close range. 
Mystery that was not cosmic in scope . . . 



just a swarm of innocous seeming 
planetoids ... the first explorable worlds 
that they had neared in this universe. 
Strike decided to heave to and examine 
their find. Ivy wanted samples and though 
no one said it in so many words . . . no 
one was anxious for another encounter 
with the rapacious Eridans. With typically human adaptiveness they had sublimated 
their fear of the unknown space in which 
they found themselves. Curiosity took the 
place of fear and here was something close 
at hand to probe. Anthropoid inquisitiveness prevailed. 

THE Cleopatra slowed, stopped. Strike 
and Cob Whitley suited up and 
armed themselves with spring-guns. In 
their clumsy space armor they dropped 
through Lover-Girl's ventral valve into the 
void. The monitor's glowing bulk retreated as they jetted toward the swarm of 
tiny worlds. Their space suits, too, glowed 
with the witchfire, outlining them against 
the eternal night. 

Back in the monitor's Communications 
shack, Ivy Hendricks and Celia Graham 
stood with Bayne and the other officers 
around the two way communicator that 
linked the two explorers with the ship. 

Out in space, Strike and Cob bound 
themselves together with a length of thin 
cable. They dropped down under power 
toward the planetoid they had selected to 
explore. 

"What's it like ?*' Ivy's voice crackled 
in their headsets. 

"Can't tell from this distance. We're 
still a good five miles away," replied 
Strykalski. 

"Looks like any other planetoid to me," 
avered Whitley. 

"Maybe you'd better fire a shot into 
the surface before you try landing, Strike," 
Ivy suggested. 
"Why?" 

"Just a hunch." Her voice sounded 
worrried. 

"Okay, Ivy," Strike replied. "Cob, take 
a pot shot at it will you. You should be 
able to hit it from here . . . it's twenty 
miles wide." 

Cob was disgusted. "And me the best 
shot in my class back at the Academy!" 



THE STARBVSTERS 



69 



He drew his pring gun and snapped a 
solid steel slug at the looming worldlet . . . 
What happened next, they never knew 
exactly. On the dark surface of the 
planetoid a blazing bubble of white incandescence appeared, expanding within 
split seconds to all but obscure the whole 
bulk of the disk. It churned and whirled 
and flashed, mushrooming out in a hellish 
coruscation of destruction. The blaze of 
light outlined the two men and the ship 
and the planetoids within a fifty 
mile circle and the expanding shock 
wave fanned out. It struck the 

two space armored men to send them 
spinning wildly. The glowing bulk of the 
monitor reeled and bucked. Strike felt 
himself whipping up and down at the end 
of the cable that bound him to Cob 
Whitley. He felt himself being buffeted 
and burned by the dazzling flare of atomic 
fire. The merciful blackness spread itself 
like a curtain over his tortured eyes . . . 



STRYKALSKI opened his eyes and 
stretched his battered body. His head 
was bandaged, and he could feel the familiar tingle of paratannic salve on his burns. 
Pain still throbbed in little red needles 
behind his dazzled eyes. He drew a long 
rasping breath and looked around him. 
He was in the Cleopatra's infirmary, A 
Medic was standing near the bulkhead. 
Cob lay on a bunk nearby. Ivy and Celia 
Graham were leaning over him. 

"Great Space!" he muttered, What 
happened?" 

"The shot Cob fired ... it ... it 
blew up/' Celia said. 

"That's putting it rather mildly. But 
why? And how did we get back here? 

"Celia found you on the Radar," said 
Ivy "And Bayne took a skeeterboat out 
and picked you up after we got LoverGirl back right side up." 

"Cob ? " 

As though in answer to Strykalski's 

question, a low moan came fro ™ * e u ban " 
daged form of the Executive. Ohhh . . . 
Ye gods and . . .little catfish! I wish 
I . . had a Martini ..." 

Strike smiled through cut lips. Cob was 
all right. He looked up at Ivy again. 
"But what happened?" 



"Listen!" Ivy was saying excitedly, 
"I've got it ! The answer ! All the answers, 
I think! The glowing of the ship . . . the 
lack of mass for everything native to this 
space . . . the solid shot exploding !" 

Things were becoming clear to Strykalski now. Of course! He sat up painfully. 
It was really simple enough when one 
thought it through. In negative space . . . 
Ivy went on. "Strike, the ship glows 
because there is matter everywhere . . . 
even in interstellar space. Not much, but 
enough to bombard the hull with tiny 
particles. The radiation the Geigs picked 
up is caused by atomic disintegration! 
We've had fission and fusion for two hundred years now ... but this is the complete transmutation of matter to energy! 
The complete utilization of atomic energy ! 
And the thing that causes it is the reaction 
between our kind of matter and . . ." 

"Contraterrene matter!" he exclaimed. 
"That's it, isn't it Ivy?" 

The girl nodded. "The charges of the 
atomic components are reversed in this 
space! You would have made yourself 
into a ... a bomb if you had touched 
that planetoid out there!" Her face paled. 
"Oh, Strike ! You almost killed yourself !" 
Thoughts were boiling around in Strykalski's head now. An idea ... a crazy, 
audacious idea was taking shape. 

He swung his legs over the side of the 
bunk. "Listen, Ivy . . . in this space, we 
are the unnatural form of matter, and 
here we are sort of walking bombs. 
Right?" 

She nodded, puzzled. 
"Well, what if we should transport some 
contraterrene matter back into prime space 
a planetoid for example . . . Avhat 

then?" 

The girl's face showed comprehension. 
"It would be the most devastating bomb 
ever dreamed of. It would release every 
erg in its component atoms the minute it 
came into contact with anything terrene !" 
She stopped short, her eyes wide. "Strike!" 

"Would it work, Ivy?" he pursued. 

"Yes!" she gasped, "Yes, I think it 
would!" 

"Can we do it?" 

,"I ... I think so. Lover-Girl has 
power to burn. And we could set up the 



■i»i «■ « i 



70 FLANET 

screens on tw© skeeterboats so that . . . 
yes ! By heaven, it will work ! All we have 
to do is make and set up the equipment !" 

Cob sat up on his bunk and gave a 
low whistle. " Ye gods ! No one can ever 
accuse you two of having small ideas, that's 
for sure!" 

"It will work!" Ivy insisted. Her eyes 
narrowed. She was all the engineer now, 
working out a problem. 'The explosion 
that almost killed you and set Lover-Girl 
on her beam ends came from the annihilation of one tiny slug of steel at a distance 
of five miles. Just think what the destruction of a twenty mile planetoid will do 
when we . . ." 

"How long will it take?" Strike interrupted. 

"Give me six hours." 

"Start now," he ordered, "And somebody hand Cob and me our pants. We've 
got work to do!" 



THE next hours were a nightmare of 
feverish activity aboard the T.R.S. 
Cleopatra, Two of her six skeeterboats 
were fitted with hyper screens that were 
made in the machine shop under Ivy 
Hendricks' close supervision. Power was 
shunted from the surge circuit generators 
and run out through automatic spools to 
the screen bearing skeeterboats to form the 
two poles of the hyper warp. Ivy was 
everywhere at once, giving orders, overseeing construction. Strike and Cob co-ordinated the efforts of the crew and workmen. 
"We'll pick out our planetoid," Strike 
explained to them, "And line up our 
skeeters on an arbitrary north-south axis. 
The spools will pay out the power lines 
as the boats travel. When everything is 
aligned, we turn on the juice and hope 
for the best." 

"Then," interjected Bayne, "As the 
planetoid takes its place in prime space 
without orbital velocity ... and only 
some 4,000,000 miles: from 40 Eridani 
C ... we clear out. East. 40 Eridani C 
is an M6 star . , . surface temperature 
only about 3,000 Centigrade. It's small . . . 
smaller than Sol, because it has shrunk. 
But under its semi-solid crust there are 
trillions of tons of matter that will burst 
free as soon as anything cracks the sur


STORIES 

face tension. Our bomb should act as a 
fuse to light one of the biggest fire-crackers 
ever imagined." 

"One thing," said Ivy to Strike, "Whoever pilots the skeeters ... and I presume 
you intend to handle one yourself . . . will 
have to be extremely careful. As soon as 
our planetoid exists in prime space it will 
have a planetoid's mass and gravity. Don't 
be caught with your jets cold. I'd miss 
you, Strike." 

Celia Graham interrupted the conference 
to tell them that the equipment was ready, 
and the ship in position. Strike looked 
around at the suddenly tense faces of his 
companions. He didn't like to think what 
failure might mean to them ... to Terra 
and the whole Solar Combine. He rose 
to his feet purposefully. 
"Let's go," he said. 

The skeeterboat dove out of the valve 
trailing its cable. Strike glanced back 
through the rear port to see the second 
shark-like shape close behind. Even banged 
up as he was, Cob would let no one take 
the second boat but himself. Strike's smile 
was broad. Good man to have around, that 
Coburn Whitley. 

Ahead lay the tiny world that had been 
selected for annihilation. It was a black 
blot on the star-spangled darkness of 
space. A thirty mile sphere, it floated 
serenely along its orbit . . .. an innocuous 
chunk of matter that here was just that 
and elsewhere would be the most fearful 
bomb ever guided by the hand of man. 

Strike looked back at the glowing shape 
of Old Aphrodisiac. She lured him like 
a familiar scene, a friendly voice. In all 
this alien vastness, only his beloved ship 
was safety. 

He looked around for Cob's skeeter. It 
was barely visible now, some twenty miles 
away as it fanned out to take up its position at the south pole of the planetoid. 
The tiny world drew near, and Strike 
veered to find his own station. Jockeying 
the skeeterboat carefully, he found the 
proper spot marked by the beacons that 
fanned out from the Cleopatra's prow 
and stern. 

Cob signalled from the opposite pole 
that he, too, was ready. This, as they said 
in the flicks, was it. 



THE 

He called Ivy on the radiophone. 

"All right, -Strike," her voice came back, 
"We'll all go through together. Ten seconds." 

"Check.* 

"Remember to be ready to blast away 
from that chunk of rock, you two. As 
soon as it hits prime space it will have 
plenty of gravity." 

"Right, Ivy," Cob's voice came metallic
ly. 

"Six seconds . . . 
"Five seconds . . . 

"Four seconds . . . three . . .two . . . 
NOW !" 

Strike was dazzled by the sudden shift 
of lighting The planetoid was aglow with 
the dancing, swirling witchfire! The 
skeeterboat sank toward the bright surface 
with a sickening lurch. Strike shoved the 
throttle forward and looked fearfully for 
a flare of fire at the south pole. There 
was none. Cob had gotten clear, too. The 
power cable snapped, but it didn't matter 
now. Its work was done. 

The Cleopatra lay ahead now, the fire 
gone from her hull. Behind her blazed the 
familiar beacon of Achernar. Off to the 
right Sirius A and B dominated the sky. 
And near at hand below, the turbulent, 
smoky red surface of 40 Eridani C smouldered against the familiar backdrop of the 
Milky Way. Already the contraterrene 
planetoid was plunging toward that sullen 
sphere. There wasn't much time to get 
clear. 

Strike flung his skeeter through the open 
hatch close on the exhaust of Cob's boat. 
Valves hissed shut and Lover-Girl flashed 
away homeward . 



/^vNE week later, and just off Sirius 
v/ B, Old Aphrodisiac met the Eridan 
fleet again, but with a difference . . . 

This time the black ships made no move 
to stop her. Their actions were incoherent, 
insane. They milled about in a swirling 
cluster, colliding with their fellows or 
careening off into the void. 

They floundered erratically, their co-ordination shattered. Even any evidence of 
intelligent guidance was missing. 



STAMBVSTERS 71 

The Chopatm flashed by, not even 
deigning to fire a shot at them. 

Strike shuddered as he watched them in 
the scanners. In his mind he could see the 
senseless, churning masses of flesh that 
lived mindlessly within the black hulls. 
His thoughts flew far afield to an icy world 
that had turned suddenly into an uninhabitable desert with temperatures soaring 
past the melting point of lead. He saw a 
dull red sun pulsating in cosmic agony, 
blossoming out into a menacing ball of 
white flame as its internal fires leaped to 
freedom through its shattered crust. He 
saw a star spending its failing substance 
prodigally in one bright carnival of destruction. And he saw its planets writhing 
as the sudden blast of heat speeded molecular velocities to the speed of escape and 
sent great clouds of superheated chlorine hissing into the void. 

But best of all, he imagined the horrible 
death of a thing that was the sole coordinator and reasoning agent for a race 
of ugly tentacled creatures. Strykalski saw 
the death of the Eridan group-mind . . . 
Old Aphrodisiac settled herself wearily 
onto the ramp of the Hamilton Field 
Spaceport. Her valves opened with a sighing sound. It was as though the ship 
herself had given voice to her contentment. She was home. 

The lights of the Administration building glittered against the dark backdrop 
of the California hills, and the field lights 
flamed against the stillness of the night. 

Strike and Ivy stood near the open port. 
"It's all over, Ivy," he said, "We're safe 
now." 

Ivy raised her eyes to the sky where 
the stars flecked the night. Below Orion 
hung the jewelled thread of Eridanus. 

The girl drew a shuddering breath. "It's 
a terrible thing to . . . to murder a star." 
Strike remained silent. There was nothing to say. 

It would take t*rdy light more than 
fifteen years to brifig news of the sudden 
flare of reckless life in that small star . . . 
an orgy that would sap its last reserves 
of strength and leave it a dark and frigid 
ember in the lonely void. 



PERIL ORBIT 

By C. J. WEDLAKE 




"Oh 9 hell!" Jim said and brought the gun's muzzle to his mouth. 

Caught in the sun! The young pilot stared at the mass of 
angry flame-— wondering why his training wouldn't let 

him give up. 



A CROSS THE BLAZING FACE 
/A of *he sua moved a round dark 
•*• -*• speck, a tiny, one-man space ship. 
It was very small, very close, and utterly 
helpless. The side facing the sun glowed 
dull red. 

Inside, Jim MacDonald stood glumly 
regarding the thermometer on the pilot 
compartment bulkhead. Sweat made dark 
patches on the light blue of his uniform and 
ran in beads down his forehead. He rubbed 
his arm across his face. The thermometer 
read over two hundred. He shook his 
head slowly. It couldn't be that hot, heat 
must be conducting along the magnesium 
bulkhead to the instrument. 
72 



Jim ran his fingers through his hair to 
brush back the damp strands that clung 
to his forehead. The hand came away 
with little droplets clinging to his fingertips. He wiped it across his pants, and 
tapped the thermometer again. The pointer stayed where it was, stuck against the 
peg. 

"About one forty-five, ,, be guessed 
aloud, and turned to walk with a slow, 
dragging step across to the pilot's seat. 
Weakly he slumped down with his arms 
dangling loose over the chair arms, 
knuckles almost touching the deck. He 
sat very still trying to ignore the temperature in the compartment, but the hot stifle 



PERIL 

wrapped around him and his chest heaved 
in a sigh. 

Jim MacDonld was done for and he 
knew it. The thermo-couple to the outside 
skin showed three thousand degrees. The 
inside cooling system had not been built for 
this and had long since ceased to cope with 
the heat. There seemed to be no use continuing his grim little existence, or facing 
the worse smother of heat to come. 

Yet, driven by the dull automatism of 
training and habit, he listlessly swung the 
stand with the ship's log over before him 
and noted his temperature readings. Then 
he critically reread what he had already 
written. 

A few days ago, he had been using the 
gravitational field of the sun as a booster 
to help fling the little ship from Earth to 
Venus. In the mighty field, a space warp 
had funneled out, caught him, and sucked 
the ship toward the blazing maw. 

The struggle to jescape was a masterpiece of calculation. He had figured with 
such a nicety that his fuel had run out 
just at the moment the jet tubes 
at the rear became molten lumps on the 
ship's skin. He had escaped the warp. 
But it was a futile thing now, for the 
ship swung around the sun fuelless, inoperative, in a tight orbit that had a little 
initial inward momentum. 

He had triad to radio for help, but radioing from where he was, was like trying 
to signal from the heart of an atomic 
bomb ; if a signal got through, it would be 
only a part of the meaningless jabber of 
static that always came from here. And 
if the little black speck were seen, it would 
♦only be taken for a stray meteorite moving 
across the sun's incandescent face. 

The ship was a little spherical world. 
It turned on its own axis once in an hour 
and twenty minutes. That was its little 
day. The orbit spiralled now a mere 
quarter million miles from the sun, one 
little year to two earth days. It moved 
closer at a rate that accelerated a few 
feet per second every second. 

Eventually, said the impassive rows of 
equations in the log, the inward movement 
would stop, as keeping the same speed in 
a smaller circle, the ship's centrifugal force 
increased to set up an equilibrium. But 



ORBIT 73 

that point would be three thousand miles 
below the sun's surface. The ship would 
never reach it. Jim MacDonald inhabited 
a doomed little world. 



H 



E chuckled. He even had a moon. 
Tht natural physical function of a 
few minutes before had left a jagged little 
chunk of ice swinging around the ship, outside the waste lock on the side away from 
the sun. But that wouldn't last long. It 
would pass into the hot light, and vanish 
in a puff of steam. 

Now the plastic fittings of the compartment began to send up a nostril stinging stench. Jim leafed over a few pages 
in the log to the page printed at the top: 
. . Suggestions for redsign of spaceships. 

Under his note, Enlarge cooling systems, 
he wrote, Replace urea formaldehyde plastics with metals, and insulate compartment 
thermometers from bulkheads. 

Feeling foolish at the useless act of 
writing that which no one would ever read, 
Jim swung the log away. His tongue 
peeled from the roof of his mouth like 
a strip of adhesive tape and he dragged 
across the compartment for a drink. 
Glancing toward the sun, he held his aluminum cup under the spout and pressed 
the hot button gingerly. Although the windows on that side were blanked out almost 
purple, the sun's horizon glared through 
in a heaving mass of leaping gassy prominences. 

Jim turned away, his face wrinkling into 
a grimace. Across the compartment a little 
cabinet held a pistol. It would be a simple 
sane thing to walk across there, take out 
the pistol and bring this to a sudden stop. 
He stepped toward it, then turned away 
ashamed. Spacemen didn't think like that. 
Ahead of the ship something flared into 
incandescent brilliance. Waves of force 
pounded on the front, the deck heaved. 
Jim sprawled on his face and skidded over 
under the instrument panel, his cup clattering along beside him. 

The deck scorched his hands and face. 
He wriggled out and dragged himself up 
to the chair, clinging tightly. But it was 
all over. He stood for a moment, waiting, 
then sat down. 



74 PLANET 

Experimentally he caressed his burned 
face. Looking out the windows he tried 
to see some cause for the shock. Then he 
realized his moon was gone. It had passed 
out of the deep shadow into the penumbra 
of the ship and had been instantly vaporized. The shock had been its dissociated 
molecules punimeling the front of the ship. 
He would have to be careful. If that 
could have passed directly into the full 
light instead of through the half shadow of 
the penumbra, the front of the ship might 
have caved in, softened as it was to near 
plasticity. Jim reached for the log again, 
but his hand stopped in mid air. With the 
spaceman's sensitivity to changes of state, 
he knew something was wrong. Something 
had changed in the shock of the moon's 
explosion. 

He puzzled it over, but his heat befuddled brain refused to grasp things. He 
scanned all the instruments on the panel, 
but saw nothing annual. At one side, he 
had a little tracer going, little drum turning 
with a needle scribing a red line. On it he 
had set the increase in the sun's pull 
against time to describe a curve. He examined this curve. The red line had 
changed direction suddenly; the sun's pull 
was increasing faster. 

"Dammit !" he said. The force of the 
explosion in front had slowed him and 
shorn off some protective centrifugal force. 
Now he picked up points on the new curve, 
set down equations, and found he would 
die some twenty hours sooner than he had 
expected. 

HIS mind began to revolt at the training that made him go on like this. 
The turning of the ship now showed him 
only the face of the sun. He looked at it 
a while, then shrugged his shoulders in 
disgust. Slowly he got up and walked 
toward the gun cabinet. The little door 
swung open as he pressed the buton and 
he stared at the holstered weapon. 

Leaving the door open, he walked away, 
looking back toward it. He retrieved his 
cup and filled it with tepid water. Throwing his head back he drained it at a gulp; 
then refilled it. He walked to the engine 
compartment door. It swung open at his 
touch, and he stepped into the tiny gang


STORIES 

way. Here a tiny porthole looked our 
into the infinite blue-black deeps of space. 
Jim leaned against a bulkhead and wiped 
sweat from his eyes. 

He tried to think. Not of escape, but 
of the frigid emptiness of space, the cool 
earth he had left behind. Into his mind 
came a fleeting glimpse of a lake back 
home on earth, a cold lake ringed with 
blu-green pines, jade waters where he had 
dived deep with the iciness stinging his 
skin. Against the metal bulkhead, his 
back began to burn. The vision faded. He 
realized he was thirsty all over. 

He gulped his cup of water and went 
back to the pilot's compartment. At the 
open door of the gun cabinet, he stopped 
and sent his empty cup clattering against 
the sunward windows. He took the gun 
from the cabinet. 

Back to the pilot's chair again. He toyed 
with the gun. The ship had turned now so 
that the other vast hjaaving horizon cut 
across the view. "Oh, hell!" Jim said, 
and brought the gun's muzzle to his mouth. 
Then he lowered it, sweat poured down 
into his eyes as his forehead wrinkled in 
dull puzzlement. He should be thinking 
about something, he was forgetting something. Jim tried to cudgel his heat-beclouded brain into some semblance of 
order . . . Water, explosion, change of 
velocity . . . Where was the drain outlet 
for the water supply located? 

He laid the gun aside and riffled through 
a drawer of blueprints, until he found the 
piping layout. Now he explored the maze 
of piping along the ship's sunward side. 
There it was, a little brass valve witL a 
pipe leading to the outside skin. 

The valve was hot enough to sL_ his 
hand. Jim carefully wrapped his handkerchief around the handle and twisted gently. 
Inside pressure squirted a thin stream of 
water from the supply tank into the hot 
vacuum of space. As it vaporized and 
dissociated into its atoms, Jim felt a mighty 
surge of expansion against the ship. The 
blows of a soft fist pummeled the side. 
Jim groaned as the softened plates of 
the hull creaked and buckled, but he held 
the valve as it was. An inside panel split 
and let a thin sifting of insulation drift 
to th* deck. His knee was against the 



PERIL ORBIT 



75 



PERASPERAADASTRA 

-thJuHUfh. hope to- tk£ A taJ iA.


YOU, WHO HAVE BEEN 
READING THESE PA6ES 
AND DREAMING - VES, 

yov



-yov 

WILL SEE IT HAPPEN/ 






For it is vert/ dose. now... . 
Those fetters on the spaceship 



Technical Development Committee 

Upper Atmosphere 
and Interplanetary Navigation 

a body of experts on guided missiles, 
atomic fuel, the ionosphere, etc., 
formed bu the Institute of Natvi/atton 

"to- coruuden technical pitoHenvX. ■■ . 
urtvLch. /i&Lcvte to- nxumaa±u>ri en. 
the uaaeA. eut/na-yaJve/Le. ana. on. 

fLoArij^aJti/HZ" 



76 



PLANET STORIES 



deck plates and he became conscious of 
the burning through the cloth of his uniform. But he stayed there, until through 
the windows he saw nothing but the 
speckled black of space turn slowly up. 
Then he shut the valve off and, rubbing 
his burned knee, anxiously hobbled to the 
tracer. 

The red line had not so much swoop to 
it now. "Ya!" he shouted exultantly. The 
centrifugal force from his forward velocity 
needed just a little help to begin pushing 
him away from the sun. Jim read the 
water tank gauge; about twenty gallons 
left. 

FIDGETING, he waited another hour. 
The sun's horizon swung up into 
view, the blazing plain filled the windows 
and at last he saw again the other horizon. 
It would not do to twist the valve too 
soon; he had to wait until the outlet was 
directly towar4 "tS^sun so he wouldn't 
lose any precious forward velocity. 

The sun's horizon bisected the windows. 
Now! Encouraged by his other success, 
Jim twisted the valve hard. He stepped 
back so his sore knee would not rest against 
the plates. 

The ship bounced like a beachball in the 
tremendous upshoot of the gases outside. 
Jim clung to a stanchion to keep from 
being knocked off his feet. 

Like a rubber ball dimpled by a thumb, 
the ship's skin began to bulge inward. Jim 
tried to let go his hold to get the valve. 

The bounce of the ship knocked him to 
his knees. A little steel desk came sliding 
across the compartment, banging him on 
the shoulder. He let go with one hand and 
shoved the desk between the bulging wall 
and a cross bulkhead. A white line appeared across the desk, and the paint 
crackled as it began to fold in the middle. 

Jim let go and dived for the valve. A 
panel split wide and insulation poured out. 
A scream bubbled from his throat as 
radiation cut a line across his face. 

He rolled away, then struggled to get 
to the valve again. But the push stopped. 
The tank was empty. 

Groaning with the pain of his face, Jim 
went to his tracer. He forgot the burn as 



he saw the curve now paralleled zero. 
No ... it went up a little. Jim whooped 
for joy. 

Now he scurried about the ship gathering together all the liquids he could find. 
Soup, fruit juice, medicines. He piled 
them beside the water tank and unscrewed 
the cap. Air whooshed in. 

At the sound, Jim grinned. He left his 
pile of cans and bottles as they were, and 
unscrewed the cap to a spare oxygen tank. 
The compartment air pressure went up to 
about twenty five pounds. The excess of 
oxygen exhilarated him. 

He looked over his pile of cans and 
bottles. He didn't like consomme, it went 
into the tank. Chicken broth followed. 
Everything he didn't like went into the 
tank, everything else stayed out. Then he 
patched the rip in the panel. 

It was time. Jim crouched carefully 
beside the valve, op^ig it slowly. The 
mess inside the tank ,J %*irted out. Again 
the surge beat against the ship, but with 
the first groan of the hull, Jim throttled 
the valve down a little. His eyes were on 
the compartment pressure gauge. The consomme went and inside air began to hiss 
out. As it too expanded, the push on the 
hull continued. 

When the sun's horizon was out of sight, 
the inside pressure registered only twelve 
pounds. Jim shut the valve off. 

Now the tracer line was a nice curve 
upward. 

Jim swung into the pilot's chair. He was 
a little oxygen drunk, but he made calculations grow on the page until he had 
his result. Then he leaned back and gave 
the universe a beatific smile. 

His spiral now outward, would stop as 
soon as his orbit expanded and centrifugal 
force became less. As the forces came into 
balance, he would take up a permanent 
orbit around the sun. But that orbit lay 
well outside the region of heavy static, and 
he could radio for help. In his mind he 
already heard the sweet clang of magnetic 
grapples against the hull. 

Jim reached for the log and began to 
letter neatly at the top of a new page : 

Suggestions for spacemen caught 
in the sun. 




She pushed him back, but not quickly enough. 

GARDEN OF EVIL 

By MARGARET ST, CLAIR 

Even to a drug-soaked outcast ethnographer Vy^an was a 
paradise planet. It was worth anybody's life to find Dridihad, 

the secret city of dread! 



ERICSON RETURNED TO AN 
awareness of his personal identity 
quite suddenly. He had an impression that it was a long time, months at 
least, since he had been in a state of normal consciousness. At the hack of his 
mind a memory of pain had imprinted itself as a signet makes an impression in 



hot wax ; he shied away from it. "Where 
am I ?" he asked. 

The green-skinned girl squatting beside 
him in the coppice looked at him sideways 
out of her dark jade eyes. "Hungry?" she 
asked. 

"But where am yes, I am hungry. 

Yes." 

77 



78 



PLANET STORIES 



Mnathl he knew, somehow, that that 

was her name. Didn't he remember her 
from the other side of the gulf in his memory, from the days when he had begged 
food in the streets of Penhairn? Mnathl 
handed him a nicely-roasted bosuta rib. 
He ate it avidly. He had always thought 
the bosula was the best of the food animals of Fyhon. 

When the bone was gnawed clean she 
passed him, in a folded fresh green leaf, a 
mixed grill consisting of bits of bosula 
liver, kidney, tripe, salivary glands, and 
eyes. He ate that, too. When his stomach 
was full Erickson lay back with his arms 
under his head and looked at the big puffy 
clouds drifting overhead. He had no desire 
to think about himself or the things that 
had been happening to him in the last three 
or four months, but the thoughts came 
anyhow. 

The chief thing was pain — remorseless, 
long-continued, pain. Mnathl had come to 
him one day when he was sitting on the 
dock in Penhairn and told him they were 
going to Lake Tanais. He had got up and 
gone with her obediently ; a byhror addict 
has little will of his own. The pain had 
begun after that. 

There had been a barren island in the 
middle of the brackish, poisonous waters 
of the lake, and most of the time, until 
just latterly, he had been kept bound for 
fear he would drown himself in them. 
Mnathl . . . Mnathl had swum over from 
the mainland to tend him ; she had bathed 
him and kept his body free of sores and 
vermin, set food before him and tried to 
coax him to eat. And twice a day she had 
given him injections of mercapulan with 
a hypodermic syringe. His arm was 
pocked with the needle marks. Where had 
she got the syringe and the drug? She 
must have stolen them from the big Colony Hospital in Penhairn. 

The injections had brought on the pain. 
Ericson, at the thought, felt sweat break 
out on his upper lip. What he had endured' had been just at the edge of what a 
man could stand and still live. (His ordeal, had he known it, had been very much 
less than it would have been had he taken 
the drug cure in the hospital in Penhairn. 
Mnathl, though she had not disdained the 



help of terrestrial science, knew things 
about the Fyhonese flora and its properties 
that no terrestrial even suspected. Still, 
the ordeal had been bad enough.) Ericson 
shifted his position and sighed. 

Mnathl had cured him of byhror addiction. In return, he had hated her. There 
had been weeks, he remembered, when his 
brain had held nothing but horrible pain 
and the wish to kill Mnathl. Once, when 
she had untied* him for exercise, he had 
shammed sleep until she came close to him ; 
then he had caught her by the throat. He 
had come close to killing her then. And 
no doubt in those long, maniacal days there 
had been other times. 

Ericson raised himself on one elbow and 
looked' at her. She was pouring water into 
a clay pot above the small, workman-like 
fire she had built, and was putting in bits 
of chopped bosula meat. Her greenish 
skin, the skin of a native of the South 
Polar continent, glittered slightly as she 
moved. "Mnathl . . ." he said. 

She turned toward him quickly, but did 
not speak. "Mnathl, I'm sorry I tried to 
. . . hurt you on the island. I must have 
been pretty bad." 

Mnathl almost smiled. "No matter," she 
said, "Pretty soon, soup." 

THE incident seemed to be closed. Erieson lay back in the shade again and 
watched the movements of the eloudscape 
across the deep turquoise of the sky. His 
eyes felt as fresh as Adam's. The trees 
were green with the greenness of living 
emeralds, and the sun had an ardor and a 
richness like no sun he had ever known 
before. 

Winds blew with caressive, sweet-smelling tendrils over his face, and from the 
warm soil beneath him he could almost 
feel strength soaking up again into his 
body cells. He had visited several planets 
since he had first left earth ; he had loved 
none of them as he did Fyhon. Fyhon . . . 

Arnaldo, the chunky little head of the 
paleo-biology department of Penhairn University, had told him once that terrestrials 
loved Fyhon so because conditions on that 
planet were like those on Terra during the 
part of the Cenozoic when man was beginning to become man. Fyhon, he said, ap


€iARDEN 

pealed to some deep-seated memory in humanity of what a planet ought to be. 

Ericson had laughed at him. He was new 
to Fyhon then, with a temporary appointment as ethnographer to the South Polar 
Ethnographic Commission. Racial memory 
had seemed to him as out-moded a concept 
as spontaneous generation. But his temporary appointment had been extended 
once, and then once again, and by the end 
of the second period he had beet* wildly, 
hopelessly in love with Fyhon. He had 
hoped' to get a permanent appointment, 
had hoped to stay on Fyhon for the rest 
of his life. 

Ericson sighed again. After a while he 
raised one hand above his head and looked 
at it. He could see the bones and the joints 
of the bones and' the movements of the 
sinews under the pale gold skin. The 
marks of Mnathl's hypodermic needle were 
faintly red. He ran^his fingers down his 
body, surprised at the largeness and hardness of the rib cage, and the prominence 
of the sockets of his hips. His body felt 
attenuated and worn. But it was his body, 
no longer the property of byhror and the 
byhror emptiness. He held up his hand 
once more and looked at it against the 
light. He was beginning to realize that 
he was alive. 

He drifted off into sleep. Whence 
woke, Mnathl was holding out a steaming 
bowl to him. "Soup?" she said. 

THEY stayed for some eight days in 
the coppice, while Ericson knotted his 
memories together. Byhror and the need 
for it were sinking back with the passage 
of each successive day into the status of 
things unalterably in the past. Mnathl set 
snares and hunted she would not allow him to move a hand and Ericson 

watched her almost incuriously. He felt a 
little more conscious every hour how good 
it was to be alive. 

On the ninth day Mnathl poured water 
on the cooking fire. She nested the cooking pots together, slung them deftly oyer 
her shoulder, and contrived a belt of twisted vines for her hunting knife. "Go now," 
she announced. 

Ericson got up obediently. "Are we going back to Penhairn?" he asked. 



OF EVIL 79 

The corners of Mnathl's mouth twitched. 
"No," she said. "Way on up. On in. In 
Dridihad." She pointed with her thumb. 

Ericson stared at her. "Dridihad?" he 
said. He'd heard the name before. It was 
. . . now wait . . . yes, it was the name the 
natives applied to the heart of the almost 
unknown South Polar Minor continent. "I 
can't go there. I've got to go back to Penhairn, now that I'm well. I've three years 
of byhror addiction to make up," 

Mnathl's eyes narrowed. "Dridihad," 
she repeated stubbornly. 

"But . . Listen, Mnathl, I'm terribly 
grateful to you for what you've done for 
me. I never can thank you enough. But 
I couldn't go to Dridihad now, wherever 
it is*. I'd need equipment cameras, note





books, guns, a tent. Right now I've got to 
go back to Penhairn, see about getting a 
job." 

"All sorts of things to see," Mnathl 
said. She edged up to him. "You like. 
You like good." There was a prick in his 
arm. Mnathl had made other things in her 
cooking pots the last few days beside soup. 
Ericson felt a peculiar glassy lethargy 
creeping over him. The sensation was not 
entirely unpleasant. It was as if he looked 
at his limbs and his body through a sheet 
of perfectly transparent crystal. He could 
see his actions and his movements with 
absolute clarity, but he had nothing to do 
with them. 

"You like see Dridihad," Mnathl said. 

"All sorts of things for eth ethnog 

for man like you to look at. Come on. 
You like good." She started along a shadowy, green-roofed trail. 

While Ericson watched with resentful 
detachment, his body began obediently to 
follow her. Speech as well as volition had 
deserted him, and all he could do was to 
move silently in her steps. 

As mile succeeded silent mile, memory 
and common sense came to his aid. There 
had been a time, nearly three years ago, 
when he had set out to explore the periphery of the minor polar continent by himself. His temporary appointment had expired, and he had been moving heaven and 
earth to get it made permanent. The oneman expedition had been a part of the 
general heaven-and-earth moving process; 



PLANET STORIES 



it had occurred to him that the Ethnographic Commission might be inclined to 
view his application more favorably if he 
could offer the Commission a piece of 
original ethnographic research, such as a 
report on the natives in the periphery 
would be. 

His attempt had been a miserable failure; indeed, he owed his former byhror 
addiction to it. His supplies had been 
eaten by animals, he had poisoned himself 
with tainted chornis liver, fever had attacked him. In his fits of feverish delirium 
he had thrown away nearly everything, 
even his hunting knife. In order to get 
back to Penhairn at all he had had to resort to chewing the leaves of the byhror 
plant. The leaves contain a remarkable 
stimulant ; Ericson had been able to get his 
fever- racked body back to civilization 
alive. But it had been at the cost of slavish 
addiction to the drug. 

And now Mnathl bless her greenish 

skin and queer flat eyes was offering 

him a journey to the mysterious heart of 
the minor polar continent. Offering it to 
him on a silver platter. A piece of original 
ethnographic research. He had been ungrateful and a fool. "You like good," she 
had said. Well, she ought to know. 

The effects of the drug she had pricked 
his arm with must be wearing off. Ericson 
found he could smile. "Why are we going 
to Dridihad, Mnathl?" he asked a little 
later. 

Mnathl shook her sleek green head without even turning around to him. "No," 
she said. 

THE trip in to Dridihad was a seduction, an enchantment, a bliss. Ericson's strength came flooding back to him. 
His sick pallor was turning to rich gold. 
On the second day he whittled, under 
MnathTs guidance, a spear and a throwingstick for it, and on the third and fourth 
she taught him to set snares and kindle 
fires with a sliver of onchian. The country grew wilder and more beautiful, the 
trees taller, the sky a deeper blue, the 
waterfalls more loud. He tried to question the girl, but she never answered anything except "No", and after a little, in his 
happiness, he gave up asking questions. 



What did it matter, after all ? He was 
learning from day to day secrets that any 
geographer or ethnographer would have 
given the best years of his life to learn; 
the piece of original ethnographic research 
was becoming a reality; and who, except 
a fool, questions someone who has not only 
restored him to life but is giving him his 
heart's desire? 

On the eighteenth day, when Ericson's 
body had filled out and been turned to a 
living gold by the sun, they came across 
the pyramid. It stood in a swale with 
purple flowers growing around it and a 
small river flowing around one side, and 
it was so tall that Ericson, looking dizzily 
up, swore he saw clouds floating around 
its top. He wanted to stay and look at it, 
to record it in his mind, but Mnathl was 
not impressed. She let him have two hours, 
and then she urged him on. 

"But who built it, Mnathl?" he demanded when he had been pulled reluctantly away. "How did it get here?" 

Mnathl seemed to be debating whether 
to answer him. He could never decide 
whether she was naturally taciturn, or 
whether she really grudged telling him 
things. "My people built it," she said at 
last. "Deidrithes. Long time ago. Long 
time ago." She motioned vaguely with 
her hand. 

Something in the gesture made Ericson 
see with sudden clarity how deep the 
abysm of the past, even on this young 
world with the ardent sun, really was. 
Fyhon was young ; but the Deidrithes had 
been living on Fyhon a long time. 

Two days later Ericson, contrary to their 
usual custom, was in the lead, breaking 
trail. Mnathl caught him suddenly around 
the waist and pulled him back, but she was 
not quick enough. The huge, thick-bodied 
snake with the red bandings lashed out at 
him and just fell short. But one glistening 
fang grazed his foot. 

Mnathl, bleached by fear to the color of 
an inferior grade of jade, killed the snake 
with a stone. Then she made Ericson sit 
down on the grass, and slashed at his foot 
with her hunting knife. 

"What is it, Mnathl?" Ericson asked. 
The wound was not especially painful, but 
his heart had already bgun to beat slowly 






GARDEN 

and wearily, as if beating were a burden 
almost beyond its strength, and at the same 
time it seemed to have grown until it 
threatened to burst his chest. 

"Outis" Mnathl answered briefly. She 
hesitated for a moment. "Bad," she said, 
as if to herself. "Very bad. Could kill me 
too." Then she leaned over and set her 
lips to the bleeding gash her knife had 
made. 

Ericson tried to draw away from her. 

He was so dizzy that he could hardly see. 

"No," he croaked, "don't. You musn't suck 

it, Mnathl. I don't want you to risk your 

life." 
The green-skinned girl shrugged. "No 

matter," she answered. "Will do. O. K." 
Ericson tried to push her from him, but 

he was too weak. The world was receding 

from him in black waves. She sucked 

blood and poison from the wound, spat, 

sucked, spat, and sucked again. 

He would have liked to protest, to thank 

her for her sacrifice, but he had no time. 

His pulse had begun to flutter feebly, and 

he fainted. 

FOR the next several days he was in a 
stupor most of the time. Whenever 
he came back to consciousness, he saw 
Mnathl lying exhausted in the grass near 
him, and he knew without being told that 
the poison she had sucked from his wound 
was moving sluggishly and with slow malignity through her veins. Nevertheless, the 
wound on his foot was always cleanly 
dressed and plastered with fresh herbs, and 
from time to time she opened it with her 
knife and let the pus escape. 

When they were finally on the road to 
Dridihad again, he tried to thank her for 
what she had done. 

"Anything I can do for you, Mnathl," 
he wound up with some embarrassment (it 
is difficult to thank someone who refuses 
to look at you), "anything I can do for 
you, why, you let me know. I could have 
died there, without ever getting my permanent appointment or seeing Dridihad. 
We're friends, aren't we, Mnathl? 
Friends." He took her hand. 

Mnathl nodded curtly. "O. K.," she 
said. She pulled her fingers from his. The 

6— Planet— Summer 



OF EVIL 81 

Deidrithes, Ericson thought not for the 
first time, were an impassive, unemotional 
folk. 

It took them nearly a month more to 
get to Dridihad. On the way they had to 
ford two swollen rivers and beat off the 
attack of a must-maddened bull rhodops. 
Neither of these incidents had any consequences. On the sixty-sixth day after their 
departure from Lake Tanais, they came to 
the foot of Dridihad. 

For a week or so the ground had been 
rising steadily and the air growing crisp 
and thin. They had labored uphill, uphill. 
Dridihad itself, built on a high plateau, had 
been visible for three days before they 
reached it, a silhouette, faintly pinkish, 
against the clouds. When they had first 
caught sight of it, Ericson had felt an almost painful anticipation seize him, and 
even Mnathl, usually so impassive, had 
shown, in her glowing face and quickened 
breathing, how excited she was. 

The ascent to the plateau itself, along a 
path so precipitous that Ericson was always having to clutch it with hands as 
well as feet, was so toilsome that fatigue 
had dimmed his curiosity a little when they 
arrived at the top. Earlier that day Mnathl 
had thrown the cooking pots and the knife 
contemptuously over the side of the cliff, 
and now, cupping her hands around her 
lips and standing almost arrogantly erect, 
she strode up to the rosy-red, eroded 
battlements. 

"Klarete laoi !" she called. "Laoi, klarete !" So far as Ericson could see, no one 
at all was listening. But after a moment 
the massy doors of the gate began to open 
outward, ponderously, in the twilight. They 
went in. 

Dridihad, Ericson saw at first glance, 
was much larger and more populous than 
he had supposed from below. The low, 
stepped buildings, all made of the rose-pink 
stone, seemed to stretch out for mile upon 
mile, as far as he could see. They made 
upon him an impression of antiquity so 
strong that it was almost disturbing. The 
small greenish people like Mnathl were 
everywhere. In clots, trickles and rivulets 
they were pouring out into the streets. 

MnathFs eyes fell on a man near her. 
She spoke to him. Instantly he bowed 



82 PLANET 

profoundly before her, and made a second, 
shallower obeisance to Ericson. 

"Go with him," Mnathl said, turning to 
the ethnographer. "Sleep in his house. " 
Obediently, Ericson followed his guide. 
When he looked around toward Mnathl, 
she had already disappeared. 

The man (his name seemed to be 
Boator) took Ericson to an airy suite of 
rooms on the top floor of one of the biggest of the houses of red stone. Attendants 
waited on him with food and drink and 
water for bathing. They took away his 
dirt-encrusted, ragged clothing and brought 
him a heavy greenish robe. After Ericson 
had bathed and put it on, he inspected 
himself in the sheet of polished metal that 
served for a looking glass and decided that 
the color of the fabric made his curling 
beard and fair skin look as if they had 
been cast from yellow gold. 

He was tired, but far too excited to rest. 
The chief thing, the indubitable, the incredible thing, was that there was a very 
old, a very populous city, a city whose existence no one had even suspected, in the 
heart of the South Polar Minor continent. 
It was news to inflame an ethnographer 
to the point of hysteria. When Ericson 
got back to Penhairn with his report, it 
was going to revolutionize their whole concept of Fyhonese history ; one would hardly exaggerate to say that it would be epochmaking news. No doubt there would be a 
period when they'd consider him the biggest liar since Marco Polo. But after the 
first skepticism wore off he'd have a permanent ethnographic appointment almost 
forced upon him. His report would shake 
established reputations, found new schools, 

would oh, if he only had something to 

write on! 

When the attendant came in again, Erieson made motions of writing in the palm 
of his hand, but the man's face remained 
blank. And when he asked for Mnathl the 
attendant merely shook his head and went 
out. 

For want of anything better the young 
man hung out of the window watching 
the smoky flicker of lights in the city 
around him. It was not until the last one 
had gone out that he went, reluctantly, 
to bed. 



STOMES 

*^"EXT morning, immediately after 
-L ^ breakfast, Mnathl came to visit him. 
He hardly knew her at first. The scanty 
garments she had worn unconcernedly on 
their journey to Dridihad had been replaced by the stiff, hieratic folds of a dull 
purple robe embroidered in blue. On her 
head there was a silvery crown of antique 
workmanship, set with luminous purple 
stones, and she moved with the conscious 
dignity of a princess or a priest. 

Her manner toward him, too, had 
changed. She smiled faintly when she firstsaw him, and everything about her seemed 
freer than Ericson had seen it before. She 
was animated, almost vivacious. 

He asked her for something to write 
with. "No," she answered, still with that 
faint smile, "no use. Hunt now." 

They left Boator's house by a side door' 
(to avoid the crowd that would appear at 
once if they were glimpsed in the streets, 
Ericson surmised) and entered a small, 
walled court. There four improbably 
striped animals, about the size of small 
ponies, were waiting for them. Ericson 
mounted one of them, and Mnathl, tucking up her skirts, bestrode another. With 
two attendants they rode circuitously 
through Dridihad and out into the high 
plain. 

The variety and abundance of game were 
amazing. There seemed to be more animals than there were trees, and they came 
in all sizes, shapes, colors, and coats. There 
was even a big blue-hued thing that reminded the young man a little of a kangaroo. He enjoyed himself, but he could 
not help wishing that he knew more about 
Fyhonese zoology than he did — to appreciate all those properly. 

They got back to the city just before 
dark. Ericson ate, and then Mnathl took 
him to the temple. It was the tallest building in Dridihad, a stepped pyramid of unusually reddish stone, and Ericson was to 
grow fond, later, of the view from its flat 
top. The naos itself, however, was a small 
room skimpily scooped out of one 6ide of 
the pyramid, and it was very badly lighted. 
Ericson, who had resolved, in default of 
paper to write on, to impress all he saw 
and heard irremovably upon his mind, had 
to strain his eyes to see anything. 



GARDEN 

Mnathl officiated. His first feeling 
that she was a priestess seemed to be correct. As to the ritual itself, it was highly 
impressive, especially when one considered that he did not know the language in 
which it was going on. It ended with the 
sacrifice of an animal like a bosula; while 
two attendants held it, Mnathl cut its 
throat, caught the blood in a cup, and 
poured it on the altar fire Then she roasted pieces of the meat over the coals and 
dealt them out among the celebrants of 
the ceremony, partaking first herself. None 
of the collops was offered to Ericson; 
but, then, he could hardly be considered a 
communicant of the religion of the Deidrithes, whatever it was, 

As the days passed, a possible explanation of Mnathl's treatment of him began 
to come to Ericson. He was not a conceited man, or it might have occurred to 
him earlier. And it bothered him to think 
that she was attracted to him, whereas he 
had never found her attractive in any way. 
Still, what other hypothesis would account 
for the facts? 

They were together almost constantly 
and, except for the attendants who were 
always armed with heavy axes, always 
alone She hunted with him, showed him 
the city, rode with him; she even taught 
him to play a rather childish game, something like the Sicilian Mora, which she 
always beat him at. Day after day she 
took him with her to witness religious rites 
which were obviously of the most hallowed 
character. Ericson had the impression that 
the rites were leading, in a series of slight 
graduations, up to some supreme event! 
and he tried to note and remember everything. 

THE climax came suddenly. One lovely evening, just as the full moon was 
rising, Mnathl took him with her up the 
steep sides to the top of the pyramid. The 
two attendants hovered discreetly in the 
background. For all practical purposes, 
he and the girl were alone. 

Mnathal looked at him. There was a 
glint, warm, glowing, and facile, in her 
eyes that he had never seen there before. 
There was a short but rather embarrassing 



OF EVIL 83 

silence. At last Ericson, feeling like a boor 
and a churl, took her hand. 

"Mnathl," he said, 'Tm so grateful to 
you. You've done so much for me, helped 
me so much. You . . . mean a lot to me, 
Mnathl." That, at least, was true. 

Mnathl pulled her fingers away and regarded him. "What you mean?" she asked 
blankly. "What you mean?" 

"That you . . . that I . . ." he stopped, 
too embarrassed to go on, 

Mnathl threw back her head and 
laughed. It was the first time he had ever 
heard the sound from her, and there was 
something strange in it. She motioned to 
the axmen with her hand. 

"Not like, not hate," she said blandly. 
"Let you see, let you hear, so you tell Them 
all that Deidrithes do. You our messenger. 
Then we eat." 

Then we eat . . . For a moment the 
words echoed meaninglessly in Ericson's 
mind. The axmen were forcing him to 
his knees near a depression in the center 
of the pyramid. "But why . . ." he said. 
"We hear about you the first time you 
try trip," Mnathl said. "Everybody know. 
No other men your color in Fyhon." 

His color. Ericson began to understand. Mnathl's devotion, her self-sacrificing tenacity, her long kindness to him, 

everything had all been nothing but the 

prelude to a ritual meal in which his rare 
blonde body was to be the chief support. 
No doubt a man of his color would be an 
especially choice offering to the gods. The 
gleam he had seen in Mnathl's eyes had 
been not love, but a kind of religious gluttony. 

He began to laugh. Irony had always 
appealed to him; and besides he was remembering a sentence in the Ethnographic 
Commission's preliminary survey: "There 
is no doubt that ritual cannibalism is unknown among the natives of Fyhon." 

"O. K., Mnathl," he said, recalling what 
he had been saved from, what he had seen 
and learned. "I'm ahead, no matter how 
you look at it. It's O.K." 

He was still smiling when the axman on 
the right struck and Ericson's severed 
head went rolling along the surface of the 
pyramid. 



Stalemate In Space 

By CHARLES L. HARNESS 

Two mighty metal globes clung in a murderous death-struggle. 

lashing out with flames of poison. Yet deep in their twisted. 

radioactive wreckage the main battle raged — where a girl 

swayed sensuously before her conqueror's mocking eyes. 



AT FIRST THERE WAS ONLY 
the voice, a monotonous murmur 
in her ears. 

"Die now — die now — die now — " 

Evelyn Kane awoke, breathing slowly 
and painfully. The top of the cubicle was 
bulging inward on her chest, and it seemed 
likely that a rib or two was broken. How 
long ago? Years? Minutes? She had no 
way of knowing. Her slender right hand 
found the oxygen valve and turned it. For 
a long while she lay, hurting and breathing 
helplessly. 

"Die now — die now — die now — " 

The votrom had awakened her with its 
heart-breaking code message, and it was 
her duty to carry out its command. Nine 
years after the great battle globes had 
crunched together the mentors had sealed 
her in this finy cell, dormant, unwaking, to 
be livened only when it was certain her 
countrymen had cither definitely won — or 
lost. 

The votron's telepathic dirge chronicled the latter fact. She had expected 
nothing else. 

She had only to find the relay beside her 
cot, press the key that would set in motion 
gigantic prime movers in the heart of the 
great globe, and the conquerors would join 
the conquered in the wide and nameless 
grave of space. 

But life, now doled out by the second, 
was too delicious to abandon immediately. 
Her mind, like that of a drowning person, 
raced hungrily over the memories of her 
past. 

For twenty years, in company with her 
great father, she had watched The Defender grow from a vast metal skeleton into a 
planet-sized battle globe. But it had not 
grown fast enough, for when the Scythian 
globe, The Invader, sprang out of black 
space to enslave the budding Terran Con84 



federacy, The Defender was unfinished, 
half-equipped, and undermanned. 

The Terrans could only fight for time 
and hope for a miracle. 

The Defender, commanded by her father, Gordon, Lord Kane, hurled itself from 
its orbit around Procyon and met The 
Invader with giant fission torpedoes. 

And then, in an intergalactic proton 
storm beyond the Lesser Magellanic Cloud, 
the globes lost their bearings and collided. 
Hordes of brute-men poured through the 
crushed outer armor of the stricken Defender. 

The prone woman stirred uneasily. Here 
the images became unreal and terrible, 
with the recurrent vision of death. It had 
taken the Scythians nine years to conquer 
The Defender's outer shell. Then had 
come that final interview with her father. 
"In half an hour our last space port will 
be captured/' he had telepathed curtly. 
"Only one more messenger ship can leave 
The Defender. Be on it." 
"No. I shall die here/' 
His fine tired eyes had studied her face 
in enigmatic appraisal. "Then die usefully. 
The mentors are trying to develop a force 
that will destroy both globes in the moment 
of our inevitable defeat. If they are successful, you will have the task of pressing 
the final button of the battle." 

"There's an off-chance you may survive," countered a mentor. "We're also 
working on a means for your escape — not 
only because you are Gordon's daughter, 
but because this great proton storm will 
prevent radio contact with Terra for years, 
and we want someone to escape with our 
secret if and when our experiments prove 
successful." 

"But you must expect to die," her father 
had warned with gentle finality. 

She clenched her fingernails vehemently 




She fought far her life under that mile-high ceiling. 



86 



PLANET 



into her palms and wrenched herself back 
to the present. 

That time had come. 

With some effort she worked herself out 
of the crumpled bed and lay on the floor 
of her little cubicle, panting and holding 
her chest with both hands. The metal 
floor was very cold. Evidently the enemy 
torpedo fissionables had finally broken 
through to the center portions of the ship, 
letting in the icy breath of space. Small 
matter. Not by freezing would she die. 

She reached out her hand, felt for the 
all-important key, and gasped in dismay. 
The mahogany box containing the key had 
burst its metal bonds and was lying on 
its side. The explosion that had crushed 
her cubicle had been terrific. 

With a gurgle of horror she snapped on 
her wrist luminar and examined the interior of the box. 

It was a shattered ruin. 

ONCE the fact was clear, she composed 
herself and lay there, breathing hard 
and thinking. She had no means to construct another key. At best, finding the 
rare tools and parts would take months, 
and during the interval the invaders would 
be cutting loose from the dead hulk that 
clutched their conquering battle globe in 
a metallic rigor mortis. 

She gave herself six weeks to accomplish this stalemate in space. 

Within that time she must know whether the prime movers were still intact, and 
whether she could safely enter the pile 
room herself, set the movers in motion, 
and draw the moderator columns. If it 
were unsafe, she must secure the unwitting 
assistance of her Scythian enemies. 

Still prone, she found the first-aid kit 
and taped her chest expertly. The cold 
was beginning to make itself felt, so she 
flicked on the chaudiere she wore as an 
under-garment to her Scythian woman's 
uniform. Then she crawled on her elbows 
and stomach to the tiny door, spun the 
sealing gear, and was soon outside. Ignoring the pain and pulling on the side of the 
imitation rock that contained her cell, she 
got slowly to her feet. The air was thin 
indeed, and frigid. She turned the valve 
of her portable oxygen bottle almost SUD


ATORIES 

consciously, while exploring the surrounding blackened forest as far as she could 
see. Mentally she was alert for roving 
alien minds. She had left her weapons 
inside the cubicle, except for the three 
things in the little leather bag dangling 
from her waist, for she knew that her 
greatest weapon in the struggle to come 
would be her apparent harmlessness. 

Four hundred yards behind her she detected the mind of a low-born Scythe, of 
the Tharn sun group. Very quickly she 
established it as that of a tired, brutish 
corporal, taking a mop-up squad through 
the black stumps and forlorn branches of 
the small forest that for years had supplied 
oxygen to the defenders of this sector. 

The corporal could not see her green 
Scythian uniform clearly, and evidently 
took her for a Terran woman. In his mind 
was the question: Should he shoot immediately, or should he capture her? It 
had been two months since he had seen 
a woman. But then, his orders were to 
shoot. Yes, he would shoot 

Evelyn turned in profile to the beamgun and stretched luxuriously, hoping that 
her grimace of pain could not be detected. 
With satisfaction, she sensed a sudden 
change of determination in the mind of 
the Tharn. The gun was lowered, and the 
man was circling to creep up behind her. 
He did not bother to notify his men. He 
wanted her first. He had seen her uniform, 
but that deterred him not a whit. Afterwards, he would call up the squad. Finally, 
they would kill her and move on. Women 
auxiliaries had no business here, anyway. 

Hips dipping, Evelyn sauntered into the 
shattered copse. The man moved faster, 
though still trying to approach quietly. 
Most of the radions in the mile-high ceiling had been destroyed, and the light was 
poor. He was not surprised when he lost 
track of his quarry. He tip-toed rapidly 
onward, picking his way through the 
charred and fallen branches, thinking that 
she must turn up again soon. He had not 
gone twenty yards in this manner when a 
howl of unbearable fury sounded in his 
mind, and the dull light in his brain went 
out. 

Breathing deeply from her mental effort, 
the woman stepped from behind a great 






STALEMATE 

black tree trunk and hurried to the unconscious man. For I.Q.'s of 100 and less, 
telepathic cortical paralysis was quite effective. With cool efficiency and no trace of 
distaste she stripped the odorous uniform 
from the man, then took his weapon, 
turned the beam power down very low, 
and needled a neat slash across his throat. 
While he bled to death, she slipped deftly 
into the baggy suit, clasped the beam gun 
by the handle, and started up the sooty 
slope. For a time, at least, it would be 
safer to pass as a Tharn soldier than as 
any kind of a woman. 



II 



THE INQUISITOR LEANED forward, frowning at the girl before 
him. 

"Name?" 
"Evelyn Kane." 

The eyes of the inquisitor widened. "So 
you admit to a Terran name. Well, Terran, 
you are charged with having stolen passage 
on a supply lorry, and you also seem to 
be wearing the uniform of an infantry 
corporal as well as that of a Scythian 
woman auxiliary. Incidentally, where is 
the corporal? Did you kill him?" 

He was prepared for a last-ditch denial. 
He would cut it short, have the guards 
remove her, and execution would follow 
immediately. In a way, it was unfortunate. 
The woman was obviously of a high 
Terran class. No — he couldn't consider 
that. His slender means couldn't afford 
another woman in his quarters, and besides, he wouldn't feel safe with this cool 
murderess. 

"Do you not understand the master 
tongue? Why did you kill the corporal?" 
He leaned impatiently over his desk. 

The woman stared frankly back at him 
with her clear blue eyes. The guards on 
either side of her dug their nails into her 
arms, as was their custom with recalcitrant 
prisoners, but she took no notice. 

She had analyzed the minds of the 
three men. She could handle the inquisitor 
alone or the two guards alone, but not 
all three. 

"If you aren't afraid of me, perhaps 
you'd be so kind as to send the guards out 



IIV SPACE 87 

for a few minutes," she said, placing a 
hand on her hip. "I have interesting information." 

So that was it. Buy her freedom by 
betraying fugitive Terrans. Well, he could 
take the information and then kill her. He 
nodded curtly to the guards, and they 
walked out of the hut, exchanging sly 
winks with one another. 

Evelyn Kane crossed her arms across 
her chest and felt her broken rib gingerly. 
The inquisitor stared up at her in sadistic 
admiration. He would certainly be on 
hand for the execution. His anticipation 
was cut short with a horrible realization. 
Under the paralyzing force of a mind 
greater than his own, he reached beneath 
the desk and switched off the recorder. 

"Who is the Occupational Commandant 
for this Sector," she asked tersely. This 
must be done swiftly before the guards 
returned. 

"Perat, Viscount of Tharn," replied the 
man mechanically. 

"What is the extent of his jurisdiction?" 
"From the center of the Terran globe, 
outward four hundred miles radius." 

"Good. Prepare for me the usual visa 
that a woman clerk needs for passage to 
the offices of the Occupational Commandant." 

The inquisitor filled in blanks in a stiff 
sheet of paper and stamped a seal at its 
bottom. 

"You will add in the portion reserved 
for 'comments', the following: 'Capable 
clerk. Others will follow as they are found 
available.' " 

The man's pen scratched away obediently. 

Evelyn Kane smiled gently at the impotent, inwardly raging inquisitor. She 
took the paper, folded it, and placed it in 
a pocket in her blouse. "Call the guards," 
she ordered. 

He pressed the button on his desk, and 
the guards re-entered. 

"This person is no longer a prisoner," 
said the inquisitor woodenly. "She is to 
take the next transport to the Occupational 
Commandant of Zone One." 

When the transport had left, neither 
inquisitor nor guards had any memory of 
the woman. However, in the due course of 



88 PLANET STOtUES 

events, the recording was gathered up with 
many others like it, boxed carefully, and 
sent to the Office of the Occupational 
Commandant, Zone One, for auditing. 



EVELYN was extremely careful with 
her mental probe as she descended 
from the transport. The Occupational 
Commandant would undoubtedly be highborn and telepathic. He must not have 
occasion to suspect a similar ability in a 
mere clerk. 

Fighting had passed this way, too, and 
recently. Many of the buildings were still 
smoking, and many of the radions high 
above were either shot out or obscured by 
slowly drifting dust clouds. The acrid 
odor of radiation- remover was everywhere. 

She caught the sound of spasmodic 
small-arm fire. 

"What is that?" she asked the transport 
attendant. 

"The Commandant is shooting prisoners/* he replied laconically. 
"Oh." 

"Where did you want to go?" 
"To the personnel office." 
"That way." He pointed to the largest 
building of the group — two stories high, 
reasonably intact. 

She walked off down the gravel path, 
which was stained here and there with 
dark sticky red. She gave her visa to the 
guard at the door and was admitted to an 
improvised waiting room, where another 
guard eyed her stonily. The firing was 
much nearer. She recognized the obscene 
coughs of a Faeg pistol and began to feel 
sick. 

A woman in the green uniform of the 
Scythe auxiliary came in, whispered something to the guard, and then told Evelyn 
to follow her. 

In the anteroom a grey cat looked her 
over curiously, and Evelyn frowned. She 
might have to get rid of the cat if she 
stayed here. Under certain circumstances 
the animal could prove her deadliest 
enemy. 

The next room held a foppish little man, 
evidently a supervisor of some sort, who 
was studying her visa. 

"Fm very happy to have you here, S'ria 



— ill — "—he looked at the visa suspiciously 
— "S'ria Lyn. Do sit down. But, as I 
was just remarking to S'ria Gerek, here" 
— he nodded to the other woman, who 
smiled back— "I wish the field officers 
would make up their august minds as to 
whether they want you or don't want you. 
Just why did they transfer you to H.Q. ?" 
She thought quickly. This pompous 
little ass would have to be given some 
answer that would keep him from checking 
with the inquisitor. It would have to be 
something personal. She looked at the 
false black in his eyebrows and sideburns, 
and the artificial way in which he had 
combed hair over his bald spot, She 
crossed her knees slowly, ignoring the narrowing eyes of S'ria Gerek, and smoothed 
the back of her braided yellow hair. He 
was studying her covertly. 

"The men in the fighting zones are uncouth, S'rin Gorph," she said simply. "I 

was told that you, that is, I mean " 

"Yes?" he was the soul of graciousness. 
S'ria Gerek began to dictate loudly into her 
mechanical transcriber. 

Evelyn cleared her throat, averted her 
eyes, and with some effort, managed a 
delicate flush. "I meant to say, I thought 
I would be happier working for — working 
here. So I asked for a transfer." 

S'rin Gorph beamed. "Splendid. But 
the occupation isn't over, yet, you know. 
There'll be hard work here for several 
weeks yet, before we cut loose from the 
enemy globe. But you do your work well" 
—winking artfully— "and I'll see that—" 
He stopped, and his face took on a 
hunted look of mingled fear and anxiety. 
He appeared to listen. 

Evelyn tensed her mind to receive and 
deceive a mental probe. She was certain 
now that the Zone Commandant was highborn and telepathic. The chances were 
only fifty-fifty that she could delude him 
for any length of time if he became interested in her. He must be avoided if at 
all possible. It should not be too difficult. 
He undoubtedly had a dozen personal .secretaries and/or concubines and would take 
small interest in the lowly employees that 
amused Gorph. 

Gorph looked at her uncertainly. "Perat, 
Viscount of the Tharn Suns, sends you 



STALED ATE I2V SPACE 



89 



his compliments and wishes to see you on 
the balcony." He pointed to a hallway. 
"All the way through there, across to the 
other wing/' 

As she left, she heard all sound in the 
room stop. The transcribing and calculating machines trailed off into a watchful 
silence, and she could feel the eyes of the 
men and women on her back. She noticed 
then that the Faeg had ceased firing. 

HER heart was beating faster as she 
walked down the hall. She felt a 
very strong probe flooding over her brain 
casually, palping with mild interest the 
artificial memories she supplied : Escapades 
with officers in the combat areas. Reprimands. Demotion and transfer. Her deception of Gorph. Her anticipation of 
meeting a real Viscount and hoping he 
would let her dance for him. 

The questing probe withdrew as idly as 
it had come, and she breathed a sigh of 
relief. She could not hope to deceive a 
suspicious telepath for long. Perat was 
merely amused at her "lie" to his undersupervisor. He had accepted her at her 
own face value, as supplied by her false 
memories. 

She opened the door to the balcony and 
saw a man leaning moodily on the balustrade. He gave no immediate notice of 
her presence. 

The five hundred and sixth heir of 
Tharn was of uncertain age, as were most 
of the men of both globes. Only the left 
side of his face could be seen. It was gaunt 
and leathery, and a- deep thin scar lifted 
the corner of his mouth into a satanic 
smile. A faint paunch was gathering at 
his abdomen, as befitted a warrior turned 
to boring paper work. His closely cut 
black hair and the two sparkling redgemmed rings — apparently identical — on 
his right hand seemed to denote a certain 
fastidiousness and unconscious superiority. 
To Evelyn the jeweled fingers bespoke an 
unnatural contrast to the past history of 
the man and were symptomatic of a personality that could find stimulation only 
in strange and cruel pleasures. 

In alarm she suddenly realized that she 
had inadvertently let her appraisal penetrate her uncovered conscious mind, and 



that this probe was there awaiting it. 

"You are right/' he said coldly, still 
staring into the court below. "Now that 
the long battle is over, there is little left 
to divert me." 

He pushed the Faeg across the coping 
toward her. "Take this." 

He had not as yet looked at her. 

She crossed the balcony, simultaneously 
grasping the pistol he offered her and looking down into the courtyard. There seemed 
to be nearly twenty Terrans lying about, 
in pools of their own blood. 

Only one man, a Terran officer of very 
high rank — was left standing. His arms 
were folded somberly across his chest, and 
he studied the killer above him almost casually. But when the woman came out, 
their eyes met, and he started imperceptibly. 

Evelyn Kane felt a horrid chill creeping 
over her. The man's hair was white, now, 
and his proud face lined with deep furrows, but there could be no mistake. It 
was Gordon, Lord Kane. 

Her father. 

The sweat continued to grow on her 
forehead, and she felt for a moment that she 
needed only to wish hard enough, and this 
would be a dream. A dream of a big, 
kind, dark-haired man with laugh-wrinkles 
about his eyes, who sat her on his knee 
when she was a little girl and read bedtime stories to her from a great book with 
many pictures. 

An icy, amused voice came through: 
"Our orders are to kill all prisoners. It is 
entertaining to shoot down helpless men, 
isn't it? It warms me to know that I am 
cruel and wanton, and worthy of my 
trust." 

Even in the midst of her horror, a cold, 
analytical part of her was explaining why 
the Commandant had called her to the balcony. Because all captured Terrans had to 
be killed, he hated his superiors, his own 
men, and especially the prisoners. A task 
so revolting he could not relegate to his 
own officers. He must do it himself, but 
he wanted his underlings to know he 
loathed them for it. She was merely a 
symbol of that contempt. His next words 
did not surprise her. 

"It is even more stimulating to require 



90 



PLANET STORIES 



a shuddering female to kill them. You 
are shuddering you know?" 

She nodded dumbly. Her palm was so 
wet that a drop of sweat dropped from 
it to the floor. She was thinking hard. 
She could kill the Commandant and save 
her father for a little while. But then the 
problem of detonating the pile remained, 
and it would not be solved more quickly 
by killing the man who controlled the pile 
area. On the contrary if she could get him 

interested in her 

"So far as our records indicate/' murmured Perat, "the man down there is the 
last living Terran within The Defender. 
It occurred to me that our newest clerk 
would like to start off her duties with a 
bang. The Faeg is adjusted to a needlebeam. If you put a bolt between the man's 
eyes, you may dance for me tonight, and 

perhaps there will be other nights " 

The woman seemed lost in thought for 
a long time. Slowly, she lifted the ugly 
little weapon. The doomed Terran looked 
up at her peacefully, without expression. 
She lowered the Faeg, her arm trembling. 
Gordon, Lord Kane, frowned faintly, 
then closed his eyes. She raised the gun 
again, drew cross hairs with a nerveless 
wrist, and squeezed the trigger. There 
was a loud, hollow cough, but no recoil. 
The Terran officer, his eyes still closed 
and arms folded, sank to the ground, face 
up. Blood was running from a tiny hole 
in his forehead. 

The man leaning on the balustrade 
turned and looked at Evelyn, at first with 
amused contempt, then with narrowing, 
questioning eyes. 

"Come here," he ordered. 
The Faeg dropped from her hand. With 
a titanic effort she activated her legs and 
walked toward him. 

He was studying her face very carefully. 

She felt that she was going to be sick. 
Her knees were so weak that she had to 
lean on the coping. 

With a forefinger he lifted up the mass 
of golden curls that hung over her right 
forehead and examined the scar hidden 
there, where the mentors had cut into 
her frontal lobe. The tiny doll they had 
created for her writhed uneasily in her 



waist purse, but Perat seemed to be thinking of something else, and missed the 
significance of the scar completely. 

He dropped his hand. "I'm sorry," he 
said with a quiet weariness. "I shouldn't 
have asked you to kill the Terran. It was 
a sorry joke." Then : "Have you ever seen 
me before?" 

"No," she whispered hoarsely. His 
mind was in hers, verifying the fact. 

"Have you ever met my father, Phaen, 
the old Count of Tharn?" 

"No." 

"Do you have a son?" 

"No." 

His mind was out of hers again, and he 
had turned moodily back, surveying the 
courtyard and the dead. "Gorph will be 
wondering what happened to you. Come 
to my quarters at the eighth metron tonight." 

Apparently he suspected nothing. 

Father. Father. I had to do it. But 
we'll all join you, soon. Soon. 

Ill 

DERAT LAY ON HIS COUCH, SIPA ping cold purple terif and following 
the thinly-clad dancer with narrowed eyes. 
Music, soft and subtle, floated from his 
communications box, illegally tuned to an 
officer's club somewhere. Erelyn made the 
rhythm part of her as she swayed slowly 
on tiptoe. 

For the last thirty "nights"— the hours 
allotted to rest and sleep — it had been 
thus. By "day" she probed furtively into 
the minds of the office staff, memorizing 
area designations, channels for official 
messages, and the names and authorizations of occupational field crews. By night 
she danced for Perat, who never took his 
eyes from her, nor his probe from her 
mind. While she danced it was not too 
difficult to elude the probe. There was an 
odd autohypnosis in dancing that blotted 
out memory and knowledge. 

"Enough for now," he ordered. "Careful 
of your rib." 

When he had first seen the bandages on 
her bare chest, that first night, she had 
been ready with a memory of dancing on 
a freshly waxed floor, and of falling. 



STALEMATE IK SPACE 



Perat seamed to be debating with himself as she sat down on her own couch to 
rest. He got up, unlocked his desk, and 
drew out a tiny reel of metal wire, which 
Evelyn recognized as being feed for an 
amateur stereop projector. He placed the 
reel in a projector that had been installed 
in the wall, flicked off the table luminar, 
and both of them waited in the dark, 
breathing rather loudly. 

Suddenly the center of the room was 
bright with a ball of light some two feet 
in diameter, and inside the luminous sphere 
were an old man, a woman, and a little boy 
of about four years. They were walking 
through a luxurious garden, and then they 
stopped, looked up, and waved gaily. 

Evelyn studied the trio with growing 
wonder. The old man and the boy were 
complete strangers. But the wonian^ / 

"That is Phaen, my father," said Perat 
quietly. "He stayed at home because he 
hated war. And that is a path in our 
country estate on Tharn-R-VII. The little 
boy I fail to recognize, beyond a general 
resemblance to the Tharn line. 

"But — c*n you deny that you are the 
icoman?" 

The stereop snapped off, and she sat 
wordless in the dark. 

"There seemed to be some similarity — " 
she admitted. Her throat was suddenly 
dry. Yet, why should she be alarmed? 
She really didn't know the woman. 

The table luminar was on now, and 
Perat was prowling hungrily about the 
room, his scar twisting his otherwise handsome face into a snarling scowl. 

"Similarity! Bah! That loop of hair 
over her right forehead hid a scar identical 
to yours. I have had the individual frames 
analyzed!" 

Evelyn's hands knotted unconsciously. 
She forced her body to relax, but her mind 
was racing. This introduced another variable to be controlled in her plan for 
destruction. She must make it a known 
quantity. 

"Did your father send it to you?" she 
asked. 

"The day before you arrived here. It 
had been en route for months, of course." 

"What did he say about it?" 

"He said, 'Your widow and son send 




And then the cat pounced! 



greetings. Be of good cheer, and accept 
our love.' What nonsense ! He knows very 
well I'm not married and that — well, if I 
have ever fathered any children, I don't 
know about them." 

"Is that all he said?" 

"That's all, except that he included this 
ring." He pulled one of the duplicate 
jewels from his right middle finger and 
tossed it to her. "It's identical to the one 
he had made for me when I entered on 
my majority. For a long time it was 
thought that it was the only stone of its 
kind on all the planets of the Tharn suns, 
a mineralogical freak, but I guess he found 
another. But why should I want two of 
them?" 

Evelyn crossed the room and returned 
the ring. 

"Existence is so full of mysteries, isn't 
it?" murmured Perat. "Sometimes it 
seems unfortunate that we must pass 
through a sentient phase on our way to 
death. This foolish, foolish war. Maybe 
the old count was right." 

"You could be courtmartialed for that." 

"Speaking of courtmartials, I've got to 
attend one tonight — an appeal from a 
death sentence." He arose, smoothed his 
hair and clothes, and poured another glass 
of terif. "Some fool inquisitor can't show 
proper disposition of a woman prisoner." 

Evelyn's heart skipped a beat "Indeed?" 



92 



PLANET STORIES 



"The wretch insists that he could remember if we would just let him alone. I 
suppose he took a bribe. You'll find one 
now and then who tries for a little extra 
profit" 

She must absolutely not be seen by the 
condemned inquisitor. The stimulus would 
almost certainly make him remember. 

"I'll wait for you," she said indifferently, 
thrusting her arms out in a langourous 
yawn. 

"Very well/' Perat stepped to the door, 
then turned and looked back at her. "On 
the other hand, I may need a clerk. It's 
way after hours, and the others have 
gone." 

Beneath a gesture of wry protest, she 
swallowed rapidly. 

"Perhaps you'd better come," insisted 
Perat. 

She stood up, unloosed her waist purse, 
checked its contents swiftly, and then followed him out. 

This might be a very close thing. From 
the purse she took a bottle of perfume and 
rubbed her ear lobes casually. 

"Odd smell/' commented Perat, wrinkling his nose. 

"Odd scent," corrected Evelyn cryptically. She was thinking about the earnest 
faces of the mentors as they instructed her 
carefully in the use of the "perfume." The 
adrenalin glands, they had explained, provided a useful and powerful stimulant to a 
man in danger. Adrenalin slowed the heart 
and digestion, increased the systole and 
blood pressure, and increased perspiration 
to cool the skin. But there could be too 
much of a good thing. An overdose of adrenalin, they had pointed out, caused almost immediate edema. The lungs filled 
rapidly with the serum and the victim. . . 
drowned. The perfume she possessed overstimulated, in some unknown way, the 
adrenals of frightened persons. It had no 
effect on inactive adrenals. 

The question remained — who would be 
the more frightened, she or the condemned 
inquisitor? 

She was perspiring freely, and the 
blonde hair on her arms and neck was 
standing stiffly when Perat opened the 
door for her and they entered the Zone 
Provost's chambers. 



ONE glance at the trembling creature 
in the prisoner's chair reassured her. 
The ex-inquisitor, shorn of his insignia, 
shabby and stubble-bearded, sat huddled 
in his chair and from time to time swept 
his grave tormentors with glazed eyes. He 
looked a long while at Evelyn. 

She got out her bottle of perfume idly 
and held it open in her warm hand. The 
officers and judge-provost were listening 
to the opening address of the prosecution 
and took no notice of her. 

More and more frequently the condemned man turned his gaze to Evelyn. She 
poured a little of the scent on her handkerchief. The prisoner coughed and rubbed his chin, trying to think. 

The charges were finally read, and the 
defense attorney began his opening statement. The prisoner, now coughing more 
frequently, was oblivious to all but the 
woman. Once she thought she saw a flicker 
of recognition in his eyes, and she fanned 
herself hurriedly with her handkerchief. 

The trial droned on to a close. It was 
a mere formality. The prosecutor summed up by proving that a Terran woman 
had been captured, possibly named Evelyn 
Kane, turned over to the defendant for 
registration and disposal, and that the defendant's weekly accounts failed to show a 
receipt for the release of the woman. 
Q.E.D., the death sentence must be affirmed. 

The light in the prisoner's eyes was 
growing clearer, despite his bronchial difficulties. He began now to pay attention to 
what was said and to take notice of the 
other faces. It was as though he had 
finally found the weapon he wanted, and 
patiently awaited an opportunity to use it. 

The defense was closing. Counsel for 
the prisoner declared that the latter might 
have been the innocent victim of the escapee, Evelyn Kane, possibly a telepathic 
Terran woman, because only a fool would 
have permitted a prisoner to escape without attempting to juggle the prison records, unless his mind had been under telepathic control. They ought to be looking 
for Evelyn Kane now, instead of wasting 
time with her victim. She might be anywhere. She might even be in this building. He bowed apologetically to Evelyn, 



STALEMATE IN SPACE 



93 



Si«i?* 




She did not shriek when the belt tore through her* 



94 



PLANET STORIES 



she smiled at the faces suddenly looking at 
her with new interest. 

The man in the prisoner's chair was 
peering at Evelyn through half-closed eyes, 
his arms crossed on his chest. He had 
stopped coughing, and the fingers of his 
right hand were tapping patiently on his 
sleeve. 

If Perat should at this moment probe 
the prisoner's mind . . . 

Evelyn, in turning to smile at Perat, 
knocked the bottle from the table to the 
floor, where it broke in a liquid tinkle. She 
put her hands to her mouth in contrite 
apology. The judge-provost frowned, and 
Perat eyed her curiously. The prisoner 
was seized with such a spasm of coughing 
that the provost, who had stood to pronounce sentence, paused in annoyance. 
The wracking ceased. 

The provost picked up the Faeg lying 
before him. 

"Have you anything to say before you 
die?" he asked coldly. 

The ex-inquisitor stood and turned a 
triumphant face to him. "Excellency, you 
ask, where is the woman prisoner who escaped from me? Well, I can tell you . . ." 

He clutched wildly at his throat, coughed horridly, and bent in Evelyn Kane's 
direction. 

"She .:.." 

His lips, which were rapidly growing 
purple, moved without saying anything intelligible, and he suddenly crashed over the 
chair and to the floor. 

The prison physician leaped to him, 
stethoscope out. After a few minutes, he 
stood up, puzzled and frowning, in the 
midst of a strained silence. "Odd, very 
odd," he muttered. 

"Did the prisoner faint?" asked the 
judge-provost incuriously, lowering the 
Faeg. 

"The prisoner's lungs are filled with 
liquid, apparently the result of hyperactive 
adrenals," commented the baffled physician. "He's dead, and don't ask me to 
explain why." 

Evelyn smothered a series of hacking 
coughs in her handkerchief as the court 
broke up in excited groups. From the 
corner of her eye she saw that Perat was 
studying her thoughtfully. 



IV 



TWO WEEKS LATER, VERY 
late at "night", Perat lay stretched 
gloomily on his sleeping couch. On the 
other side of the room Evelyn was curled 
luxuriously on her own damasked lounge, 
her head propped high. She was scanning 
some of the miniature stereop reels that 
Perat had brought from his far-distant 
home planet. 

"Those green trees and hedges ... so 
far away," she mused. "Do you ever 
think about seeing them again?" 

"Of late, I've been thinking about them 
quite a bit." 

What did he mean by that? 

"I understood it would be months before the field crews cut us loose from the 
Terran ship," she said. 

'Indeed?" 

"Well? Won't it?" 

Perat turned his moody face toward her. 
"No, it won't. The field crews have been 
moving at breakneck speed, on account of 
some unfounded rumor or other that the 
Terran ship is going to explode. On orders from our High Command, we pull out 
of here by the end of the working day tomorrow. Within twenty metrons from 
now, our ship parts company with the enemy globe." 

The scar on her forehead was throbbing 
violently. There was no time now to send 
the false orders to the field crew she had 
selected. She must think a bit. 

"It seems then, this is our last night together." 

"It is." 

She rose from her couch and walked 
the room like a caged beast. 

"You could hardly take me, a commoner, back with you . . ." 

With growing shock she realized that 
she was more than half sincere in her request. 

"It is not done. It is unlike you to 
suggest it." 

"Well, that's that, I suppose." She stopped and toyed idly with a box of chessmen 
on his table. "Would you care for a game 
of Terran chess ? I'll try to play very intelligently, so that you won't be too terribly bored." 



STALEMATE 

"If you like. But there are more interesting . . ." 

"Do you think," she interrupted quickly, 
"that you could beat me without sight of 
the board or pieces ?" 

"What do you mean by that?" 

"I just thought it would be more interesting for you. I'll take the board over to 
my bed, and you call out your moves and 
I'll tell you my replies. I'll see the board, 
but you won't." 

"A curious variant." 

"But you must promise to keep out of 
my mind; otherwise you would know my 
plans." 

He smiled, "Set up the pieces. What 
color do you want?" 

"Ill defend. Give me black." 

She loosed her waist-purse, took a handkerchief from it, and set the purse on the 
deep carpet in the shadow of her table. 
She unfolded the chessboard in front of 
her on the couch and quickly placed the 
pieces. "I'm ready," she announced. 

Indeed, everything was in readiness now 
except that she didn't know where the cat 
was. She regretted bitterly not having 
killed that innocent mouser weeks ago. 

"Pawn to king four," announced Perat, 
gazing idly at the ceiling. 

She made the move and replied, "Pawn 
to king three." 

From the unlaced purse hidden on the 
floor a tiny head thrust itself out, followed 
soon by a pair of miniscule shoulders. 

"Have you studied this Terran game?" 
queried Perat curiously, "or don't you 
know enough to seize the center on your 
first move?" 

"Have I made an error already? Was 
that the wrong move?" 

"It's the first move in a complete defensive system, but few people outside of 
Terrans understand it. Pawn to queen 
four." 

She had blundered in attempting the 
French Defense, but it was not too late to 
convert to something that could be expected of a Scythian woman beginner. "Pawn 
to queen three." 

The grey doll was out of the purse, 
sidling through the shadows to the door, 
which stood slightly ajar. 

"So you don't know the book moves, 



fiV SPACE 



95 



after all. You would really have astonished me if you had moved your queen 
pawn two squares. I'll play pawn to king 
bishop four. Will you have some terif?" 

He spun around upright and reached for 
the decanter, looking full at the door . . . 
and the tiny figure. 

Evelyn was up at once, cutting off his 
line of vision. "Yes, I think I will have 
one," 

Telepathically she ordered the little 
creature to dash through the crack in the 
doorway. She heard the faint rustle behind her as she picked up the glass Perat 
poured. 

"You know," he said thoughtfully, "for 
a moment I thought I saw your little doll 

She looked at him dubiously. "Really, 
Perat? It's in my purse." 

He stepped lithely to the door and flung 
it open. Far down the hall there was the 
faintest suggestion of a scuffle. 

"A mouse, I guess." He returned to his 
bed, but it was plain that he was unsatisfied. 

THE GAME wore on for half a metron. Perat's combinations were met 
with almost sufficient counter-combinations, so that the issue hung in doubt for 
move after move. 

"You've improved considerably since 
yesterday," he admitted grudgingly. 

"Not at all. It's your playing /blind' 
that makes us even. No cheating ! Keep 
out of my mind! It isn't fair to know 
what I'm planning." 

Oh, by the merciful god of Galaxus, if 
he'll stay out of mind and the cat out of 
the communications room for another five 
minutes 1 

"All right, all right. I'll win anyway," 
he muttered, as he concluded a combination that netted him the black queen. "You 
could gracefully resign right now." 

Evelyn studied the position carefully. She 
had made a grave miscalculation — the 
queen loss had definitely not been a part 
of the plan. She must contrive a delaying action that would invoke an oral argument. 

"Bishop to queen rook eight," she murmured. Her telepathic probe, f ocussed on 



96 PLANET 

the bit of nervous tissue that the mentors 
had cut from her frontal lobe and given to 
her mannikin as a brain, continued its 
tight control. In Gorph's office, far down 
the wing, the little creature was hopping 
painstakingly from one key to another of 
the dispatch printing machine. 

". . . takes priority over all other pending projects . . y 

"Your game is hopeless," scowled Perat. "I'm a queen and the exchange up 
on you." 

"I always play the game out," replied 
Evelyn easily. "You never know what 
might happen. Your move." 

". . . five horizontal columns of metallic trans-scythium nine hundred xedars 
long mill be found in a Terran storeroom, 
our area code . . ." 

"All right, then. Queen takes pawn." 

"Pawn to queen knight seven," replied 
Evelyn. It was her sole remaining pawn, 
and she hoped to use it in an odd way. 

Perat checked with his queen at queen 
bishop four, and Evelyn's king slid to 
safety at queen knight eight. Perat moved 
his rook from queen knight five to queen 
five. 

"Do you intend to mate with rook to 
queen's square next move?" asked Evelyn 
demurely. 

''under the strictest secrecy. Therefore 
you are ordered not to communicate ..." 

"Nothing can prevent it," observed the 
Viscount of Tharn somberly. He had already lost all interest in the game and was 
contemplating the ceiling tapestries. With 
a lurch she brought her telepathic probe to 
rest, ready to prepare a false front for his 
searching mind. She must keep him out a 
moment longer, or all was lost. 

"But it's my move, and I have no move," 
she objected, focussing her probe again. 

". . .signed, Perat, Viscount of Tharn, 
Commandant, Occupation Zone One/' 

Through that distant fragment of her 
mind she sensed that something was watching the doll with feral interest. 

The cat. 

"So? No move? Then you lose," replied Perat. 

"But my king isn't in check. You told 
me yourself that when my king was not in 
check, and I had no legal move, that I was 



STORIES 

stalemated, and the game was a draw." 

In that other room, her telepathic contact guided the little figure down the table 
leg. Slowly now, don't excite the cat into 
pouncing. She had only seconds left, but 
it should suffice to place the dispatch in 
Gorph's incoming box. The pompous little supervisor would send it by the first jet 
messenger without doubt or question, and 
the field crew would proceed to draw the 
five columns. 

Pain daggered into her right leg! 

THE cat had seized her homunculus by 
the thigh ; she knew the tiny bone had 
been crushed. She caught fleet, dizzy impressions of the animal striding off proudly 
with the little creature between its jaws. 
The letter lay where it had fallen, under 
the dispatch machine, almost invisible. 

The doll ceased her blind writing and 
drew a tiny black cylinder from her belt. 
The cat's right eye loomed huge above her. 

Mentally, Perat studied the chessboard 
position with growing interest. 

"Idiotic Terran game," he growled. 
"Only a Terran would conceive of the idea 
of calling a crushing defeat a drawn battle. 
I'm sorry I taught you the game. It's 
really quite — what was that?" 

"Sounded like the cat, didn't it?" responded Evelyn. 

Her tiny alter ego had dropped from 
those destructive jaws and was dragging 
itself slowly back to the dispatch. It found 
the message and picked it up. 

"Do you think something could have 
hurt it?" asked Evelyn. 

The doll struggled toward Gorph's desk, 
leaving behind a thin red trail. 

Then several things happened. Hot 
swords sizzled in Evelyn's back, and she 
knew the enraged feline had broken the 
spinal column of the doll. With throbbing 
intuition she collapsed her telepathic tentacle. 

Too late. 

Perat's probe was already in her mind, 
and she knew that he had caught the full 
impact of her swift telepathic return. She 
lay there limply. Her rib, now almost 
healed, began to ache dully. 

The man continued to lie motionless, 
staring heavy-lidded at the ceiling. Grad


STALEMATE IIV SPACE 



97 



ually, his mind withdrew itself from hers. 
"So you're high-born," he mused aloud, 
"I should have known, but then, you concealed it very adroitly, didn't you?" 

She sat up against the wall. Her heart 
was pounding almost audibly. 

He was relentless. "No Scythian would 
play chess the way you did. Only a Terran would play for a draw after total defeat." 

"I play chess well, so I am a Terran?" 
she whispered through a dry throat. 

Perat turned his handsome grey eyes 
from the ceiling and smiled at her. His 
mouth lifted venomously as he watched 
her begin to tremble. 

"Pour me a terif, 39 he ordered. 
She arose, feeling that she must certainly collapse the next instant. She forced 
her legs to move, step by step, to the table 
by his couch. There she picked up the 
terif decanter and tipped it to fill his glass. 
The dry clatter of bottle on glass betrayed 
her shaking hands. 

"One for you, too, my dear Lyn." 
She -held the decanter several inches 
above her glass to avoid that horrible clatter, and managed to spill quite a bit on 
the table. 

Perat held his glass up to touch hers. 
"A toast," he smiled, "to a mysterious and 
beautiful lady!" 

He drank prone, she standing. She 
knew she would spill her drink if she tried 
to recross to her couch. 

"So you're a Terran? Then why did 
you kill the Terran officer on the balcony?" 
She was so relieved that she sank limply 
to the floor beside him. 

"Why should I tell you? Yo>i wouldn't 
believe anything I told you now, or that 
you found in my mind." She smiled up 
at him. 

"True, true. Quite a dilemma. Should 
I shoot you now and possibly bring the 
rage of a noble Scythian house down about 
my ears, or should I submit you to mechanical telepathic analysis?" 

"I am yours, viscount," she laughed. 
"Shoot me. Analyze me. Whatever you 
wish." 

She knew her gaiety was forced, and 
that it had struck a false note. The iron 

7— Planet— Summer 



SONG-WRITERS ATTENTION 

The amazing demand for phonograph records, accelerated by countless Juke-Boxes, warrants your 
immediate investigation. We are offering New 
Writers the rare opportunity of having a celebrated "Hit" composer furnish music on reduced 
percentage basis for any likely poems received this 
month. The "Petrillo Ban" does not affect us. 

RECOLA RECORDING CO., Box 987FH, Hollywood 28, Calif. 



SONG POEMS WANTED 

TO BE SET TO M V S M C 

Send your Poems today for Free Examination to 

J. CHAS. McNElX 

A.B. MASTER OF MUSIC 
510-FH So. Alexandria Los Angeles 5, Calif. 




■HfiB^Show It— then pitch It up Into the air-* 
Its now completely disappeared, yet when you reach inter 
• spectator's pocket you produce the same card — It's com* 
pjfte, ready to perform, easy to do, price only , — 



"THE MAGICIAN' 



2463 F- Kensington Avenue. Phlla. 29. 



£M 



NEW FRIENDS? 



I ARE YOU LONELY? 
Find them through correspondence. Nation - Wide contacts. 
_p Send li stamp for free details. 

INTERNATIONAL BUREAU. Dcpt. 38, Box 157, G.P.O., Hew York 1 




KEEP A FIRM GRIP ON 

YOUTH 

at 45-55-65 
Pep up to Win 

If you are losing nerve 
force, pep. energy, am, bltion — and a full. fin» 
1 youthful grip on life— 
• ft may be for want of 
enough vital elements often needed AFTER 
40. One of America's great laboratories 
lias now produced JOY TABLETS. This dependable new VITAMINIZED Tonic and 
£ ITTERS with Real ORGANIC Iron is intended for ADULTS ONLY. In One Night 
it can begin to ACT. Full three weeks 
supply of JOY TABLETS — taken three 
times a day — must bring tremendous increase in Nerve. Force, Energy and Power 
to any man or woman past 40 — ana 
thoroughly satisfy— or NO CHARGE. Youi 
money back if not positively delighted 
100 per cent. Nothing else the same. So, 
get JOY TABLETS today. Send SI .98 Cash, 
Check or Money Order and receive JOY 
f ABLETS in plain wrapper (postage pre* 
paiid} Or if you prefer, order C.O.D. and 
My postman $1.98 plus posta ge and 
£To.D. fees. JOY PRODUCTS. 900 Westside Ave., Dept. 91, JERSEY CITY, N. J. 



I 



Please mention Fiction House Magazine Group when answering advertisements 



98 



PLANET STORIES 



gate of doubt had clanged shut between 
them. From now on he would contain her 
mind in the mental prison of his own. The 
dispatch beside Gorph's desk could have 
no further aid from her. Anyway, the cat 
had undoubtedly carried off the doll. 

"What a strange woman you are," he 
murmured. A brief shadow crossed his 
face. "With you, for a little while, I have 
been happy. But in a few metrons, of 
course, you will depart under close arrest 
for the psych center, and I'll be on my way 
back to the Tharn suns." 

Within half a metron the office force 
wouH begin straggling into the Administration offices and her letter would be 
found and given to a puzzled Gorph, who 
would then query Perat as to whether it 
should not be in the incoming box for urgent matters. But what would Gorph do 
if his superior refused to communicate 
with him or anyone else for a full metron ? 
The first messenger jet left very soon, and 
there was no other for four metrons. 
Would Gorph send it on the first jet, or 
would he wait? It was a chance she'd 
have to take. 

She got up from the floor and sat down 
on the couch besjde the Viscount of Tharn. 
"Perat," she began hesitantly, "I know you 
must send me away. I'm sorry, because I 
don't want to leave you so soon, and you 
do not want me to leave you until the last 
moment, either. Anything else that I 
would tell you, you might doubt, so I say 
nothing more. I would like to dance for 
you. When I dance, I tell the truth." 

"Yes, dance, but take care of your rib," 
assented the man moodily. 

She filled his glass again with a sure 
hand and replaced it on the table. Then 
she unloosed the combs in her hair and let 
it fall in a- profusion of curls about her 
shoulders, where it scintillated in a myriad 
sparkling semicircles, in the soft light of 
the table luminar. 

She shook her shoulders to scatter her 
hair, and unhurriedly released the clasp of 
her outer lounging gown. The heavy robe 
fell about her feet, leaving her clad only 
in a thin, flowing undergarment, which 
she smoothed languidly while she kicked 
off her slippers. Her mouth was now 
half-parted, her eyelids drooping and 



slumbrous. Perat was still staring at the 
ceiling, but she knew his mind was flowing unceasingly over her body. 

"I must have music," she whispered. 
The man made no protest when she pressed the controls on his communications box 
to receive the slow and haunting dance 
music from the officers' club in the next 



zone. 

The main avenue of access to Perat was 
now cut. And Gorph was a bolder man 
than she thought if he dared knock on the 
door of his chief while she was inside. 

She began to sway and to chant. "The 
Song of Karos, the Great God of Scythe, 
Father of Tharn folk, Dweller in Darkness . . ."" 

Perat's glass halted, then proceeded 
slowly to his lips. Of course, no educated 
nobleman admitted a belief in the ancient 
religion of the Scythes, but how good it 
was to hear it sung and danced again? 
Not since his boyhood, when his mother 
had dragged him to the temple by main 
force ... He placed one palm behind his 
head and continued to sip and to think, as 
this strange, lovely woman unraveled with 
undulant body and husky voice the long, 
satisfying story of his god. 

As she postured sinuously, Evelyn 
breathed a silent prayer of thanks to the 
dead mentors who had crammed her to 
bursting with Scythe folklore. 

The luminous metron dial revolved with 
infinite slowness. 



ONE METRON HAD PASSED 
when Perat laid his empty glass on 
the table, without releasing it. 

"Enough of dancing," he murmured 
with cold languor, cutting his communications box back to its authorized channel, 
"Come here, my dear. I wish you to kiss 
me." 

Evelyn glided instantly to the silken 
couch, tossing her hair back over her 
shoulders and ignoring the fact that her 
rib was alive with pain. She knelt over 
the reclining man and kissed him on the 
mouth, running her fingers lightly down 
his right arm. He relinquished his glass 
at her touch, and she refilled it absently. 



STALEMATE IJV SPACE 



93 



Only then did she notice that something 
was wrong. 

His left hand was no longer beneath 
his head, but was concealed in the mass 
of cushions that overflowed his couch in 
a mute, glittering cascade. 

Perat swirled his glass silently, apparently watching only the tiny flashes of iridescence flowing from his jeweled right 
hand. 

Evelyn thought: What made him suspicious? There's something in his left 
hand. If I only dared probe . . . But he'd 
know I was afraid, and I'm not supposed 
to be afraid. Anyway, in a little while it 
won't matter. If the field crew has started 
pulling the columns, they should be 
through in half a metron. If they haven't 
started, they never will, and nothing will 
matter then, anyway. 

The man's face was inscrutable when 
he finally spoke, "You couldn't have 
gone on much longer, anyway, on account 
of your rib." 

"It was becoming a little painful." 

"Twice you nearly fainted." 

So he had noticed that. 

He continued mercilessly. "Why were 
you so anxious to keep me shut up for a 
whole metron?" 

"I wanted to amuse you. We have so 
little time left, now." 

"So I thought, until your rib began to 
trouble you, The reaction of an ordinary 
woman would have been to stop." 

"Am I an ordinary woman?" 

"Decidedly not. That's why the situation has become so interesting." 

"I don't understand, Perat." She sat 
down beside him, forcing him to move his 
legs so that his left hand was jammed under the cushion. 

"A little while ago, I decided to contact Gorph's mind." He took a sip. "It 
seems he had been trying to reach me 
through the communications box." 

"He had?" She pictured Gorph's oldwomanish anxiety. He had found the 
sealed message, then, but hadn't been able 
to verify it because his chief had been listening to a tale of gods. Had he or 
had he not sent the message by the early 
jet? It had to be! Possibly all five of 




BELIEVE IN LUCK?-: 



"prevent" Bad 



i Carry a parr of GENUINE BRAHMA 
fRED LIVE HIGHLY MAGNETIC LODE; 
I ST ON ESI Legend reputes, Occult Oriental 
■ancients superstltlously carried two Llv« 
Lodestones as MOST POWERFUL MAGNETIC "LUCKY" CHARMS, one to "attract" Good Luck In Money, Games, 
Love, Business, Work, etc., the other 
Luck, Losses, Evil, Trouble, Harm, etc. 
Believe In Luck? Carry a Pair of these curious Genuine 
Brahma Red Live Lodestenesl We make no supernatural claims, 
$1.97 Postpaid for the two, with all information. 28o extra It 
C.O.D. Send $1.97 and ;j»ave 28c. Satisfaction GUARANTEED 
or Money Returned, Order yours NOW! 

ASTROL CO., Dept. 45, Main P. O. 
Box 72, BROOKLYN, N. Y. 
NOTICE! Beware of Imitations! We absolutely GUARANTEE 
these Genuine Brahma Lodestones are ALIVE! We believe they 
are just what you want, the REAL THING— POWERFUL DRAWING, Extra Highly Magnetic! Fully Guaranteed! Copyrlght'37-A, Co, 



T 



COMIC PRINTED 

POCKET FUN 

NOVELTIES 

40 Comic Pocket Cards 

12 Illustrated Booklets 

6 Comic Love Letters 

6 Laughable Diplomas 

4 Printed Pocket Laughs 

Evervthins $1.00 



FUN SHOP. 2463 F- Kensington Ave., Phila. 25, Pa. 



RUPTURE-EASER 

A strong, form fitting, washable sup> 
port. Back lacing adjustable. Snaps 
Hp In front. Adjustable leg strap. 
Soft, flat groin pad. No steel or 
leather bands. Unexcelled for comfort. 
Also used as after operation support 
For men or women. Mall order* give 
measure around the lowest part of the 
abdomen. Specify right or left side 
or double. 




DoubU.,.4.93 



300 East 12th 



"G&W 



CO. 



Kansas City 6, Mo. 



Rheumatic 

Arthritic 

Sufferers! 

Rumal Ointment Costs You 
Nothing If This External Treatment Doesn't Relieve The Pain 
Within Minutes 

Mr. I. K., Wilmington, Del., advises every 

one suffering from Rheumatic Pains to 

try RUMAL. Ointment. He says, "GOD 

BLESS YOU FOR RUMAL." 

If you hare tried everything to relieve those annoying pains of Rheumatism, Arthritis. Sciatica without results — 

Here's what we want you to do. Try Rumal Ointment (a doctor's formula that has helped thousands 
Buffering from rheumatic aches and pains), entirely 
at our risk and expense. 

Bemember — you don't risk a penny by trying Rumal 
— you pay only if it brings you relief. SEND NO 
MONEY. Just your name and address. When postman brings you Rumal deposit $2 with him. Then 
use Rumal Ointment as directed. If you don't get 
blessed relief within minutes, tell us and you'll get 
your money back by return mail. 

RUMAL MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
205 Division Street, Dept. 169, New York 2, N. Y. 



Please mention Fiction House Magazine Group when answering advertisements 



100 PLANET 

the columns had been drawn by now, but 
she couldn't assume it. The strain-pile 
would not «rupt for a full Terran hour 
after the fifth column has been drawn. 
From now until death, of one sort or another, she must delay, delay, delay. 

Her blue eyes were widely innocent^ and 
puzzled, but the nerves of her arms were 
going dead with over-tension. Perhaps if 
she threw the terif in his eyes with her left 
hand and crushed the numbing supraclavicular nerve with her thumb . . . 

Perat turned his head for the first time 
and looked her full in the face. 

"Gorph says he sent the message," he 
said tonelessly. 

She looked at him blankly, then casually removed her hand from his knee and 
dropped it in her lap. He must absolutely 
not be alarmed until she knew more. "Apparently I'm supposed to know what you're 
talking about." 

He turned back to the ceiling. "Gorph 
says someone prepared a priority dispatch 
with my signature, and he sent it out. I 
don't suppose you have any idea who did 
it?" 

Time! Time! 

"When I was Gorph's assistant, there 
was a young officer — I can't remember his 
name — who sometimes forged your signature to urgent actions when Gorph was 
out. This is true, Perat. My mind is open 
to you." 

He fastened his luminous grey eyes on 
her. "I presume you're lying, but . . ." 
His mental probe skimmed rapidly over 
her cortical association centers. Her skill 
was strained to the utmost, setting up false 
memories of each of thousands of synaptic 
groups just ahead of Perat's probe. On 
some of the groups she knew she had 
made blunders, but apparently she preserved the general impression by strengthened verification in subsequent nets. She 
wove a brief tale of a young officer in 
charge of metals salvage who had sent an 
order to a field group to recover some sort 
of metal, and since Gorph had been out, 
and H.Q. needed the metal urgently, the 
officer did not wait for official authorization. His probe then searched her visual 
lobe thoroughly, but with growing skepticism. She offered him only indistinct 



STORIES 

memories of the dead officer's identity. 

"Who was the man?" asked Perat as a 
matter of form, sipping his terif absently. 

"Sub-leader Galen, I think." That 
would give him pause. He knew she had 
offered no visual memory of Galen. He 
would wonder why she was lying. 

"Are you sure ?" 

SHE wanted to look at the time-dial on 
the wall, but dared not. From the 
corner of her eye she saw Perat's left arm 
tense, then relax warily. His mental probe 
had fastened grimly to her mind again, 
though he must know it would be effort 
wasted. She conjured up an image of 
Sub-leader Galen in the act of telling her 
he was handling a very urgent matter and 
that he'd tell the Viscount later what he'd 
done. Then the face of the young officer 
changed to another of the staff, then another, then still another. Then back to 
Galen. 

"No, I'm not sure." 

Perat smiled thinly. "You wished to 
gain time, and I wished to idle it away. I 
suppose we have both been fairly successful." 

The communications box beside the bed 
jangled. 

"Yes?" cried Perat, all alert. 

As his mouth was forming the word, 
his probe was collapsing within her mind, 
and her own flashed briefly into his mind. 
The hand under the pillow held a Faeg, 
aimed at her chest. But the safety catch 
was still on. 

"Excellency ?" came Gorph's tinny voice. 

"Yes, Gorph? Have you replaced the 
columns ?" 

"Replaced" . . J That seemed to indicate that the field crew had followed her 
forged order, then returned the columns 
by Perat's countercommand, relayed telepathically through Gorph. But once all 
the great rods were drawn, replacing them 
did not halt the strain pile. The negative 
potential would keep on increasing geometrically with time, as planned, to the 
final goal of joint catastrophe and stalemate. 

Some sort of knowledge was drumming 
silently at her threshold of consciousness. 
Something she couldn't quite grasp. About 



STALEMATE IN SPACE 



101 



the woman in the stereop? Possibly. It 
would come to her soon. 

Ignoring Perat's gloating smile, she 
looked casually at the metron dial, and her 
heart leaped with elation, for the dial had 
ceased revolving. Electrons must be flowing from the center of the ship through 
the walls, outward toward the surface two 
thousand miles away, and the massive currents were probably jamming all the wall 
circuits. 

Within minutes, finis. 

Could she really rest, now? She was 
beginning to feel very tired, almost sleepy. 
Her duty had been done, and nothing could 
ever be important again. 

Gorph was answering his master over 
the speaker : "Yes, your excellency, we got 
got them back, that is to say, excepting that 
one of the five is only half-way out of its 
cradle." 

Life was good, life was beautiful. She 
almost yawned. Most certainly all of the 
columns had been pulled out, and then four 
had been replaced and something had broken 
down with the fifth. But they had all 
been out, and that was the only thing that 
mattered. 

"What happened, Gorph?" asked Perat, 
sipping at his terif again. His eyes were 
fastened on his mistress. 

She knew that he had pulled the safety 
catch on the Faeg. 

"When the crew took the rods out, the 
prime mover broke down on the fifth one, 
when it was only half-way out. They 
brought in another mover and got the 
other four rods back in, and now they're 
trying to repair the first mover and push 
the fifth rod back." 

(The fifth rod had not been completely 
drawn. Oh Almighty Heaven!) 

"Very well, Gorph. I need not repeat 
that none of the rods are to be moved out 
again, unless I appear to you personally. 
I'll talk to you later." 

The box went dead. 

Perat, now taking no notice of Evelyn, 
finished his terif leisurely. She sat at 
his side, breathing woodenly. She had 
done all that she could do. All five rods 
had not been withdrawn, and they never 
would be, noV. 




• • • 



CTIinV AT UflMF Legally trained men win higher peraiO I UU I HI nUITIC tions and bigger success in business 
and public life. Greater opportunities now than ever before. 
More Ability: More Prestige: More Money %*&££,, £oS 

can train at home during spare time. Degree of LL.B. We furnish all 
text materia), including 14 -volume Law Library. Low cost, easy 
terms. Get our valuable 48-page "Law Training for Leadership" 
and "Evidence** books FREE. Rend NOW 

LASALLE EXTENSION UNIVERSITY, 4 17 South Dearborn Street 
A Correspondence Institution Dept, 3481 -L Chicago 5. Ill* 



Start Your Own Business 

on our capital. Always your own boss. Hundreds average $6,000 
to $25,000 annual sales year after year. We Bupply stocks, 
equipment on credit. 200 home necessities. Selling experience 
unnecessary to start. Wonderful opportunity to own pleasant, 
profitable business backed by world-wide industry. Write: 
RAW LEIGH CO., Dept, C-U-FIH, Frteport, Illinois 




Let us help you find real happiness. Join our old reliable 
club. 42 years of dependable, confidential service. Correspondents most everywhere. Many with means, seeking con* 
genial mates. Proven results. Photos, descriptions free. 
STANDARD CLUB, BOX 207, GRAYS LAKE, ILL 



MMMV4M 




"Since 1989" 



Quick relief with Dent's. Use Dent's Tooth Gum 
or Dent'* Tooth Drops for cavity toothaches. 
Use Dent's Dental Poultice for pain or soreness in gums or teeth. At all drug stores. 



TOOTH GUM 
TOOTH DROPS 
DENTAL POULTICE 



DENT'S 




iftTEMETHQftl 




Transforms Old J 
loose, Cracked or I 
Chipped Plates [ 

info NEW LUSTROUS BEAUTY- PINK 
PLASTIC PLATES ... No Impression Needed 



^10 



No need now to pay a high price for 
a new piatel Our new scxentifio 
"false plate method" saves you 
money and duplicates yoor old, on- __ 
sightly and unsanitary plate into a new, light-weight, 
lustrous, beauty- pink plastic plate with your own 
teeth. Missing teeth are replaced with new, matching teeth. Simple instructions tell you how to make 
your LOOSE plate tight -fitting before duplication. 

CPU II ilfl MillirV J™* write for oar money 
OLNU NU MIII1C. I saving FaUe Plate Method 

that gives you a new plate within hours. Guaranteed. 

WEST* DENTAL LABORATORY 

T27 N. Dearborn St., Dept. 100 Chicago2.HI. 



Please mention Fiction House Magazine Group when answering advertisements 



102 



PLANET 



"If all Terran women are like you," he 
began slowly, "X cannot understand how 
you Terrans lost this battle." He did not 
expect an answer, and did not wait for 
one. His hard eyes seemed softened somewhat by a curious admiration. "Only your 
own gods know what you have endured in 
your attempt to start thfe pile." 

She looked up wretchedly. 

He went on: "Yes, we learned in the 
nick of time, didn't we? Our physicists 
told Gorph that the great rods were the 
core of a pile that could have converted 
both ships into pure energy, with not a 
shred of matter left over — something that 
all the fission piles in the two galaxies 
couldn't do. It seems that the pile, if activated, would have introduced sufficient 
energy into the low-packing-fraction atoms, 
from iron on down to helium, to transform 
them completely from matter into radiation. 

"Unpleasant thought ! Now the Scythian 
plan will be modified slightly. We shall 
wait until we tear our globe away from 
yours, far away, and then prime movers 
left behind in your ship here can pull the 
columns again, all five, this time. Our 
globe then proceeds into the Terran Confederacy, and the war will be over. But 
of course, you'll know nothing about that." 

He regarded her wearily. 'I'm sorry 
Lyn — or is it 'Evelyn Kane'? If you had 
been of Tharn-blood, or even of the Scythian federacy, I would have married you." 

She listened to him with only half a 
mind. Some strange, inaudible thing was 
trying to reach her. Something she couldn't 
grasp, but ought to grasp. What had the 
mentors told her to be ready for? Exhaustion lay like a paralyzing blanket over 
her inert mind. 

"You killed your countryman that day," 
he intoned, "just to ingratiate yourself 
with me. He was very generous to you. 
When he saw that you wouldn't shoot him 
with his eyes open, he closed them. Who 
was he?" 

"Gordon, Lord Kane. My father." 

The terif glass shook, and the man's 
face became perceptibly paler. He breathed 
stridently for a while before speaking 
again. 

This time he seemed to be calling with 



STORIES 

earnest finality to the forbidding deity of 
his own warlike homeland, announcing a 
newcomer at the dark portals of the god: 
"This woman . . ./" 

EVELYN KANE did not shriek when 
the Faeg-bolt tore through her rib 
and lungs. Even when she sank to the 
floor, the pain-lines in her own face were 
much better controlled than those in Perat's. 

Then as she lay quietly on the thick, 
gilded carpet, with consciousness rapidly 
fading and returning with the regularity 
of her heart beats, she realized what had 
been calling to her. The piezo crystal in 
her waist pouch, still hidden in the shadows 
of her table, had been activated, and had 
brought into focus within the room the 
dim, transparent outlines of a small space 
ship. 

Perat saw it too, and his eyes widened 
as they traced it quickly from wall to 
wall. 

"It's real . . ." whispered Evelyn between clenched lips. "Mentors wanted me 
. . . return in it ... to Terra . . . secret of 
pile . . ." 

A strange light was growing over Perat's 
face. "Of course! So that's why your 
father tried so hard at the last to break 
through our blockade and get a ship 
through! If the secret of the strain-pile 
had ever reached Terra, all the Tharn 
suns — indeed, the whole Scythe federation 
— would be novae by now! By Karos, it 
was a narrow thing!" 

There was a soft gurgling in Evelyn's 
throat. 

He flung his pistol away and sat down 
beside her, lifting her head to his chest. 
"I'll call the physician," he rasped through 
contorted lips. 

She slid a cold palm over his hot cheek, 
caressing it lightly. "No ... we die . . ." 

He stiffened. "WeV 

She continued to stroke his cheek dreamily. "Die with you . . ." 

He shook her. "What are you talking 
about!" he cried. "The pile isn't going to 
erupt !" 

"Crystal f ocusses . . . ship . . . only when 
pile . . ." 

His face blanched. 



STALEMATE IN SPACE 



103 



She whispered again, so softly that he 
had to bend his ear to her lips. "You escape . . . get in ship . . /' 

He stared at her incredulously, "You'd 
let me get away with the pile secret !" 

She relaxed in his arms, smiling sleepily, 
while the tiny red trickle from the corner 
cff her mouth grew wider. "Stupid of 
me/' 

She shivered. ". . . cold . . ." 

The Viscount of the Tharn Suns, the 
greatest star-cluster in the Scythe federation, knotted his jaw muscles feverishly 
and gnawed at his lower lip. Somehow 
or other the strain-pile had been energized. 
Probably the terrific proton storm that 
had hidden both ships for years had compensated for the unrealized potential of 
the undrawn fifth rod. It was his duty to 
the federation to throw this woman to the 
floor and take refuge between the shadowy, 
shimmering walls of the escape ship. He 
must carry the secret of the pile to safety 
with him. He had only seconds. 

He looked down distractedly at the 
small creature who was destroying the 
proud ships that two great civilizations had 
spent a generation in building. She seemed to be in a deep, peaceful sleepy The 
only sign of life was a faint pulse in her 
throat. 

She was the only woman that he had 
ever found whose companionship he could 
have . . . enjoyed hour after hour. He 
almost thought, "could have loved." 

The room was growing quite warm. The 
tremendous currents coursing through the 
walls were swiftly growing stronger. 

Another thought occurred to him : How 
had those Terran mentors planned for 
their escape ship to avoid the holocaust? 
Any matter within millions of miles would 
be destroyed. It was evident, then, that 
wherever the ship was, it was not within 
the danger zone. 

Suddenly he understood everything. 

With a queer smile, in which ribald 
surmise and tenderness fought for supremacy, he picked the woman up, carried 
her into the phantom vessel, placed her on 
the pilot's lounge, and strapped her in. 
From his waist-pouch he took a hypodermic syringe, removed the sheath from the 



Mm ll BECOME AN EXPERT II 

AlltU U ll Iflll I 

Executive Accountants and C, P. A.'s earn J9.000 to $10,000 a year. 
Thousands of firms need them. We train yon thoroly at home in spare 
time for C. P. A. examinations or executive accounting position*. 
Previous experience unnecessary . Personal training under sanjrrteion 
cf staff of C- P. A.'s. Placement counsel and help. Write for fxea 
book, "Accountancy, the Profession That Pays." 

LASALLE Extension University, 417 So. Dearborn St. 

A Correspondence Institution Dept. 348 1 -h Chicago 5. Ill, 

ARE YOU LONELY? 

Thousands of lonely folk EVERYWHERE have 
found true happiness through introductions by mail. 
We will show you PROOF of results. Send NOW 
for FREE particulars in plain sealed envelope. 

RAINBOW SERVICE, 110 W. Oak Avenue 
Santa Rosa, CaL, Dept. FH 

DATE BY MAIL 

Everybody's doing it and liking it, especially our way. 
All ages, either sex, find it easy to locate their ideal 
among our NATION-WIDE members. Low rates, long 
service, large lists. FREE particulars. 

E. M. SMITH 

P. O. Box 375-FH, WatervMe, New York 



RAiSB HAMS WIS 

The new wonder animals from Syria. 

Often called Toy Bears. Delightful pets. 

Everyone wants them. Laboratories need 

thousands. Clean, odorless. Raise anywhere. A profitable and interesting hobby 
or business. We furnish breeders and instructions. Write today for free book. 

GULF HAMSTEBY. 1 51 1 BASIL ST.. MOBILE. AU. 



Be Lonely No More! 
Open Destiny's Door! 

50c brings Cupid's Destiny, World's Greatest Social Publication, including coast-to-coast names and addresses; either 
sex. Captivating descriptions; sparkling pictures — widows, 
widowers, bachelors: beautiful girls desiring early marriage. 
(Year, bi-monthly, $2.00.) Mention your age. 

DESTINY LEAGUE • Aberdeen 16 • Washington 

LONESOME? 

JOIN RELIABLE CLUB, established 1909 

Members everywhere— beautiful grirla.naraes, teachers, widows, businessmen, farmers seeking congenial 
mates. Many claim wealth. Dignified, dependable and 
snre, we get results. WRITE FOR INFORMATION 
AND DESCRIPTIONS FREE. SEALED. 

THE EXCHANGE, 3827-72 Main, Kansas City, Mo. 



Mhtto stop t obacco 




*^zz 




Banish the craving for tobacco ft? 
thousands have with Tobacco 
Redeemer. Write for free booklet 
telling of injurious effect of tobacco 
and of a treatment which has relief 
ed many men. 
35 Years in Business 

300,000 Satisfied Customers 
THE NEWELL COMPANY 
293 Clayton Sta., St Uuis 5, Ma 



FREE 
BOOK 



Please mention Fiction House Magazine Group when answering advertisements 



104 PLANET STORIES 

LOVE! MONEY! POWER! 



All these can be yours! Handwriting reveals the hidden 
talents which will make you a success in your personal 
life. Get your individual analysis today! Send ten 
lines in your writing and $1.00 to — 

SEYMOUR SCKVEID 

1669 Norman St., Ridgewood 27, Queens, New York 

needle, and thrust it into her arm. Her 
face twinged briefly, but she did not 
waken. He threw a blanket over her and 
then strode quickly to the controls. They 
were fairly simple, and he had no difficulty in switching the automatic drive to 
the general direction of the Tharn sun 
cluster. He wrote a hasty note on the pilot's navigation pad, and then turned again 
to the woman. He removed one of his 
duplicate jeweled rings and slipped it on 
her finger. His father would recognize it 
and would believe her. 

Then he bent over her and kissed her 
lightly on the lips. 

"Perhaps I love you too, my dearest enemy," he whispered gently. "Educate our 
son-to-be in the ways of peace." 

Again outside the ship, he spun the 
space lock that sealed her in. The ship's 
walls were now growing opaque and he 
could no longer see inside. 

His communications box was jangling 
furiously in a dozen different keys, and 
anxious, querulous voices were pouring 
through it into the room. He snapped it 
off, loosened his collar, filled his glass to 
overflowing with the last of the terif, and 
cut off the table luminar. His stereop projector next had his attention. 

He lay on his couch in the darkness of 
his death cell, studying with the keenest 
satisfaction his wife, son, and father, 
while they waved at him happily from the 
radiant stereop sphere. 

Those Terran mentors had planned 
well. The escape ship would not be affected by the nearing catyclysm, because it 
was really in a different time plane — at 
least five years in the past. The catastrophe would simply release it to its original 
continuum, whence it would proceed with 
its precious cargo to the Tharn suns. 

Odd effect, that time shift. He wished 
now he'd read more of the theories of that 



ancient Terran, Einstein, who claimed that 
simultaneity was an illusion — that "now" 
here could be altogether different from 
"now" in other steric areas. His son, unborn as yet "here," was more than four 
years old "there" — on the planet. TharnR-VII, where the lad played in his grandfather's gardens. 

And then there was the mystery of the 
rings. The old count had not had another ring made of course. The ring 
the count had sent with the stereop coils 
must have been the same one that Perat 
had just placed on the finger of his bride. 
The ring sent with the stereops was 
merely his original ring brought back in 
the relooping of a time-line. In his "now" 
there was only one ring — the one he was 
wearing. In Evelyn's "now" there was 
the same ring, but that was logical, because 
her "now" would soon be five years earlier 
than his. Owing to this five-year relooping of time, it had been possible for the ring 
to exist in duplicate for six weeks. But 
very soon, in his "now," it would be destroyed for good. 

He pressed the repeat button on the 
stereop and started the coil again. The 
boy had an engaging grin, rather like his 
own (he would indulge a final vanity), 
but without the scar. He hoped there 
would never be another war to disfigure 
or kill his son. It was up to the next 
generation. 

As he swirled his terif, he smiled and 
thought of the note he had left on the 
pilot's pad : Name him after your father — 
Gordon, 

". . . failed to find any survivors, or for 
that matter, any trace whatever of either 
globe, if one excepts the supernova that 
appeared for a quarter metron some thirty 
years ago at the far margin of the proton 
storm. We of the Armistice Commission 
therefore unanimously urge that further 
hostilities by either side would necessarily 
be indecisive . . ." 

. . — Scythe-Terran Armistice, History and 
Tentative Provisions (excerpts) : Gordon 
of Tharn, Editor-in-Chief and Primary 
Scythian Delegate. 



THE V1ZIGRAPH ' 105 

LONELY? WHY BE LONELY? 



accepted costumes which left female breasts fully 
exposed and yet have not lapsed into unbridled 
lewdness. Many civilizations have experimented, 
some quite successfully, with premarital and extramarital sexual freedom. 

And, if our own civilization doesn't radioactivate itself into oblivion or sterility, increasing 
biological knowledge will surely give us complete 
control of reproduction. Children will be born 
only when they are definitely desired. That too 
will alter the social patterns. 

Sex will probably remain one of the basic 
human drives as long as homo sapiens is recognizable as such. So let's quit trying to hide that fact 
beneath a mound of taboos. Whether the authors 
see the future patterns as puritanism or libertinism, monogamy or polygamy or polyandry or 
eugenic mating controlled by bureaucrats, that 
makes little difference. To each author his own 
dreams. But a writer can't very well depict the 
social structure of a hypothetical future world 
without including man-woman relationships — and 
in these sex will be a basic factor. 

So I contend that discussions of sex have just 
as legitimate a place in science-fiction as nuclear 
physics and military technology and synthetic 
foods and the eternal struggle of dictatorship vs. 
freedom. If science-fiction can persuade people to 
look openmindedly at themselves and their emotion-dominated attitudes, it can do us all a great 
service. 

So let's start jettisoning the taboos I 



Sincerely, 



John Higgins 



BE NOT AFREUD 

418 High St., 
Closter, N. J. 
Dear Editor (wow! What a terrific beginning, 
eh?): 

This fellow came staggering into my office the 
other day, and seeing that his shoes were on 
backwards and that he wore his wrist watch 
around his neck, I knew he was not quite normal. 
His eyes glared, his mouth hung slack, and he 
muttered over and over, "Eternal Zemmd Must 
Die !" A sad case. 

"Doctor, you've gotta help me," he sobbed, 
grabbing me by the sleeve. "I'm in a terrible 
condition." 

"First give me back my sleeve," I said. "Thank 
you. Now lie down on that couch and tell me all 
about it." 

"I don't know where to begin," he faltered. 

"I'll give you a choice," I cooed, "The beginning, the middle or the ending." 

"Well, it started the day the Germans won 
the war ... to escape them, I threw myself into 
the future. I woke up in the body of Space 
Patrol Agent Miram Muscle. As Miram Muscle, 
I made the first trip to the moon and found 
living there — " 

"Yes?" I asked. 

"I can't go on! I can't!" 

I soothed him with a baseball bat, and he 
resumed. 

"I found there . . . HER !" 

He paused. I could see he was thinking of HER. 
Whoever HER was. 



America's friendly club will arrange a romantic correspondence 
for you. Sealed Particulars FREE. 

DIAMOND CIRCLE 

BOX 1203, DEPT. 14 ST. LOUIS. MISSOURI 



College 



Learn Profitable Profession 
in GO days at Home 



Men and Women, IB to SO 

Many Swedish Massage graduates make $50, 

$75, or even more per week. Large full time 

jicomes from doctors, hospitals, sanl
toriums. clubs or private practice. 

Others make good money in spare 

time. You can win independence and 

prepare for future security by train
'■■ ■ ■-'-'$. ing at home and qualifying for dl
~J plonia. Anatomy Charts and 32 page 

illustrated Book. FREE — Now! The 

of Swedish Massaoe. Dept, 993C, 41 E.Pearson, Chicago II 




r=MAKE FRIENDS= 

Don't be LONESOME You can enjoy -friendship and companionship with worthwhile and 
interesting persons. Personal, confidential service for lonely people. FREE particulars in 
sealed envelope. Sincere, lonesome folks write 
Social, Box 157-A, New York II. N. Y. 



ILLUSTRATED COMIC 
BOOKLETS 

THE KIND MEN LIKE* 

(VEST POCKET SIZE) 
They are loaded with rare car* 
toons. Full of Fun and Humor, 
aro DIFFERENT booklet* 
sent prepaid for $1 in plain 
sealed wrapper. No CO. D.'s. 
GRAYKO, Depf. 1552, Box 520.G.P.O..N.Y.C I 





WHY BE LONELY! 



( Let America* 8 greatest Introduction service 
' And your Ideal friend, sweetheart, or mate. 
| Our amazingly different system has brought 
I ideal lore, friendship, and enduring happiness to thousands. Why not you? This 
method offers individual analysis and lni troductlon to persons of your type. Sensa
I tional results — even when all other methods 

fail. Largest, most select membership. Sealed details FREE. 
DR. MILES. Box ff65, Sta. S, Los Angeles 5, Cal. 




Let me arrange a romantic correspondence for 
you. Find yourself a sweetheart thru America's 
C ^/foremost Belect social correspondence club. A friendUr «hip letter Bociety for lonely ladles and gentlemen. 
Members everywhere; CONFIDENTIAL introductions by letter; 
efficient, dignified and continuous service. I have made thousands of 
lonely people happy— why not you? Write for FREE sealed particulars. 
EVAN MOORE P. 0. BOX 988 JACKSONVILLE. FLORIDA 



MATRIMONY UNLIMITED! 

America's finest club for personalized, selective introductions offers unlimited opportunities to meet refined ladies 
and gentlemen (many wealthy). Write today (enclosed 10* 
coin) for over 40 actual photos and details, sealed — confidential. Mention age. 

HOLLYWOOD "400" 
P. O. Box 2349-FG, Hollywood 28, California 



Please mention Fiction House Magazine Group when answering advertisements 



106 



PLANET STORIES 



Three days later, he looked up and resumed 
his tale. 

"She was lovely," he said. "Draped only in a 
thin sheet of bubble gum tha,. clung to her lovely 
young figure, her beauty was like that of a herd 
of catapillars in the moonlight." 

"Sounds lovely," I prompted. 

"She was," he agreed. His face grew dark 
aqua-marine. "But Oscar was her lover! Oscar, 
that blob of blobbly blob! Maddened, I leaped 
into my ship, the Sqwnvbtyuostrevat 1452089^4. 
But that good vessel had fallen in love with the 
sun, and was speeding there with unbelievable 
velocity! Was I, Miram Muscle, doomed? Oh, 
horrors upon horrors upon horrors upon horrors I 
GAAAAAAAAAAAHHHHHHHHHHH I" 

"What happened?" 

"I crashed. On the mucky slime of that gooey 
world, Venus. And there I found it!" 

He leaped to his feet, his white face flushed 
with raging madness I 

"Eternal Zemmd Must Die !" he shrieked. Then 
he collapsed on the couch. I revived him. 

"And now," he continued, his head in his hands, 
"I don't know ... I can't go on." 

"Please. What's worrying you?" 

"I don't know whether I'm a man or a robot !" 
he said, placing his head on his lap. 

This fellow was mad ! I stared at him thoughtfully. Probably something so sad had happened 
to him that he had gone nuts so he couldn't 
remember it. I went over to him. 

"Listen," I said. Then, "Dwellers In Silence, 
by Ray Bradbury!" 

He screamed. Again and again. Then, before 
I could stop him, he leaped from my window to 
the river below. A huge Zemmd came up and 
ate the poor man with one gulp. 

But he'd left something behind — on the floor of 
my office. I bent over and picked it up. 

It was a magazine. I read it. It was called 
Planet Stories. (Surprised?). 

I don't know what to do. Am I a man or a 
robot? ETERNAL ZEMMD MUST DIE! 
Miram Muscle, Space Patrol Agent — am I 
doomed to die, plunging into the sun, just because 
of my ship ? It really doesn't love the sun. Oscar ! 
No, no GAAAAAAAAHHHHHHH ! 

Yours truly, 

David M. 

SAYS STF IS IMMATURE 



Campbell 



6023 Woodlawn Ave. 
Chicago 37, 111. 
Dear Editor: 

Greetings and salutations from a new convert 
to the ranks of Science-Fiction fans! I find this 
field fascinating in a number of ways, and have 
spent the last few weeks devouring as much of 
the recent material as I could lay my hands on. 
I have found Planet to be definitely above 
average in story material. If you will allow me, 
I would like to get off my chest a few matters 
which have. caught my attention. 

First of all, it seems to me that the great value 
of Science-Fiction lies in its capacity to enlarge 
vision, to encourage thinking in terms of sweeping 
concepts and broad vistas of time and space, to 
enable the reader to get some kind of grasp on 
the ever-elusive realms of Time to Come. In short, 
STF, contrary to the opinion of some, does not 



make ideal "escape" literature. No fan, while 
reading a Planet story, can help pondering — be 
it ever so fleetingly — on the possibilities or probabilities presented to view in that writer's particular vision of the future. STF therefore must 
assume a certain responsibility toward the world 
of the present if that function is not to be miscarried. 

The question then is this : Has Science-Fiction, 
at this stage of its development, succeeded in 
living up to its responsibility ? Here I will assume 
that the current crop is reasonably representative 
of modern STF. 

And it is apparent that many fans and many 
writers have continued somehow to nurse a great 
reluctance to accept and adapt their thinking to 
facts and principles of social science which have 
long since been demonstrated and established. No 
writer of STF who described the lush vegetation 
on the Moon in the year 1955, without chronicling 
some tremendous upheaval in the nature of things 
before that time, could hope to survive the howls 
of outraged fans; yet I have seen the same fans, 
in the Vizigraph and elsewhere, use arguments in 
support of certain social prejudices which are 
distressingly pseudo-scientific, distressingly at 
variance with known and established fact— arguments of precisely the type which are heartily 
scotched during the first class session of any 
reputable introductory university course in anthropology or sociology. This inconsistency can, 
perhaps, be attributed to ignorance ; but it is none 
the less damnable in a field of literature which, 
calling itself "scientifiction," runs the risk of 
promoting blatantly unscientific attitudes in its 
excursions into various possible social orders of 
the future. 

The evidence for the immaturity of modern 
STF is closely related to that for its inconsistency, and shows itself in a perhaps unconscious 
catering to national and racial chauvinism. It is 
a scientifically demonstrable fact that the Earth 
is cooling; it is also a scientifically demonstrable 
fact that, for all the purposes of Man, the Earth 
is shrinking— and the latter process is by far the 
more rapid one. 

Trends of history reveal other significant truths 
—such as the fact that the era of passionate 
nationalism, spurred on at present by the excesses 
and failings of a blind and selfish USA and of 
an equally blind and selfish USSR, is rapidly 
nearing the end of its days ; or that the conditions 
under which any group of men could be exploited 
or even despised for the sole advantage of another 
group, without fear of harmful consequences, have 
passed from Man's world. Slowly but surely, the 
consciousness of the world is awakening to the 
principle that the future of mankind is best served 
only when each and every human being is given 
the maximum opportunity to develop his individual capacity for making constructive contributions to the advancement and welfare of himself 
and his fellow-men. 

What has all this got to do with STF and its 
immaturity? Well, in the modern STF of this 
country many stories are placed centuries in the 
future— and the hero is almost invariably American, nearly always Anglo-Saxon ! This, of course, 
is no sin in itself— after all, the literature under 
consideration is American, with a substantially 
Anglo-Saxon audience— and is perhaps to be 
taken for granted. But this is where STF must 
realize that it is not mere fantasy, that it deals 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



107 



in spite of itself with considerations and attitudes 
which are vital to the immediate progress of Man. 
It seems obvious that within the next few 
decades — given the good fortune of respite from 
an atomic-bacteriological war— the relative prominence of the Caucasoid race as compared with 
all others will decline steadily under the impact 
of the spread of technology and opportunity to 
the so-called "backward" peoples of the Earth. 
As the world of Man becomes united politically 
and begins to reach out for contact with other 
worlds, its leaders and men of science will come 
from an increasingly varied background of human 
stocks. It is even easily possible that the "Dark 
Continent" — long before space-travel becomes a 
commonplace — may see an intellectual renaissance 
under the impact of new ideas and new opportunities, and produce more than its share of 
scientific genius. 

STF faithfuls should be fully aware of the 
infinitesimal significance of the planet Earth in 
the soundless enormity of Space and Time, and 
thus also of the insignificance of the life-form 
which calls itself Man. They must realize that, 
although Man may dominate his native planet at 
least for the time being, there is no guarantee 
that he will ever succeed in dominating his Universe. Does it not seem, therefore, in the light of 
this perspective — so admirably fostered by the 
reading of Science-Fiction — that nothing can be 
quite as overwhelmingly petty and damnable ( as 
these catastrophic (to Man) bickerings of nation 
vs. nation, race vs. race? If many who delight in 
STF have failed to adapt themselves to this attitude—which is, I think, one of the great teachings 
of this literature— then it cannot be excused on 
the grounds that so few men anywhere have, so 
far, attained it. It is a supremely necessary one, 
and STF should be taking the lead in its propagation. STF, because of its essential nature, 
belongs at the very vanguard of scientific progressivism in fiction — social scientific progressivism most emphatically included. Not having yet 
fully understood and accepted its own nature, not 
having yet assumed its full responsibility, it is not 
yet at that vanguard. It is not yet mature. 

Sincerely, 
David Hitchcock Green 

{Please forgive us, DHG, but we had to trim 
your thoughtful, but overlong, letter. We think 
we saved the meat of it. — Ed.) 

PS LIGHTER THAN AIR? 

157 N. Euclid Ave., 
Oak Park, Illinois 
Dear Ediitor: 

"Hey, you I Let go my lapels. Where do you 
get off telling me I've had too much of your 
Martian Yets Boilermaker? What are you doi . . ." 
Splash, went our hero into the gutter. It was 
flush time .so down he went with all the other 
trash into the nearest sewer. 

Being a poor swimmer I started to yell for help, 
when I spied a hunk of lumber drifting by. After 
pulling myself onto the raft, I looked about to 
get my bearings. Immediately a horrible odor 
assailed my miserable nose. Grasping my nose 
with the appropriate two fingers, j searched for 
the perpetrator. There, on the other end of my 
vessel, in all its purple and yellow ugliness was 



ALL 5 
FAMOUS 

' JOWfTT 
COURSES 



tl Hm grMtttt In 
v«rldr tevt R. .. 
K«ilr, rtiyiicol 01mcttr. 

Mantle City 



Ufs 




/'Uprm 

■1-111"' 



«ah«g^ 



frSSSg, 



_ joy My "Progressive Power" 
SlreBtlh$e«rets!GhfeMe10Eisl 
Minnies A Day-WiUioot Strain) 

Til teach you the "Progressive Power 
Method" through which I rebuilt myeelt 
— leal v 



from a physical wreck the doc-_~ 
demned ^o die at 15. to the holder of 

more strength records than _my otnt* 



teacher! 
. __j its ability 
strongest, handsomest men in the world. 
And I stand ready to ahow you on a 
money hack baste—that no matter now 
flabby or puny you arv I can do the. same 
ror you right m your own home. Let me> 
prove I can add inches to your arms* 
Broaden your shoulders, give you a man' 
sized chest, powerful legs and a Rocktike back— in fact, power pack your whole 
oody so quickly it will amaze you J Yea, 
I'll Jam you with power and • confidence 
to master any situation— to win popu< 
larlty— and to get ahead on the Jobt 
Through my proven secrets I bring to 
life new power in you inside and out, 
until YOU are rally satisfied you are the 
man you want to be. 

PROVE IT TO YOURSELF IK ONE mOTI 

Send only 35c for my 5 easy-to-follow, 
picture-packed couraes now in I complete volume "Bow to Become a Muscular 
ile-Man. •• Try it for one night! K*V 
perlsnce the thrilling strength that aurgee 
through your muscles. 



George F. Jowett 
Whom expert* call 
"Champion of Champtons" e M World's 
wrestling and weight 
lifting champ at *' 
and li> e world's 
Strongest Arms e, 
* times World's 



other records! 




10-DAY TRIAL! 
Think m of lt-«ll 
nve of these famous courses now 
in one picturepacked muscle 
building, volume 
for only • 25c. 
If you don't actually FEEt, resuit» 
within ONE WEEK 
send it back and 
your money will be 
promptly refunded! 

Photo Rook Ol __ramoua Strs 



Jowttt Institute of Physical Culture 
230 Fifth Avenue. Hew York I, N. Y. 



Dept. 
FM-96 



Hear George:— Please send by return mail, prepaid, 

FREE Jowett's Photo Book of Strong Men. along 0J 

with all 5 Muscle Building Courses. 1 . Moldine • 
And 25c. NO CO.D.'a. 



.__ AGE 

'"print "Plainly. Include Zone Number) 



i ■ .-■■•»•■ mmmWmmmm'MMli M 



Please mention Fiction House Magazine Group when answering advertisements 



108 



PLANET STORIES 



Planet. Ah hah! Here was the means for my 
escape. Waiting until an open manhole was about 
to pass over-head, I reached for the moldy mass 
with my asbestos gloves. Turning to page 118 
I quickly tore out the pages headed The Vizigraph 
and pushed them under the water. Immediately 
the air cleared and Planet regained its luster. 
As it started to rise, I, with a firm grip on it, 
rose also. When I reached the street level, I let 
go, dropped to the ground, and turned around 
to watch Planet soar into the heavens. 

The moral of the story is . . . Well, guess. 
No. It isn't wrong to allow both sides to air 
their views. It is wrong however to allow any 
side to speak. Wha' hoppen to the old-fashioned 
letters dealing with stfiction? 

The three best letters? Oberfield, Nelson, and 
Bradley (couldn't figure out what he was talking 
about but it sounded important). 

The cover was ginger-peachy except for the 

tilted yellow block. Why blot out the whole 

picture? Smaller blurbs would work just as well. 

Eternal Zemmd Must Die! was satisfactory. 

The heading was masterful. 

Hostage of Tomorrow had a surprise ending. 
I thought it was going to be good but it surprised 
me. Did Abernathy run into deadline trouole? 
Too quick resolution. 

Runaway was a new twist on a weird tale from 
***** {Tst! Competitor!— Ed.) 

Moon of Madness, What's this? Another weird 
tale. The Bradbury influence is getting greater. 
And here he is now. After reading a great 
number of Ray's stories I thought I could diagnose the end. I took my beating like a man and 
bawled after guessing wrong. From now on I'll 
let the stories run their course without further 
divination. Dwellers in Silence was superb. Ray's 
the reason I started reading Planet. 

The Star Beast and Animat were above average 
while Lady Into Hell-Cat was typical b-and-t 

In keeping with the seasons it looks like you 
are having May in Spring (Mayan Spring). Get 
it? Oh, you don't want it. Okey. 
Sincerely, 

Robert A. Rtvenes 

OK, NO MORE AMERICAN HEROES 

Box 1723 
Fargo, N. D. 
Dear Editor: 

Fve been reading Planet for some time without ever having written in before, and why the 
spring issue should inspire me to do so, I don't 
know. Certainly not because of its quality; the 
best item to appear was Radell Nelsons letter. 
The only story I cared for was Lady Into HellCat, and I'm not sure what I liked about it. Not 
the ending, at am' rate. I was hoping that the 
conclusion would feature Ria clawing Heydrick's 
eyes out, or shooting him or something. I may 
be old-fashioned, but when a guy drags a woman 
clear across the solar system to have her killed, 
and spends his time en route beating her up, I 
can't see that he rates a hearts-and-flowers finale. 

Most of your correspondents seem to be Bradbury enthusiasts, but I am not. Nobody has more 
admiration than I for Bradbury's weirds and 
gruesome murder thrillers, but not his STF. 
Science is essentially materialistic, prosaic, and 
meticulous, and Bradbury's talent essentially be


longs to the field of pure imagination. He tries 
hard to amalgamate the two, but it can't be done. 
To couple the word "fiction" with science does 
not remove this basic incompatibility. True, his 
stories are well above pulp average. From anyone 
else they would be excellent. But not from the 
author of The Jar, The Small Assassin, and 
Homecoming, 

Care for another slant on your race controversy? It is this; I am surprised that the race 
issue didn't split fandom long ago. No source 
has been more active in perpetuating the cliches 
of the racists than the STF pulps. 

In the average interplanetary yarn, the hero is 
an Earthman, white, with an Anglo-Saxon or 
Irish name and speech traits plainly stamping him 
an American. The villain, unless he is the stereotyped Slav or Latin of the gangster stories, is a 
member of a non-Terrestrial race. The treatment 
of these races as a whole follow the two standard 
viewpoints of the bigot: they are crafty, dangerous, highly productive of criminals and degenerates, given to wiping out camps of explorers 
from Earth and, when properly conquered by 
the Terrestrials, to attempting to overthrow their 
rightful lords by force and violence; or they are 
primitive, docile, a bit servile, useful as workers, 
and likeable as long as they keep in their place. 
Some authors justify this blend of Kiplingesque 
imperialism and Dixonesque racism by making 
the alien races completely inhuman and repulsive 
by our standards; but even those authors who 
are willing- to grant the existence of human life 
on Mars in order to leave the way open to the 
final clinch, would never grant even a human 
Martian a lead role in the story (We have one 
coming up.— Ed.). Similarly, now and then you 
get a cruel Terrestrial governor-general of Venus, 
who oppresses the Venusians beyond the call of 
duty and in the end receives a proper comeuppance, but the right of Earth to have governorsgeneral on Venus is never questioned. 

During the war we were deluged with stories 
about brutal Jovian Krauts and treacherous Mercurians obviously patterned after the Japanese. 
That was to be expected. Already STF writers 
with no better ideas are beginning to discover 
on the outer planets races of savage bearded 
androids who maintain communist systems complete with iron curtains. We trust the editors to 
prevent that from becoming a trend, for the sake 
of international good will, if nothing else. But, 
as long as the race issue figures so strongly in 
the stories, the fans can be expected to come out 
with it once in a while. " 

Ray H. Ramsay 

HOTSY-DANDY, WITH RED EYES 

1431 2nd Avenue, S. E., 
Cedar Rapids, Iowa 
Dear Editor: 

I shall make this as brief as my inflated ego 
will permit. (I like to imagine a two page epistle 
all by me in print.) 

The magazine was really a hotsy-dandy. It 
started out with a perfect cover and never left 
that standing all the way through. It was an 
example you should set more often. Ah, yes, it's 
proud that you should be to have edited such 
a masterpiece. 

The stories were all swell. The Zemmd morsel 
was perfect. Such mastery of style and plotting I 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



Hasse should try the longer epics more often, this 
boy is really talented, once he lets himself go. 
Thank you, thank you, thank you, for this wonderful story. 

After that, in a very equal tie, were Hostage 
of Tomorrow and Animat. They were both good 
as they could be. Both novel ideas, too. 

I liked Moon of Madness an awful lot. It sort 
of reminded me of the good immortal days of 
Peacock. (No offense there, PLP, for you've 
given us things to surpass Peacock's most elaborate dreams.) (Cheese — tanks — Ed,) 

The style of it alone is the only thing that 
held Dwellers in Silence together. Really, Brad, 
old red-eyes, the plot was something terrible. It 
held up like last year's spinach. 

Runaway, Lady Into Hell-Cat, and The Star 
Beast all were pretty good, too. In fact, there 
wasn't a yarn in the whole book that one couldn't 
say he enjoyed after he read them. 

And now, says the suave, sophisticated reader 
rubbing well-manicured hands together, for the 
Vizigraph. The Paul Cox feud has gained enough 
speed already without my adding to it. All I 
will say is that Mr. Cox, in his bluntly-aimed 
aversions, preached the exact opposite of what 
he should have been taught. I trust he sees by 
this time that his place in fandom is now dissolved because of this. 

Give the first pic to Charles Henderson; he 
was on the ball. Let Leland Sapiro have second 
for his haughty rebuttal to Cox, and give third 
to Bob Bradley. 

I must leave the sacred dwelling of PLANET 
now, oh Master Payne, but fear not, for I shall 

return ! 

Fancerely, 

Marvin Williams 
WONT VOTE FOR HIMSELF 

4 Spring Street, 
Lubec, Maine 
Dear Editor: 

Good ole Planet has come out once again and 
once again I'm going to subject you to a letter 
commenting on said PS. No objections, I hope. 

•Gad, that girl on the cover certainly has a big 
veil on her ha . . . hmmm, no hat. Oh, well, nice 
cover. Keep Anderson! 

Nice to see Henry Hasse back in Planet. A 
pretty good story, too — only that blurb on the 
cover certainly didn't apply to any yarn in this 
issue of PS ! I notice that this one is faintly related to his previous stories about Aladdian, some 
of which were co-authored by Albert de Pina. 
WHERE IS DE PINA?!!? HUH?? 

Say, Coppel really had a nice yarn in Runaway! 
Good. 

Moon of Madness was, to be frank (altho I'm 
really Ed), was (oops, repeating myself) 
louseeeeeeee. This awful thing after his excellent 
Mutiny on Venus an issue or so ago? Tsk, tsk. 

Dwellers in Silence was very good. Better than 
he's been doing lately. But I wish Brad would 
switch to Venus or anywhere to get away from 
Mars for a while! 

The Star Beast was darned good! Knight 
should appear more often. Whatever you do, 
don't unlock his shackles, even for a minute! 

Stan Mullen by Lady Into Hell-Cat was very 
good. (Well, that was all I could do after start 



World's Greatest Collection of 
Strange and Secret Photographs 

NOW you can travel round the world with the most daring adventurers. You can see with your own eyes the weirdest peoples on 
earth. You witness the strangest customs of the red, whit©, 
brown, hlaok and yellow races. You attend their startling rites, their 
mysterious practices. They are all assembled for you in these five 
great volumes of THE SECRET MUSEUM OF MANKIND. 

600 LARGE PAGES 

Here is the world's Greatest Collection of Strange and Secret Photographs. Here are Exotic Photos from Europe, Primitive Photos 
from Africa, Torture Photos from Asia. Strange Photos from Oceania 
and America, and hundreds of others. There are almost 600 LARGE 
PAGES of Strange and Secret Photographs, each page 57 square 
inches in size. j qqq p HOTO S 

You see actual courtship practiced in every quarter of the world. You 
see mpgic and mystery in queer lands where the foot of a white man 
has rarely trod. You see Oriental 
modes of marriage and slavery in 
China, Japan, India, etc. Through 
the Intimacy of the cameras you witness the exotic hahits of every continent and the strangest rustoms, in 
America. Europe, etc. You are bewildered by these large pages of ONE 
THOUSAND PHOTOGRAPHS, in 
eluding 130 full-page photos and 
thrilled by the hundreds of short 
stories that describe them. 

5 PICTURE PACKED VOLUMES 

The SECRET MUSEUM OF MANKIND consists of five picturepacked volumes (solidly bound together for convenient reading). Dip 
into any one of these volumes, and as 
you turn its pages, you find it difficult to tear yourself away. Here, in 
stnry and unusual photo, is tho 
WORLD'S GREATEST COLLECTION OF STRANGE AND SECRET 
PHOTOGRAPHS, containing everything from Female Beauty Hound the 
World to the most -Mysterious CulU 
and Customs. These hundreds and 
hundreds of large pages will give you 
days and nights of thrilling instruction. 

SEND NO MONEY 

Simply sign and mail the coupon. Remember, each of the 5 Volumea 
is 9^4 inches high, and opened, over a foot wide! Remember also 
that this 5-Volume Set formerly sold for $10. And It Is bound In 
expensive 'life- time" cloth. Don't put this off. Fill out the coupon, 
drop it in the next mail, and receive this huge work at once. 



Contents of 5-Volume Set 


VOLUME 1 


The Secret Album of Africa 


VOLUME 2 


The Secret Album of Europe 


VOLUME 3 


The Secret Album of Asia 


VOLUME 4 


The Secret Album of America 


VOLUME 5 


The Secret Album of Oceania 



Specimen Photos 

Dress and Undress Round 

the World 
Various Secret Societies 
Strange Crimes, Criminals 
Omens, Totems & Taboos 
Mysterious Customs 

1,000 Strange and 
Secret Photos 



FORMERLY $><r 

NOW ONLY * 



For the complete 
^ VOLUME SET 



VOLUMES-^ 
BOUND 

TOC ETHER 






■ ■ 



■ Metro Publications, 363 Broadway, Dept. 1807, N. Y. 13, H. Y. 
B Send me "The Secret Museum of Mankind" (5 great volumes 
B bound together) I will pay postman $1.98, plus postage on 

■ arrival. If not delighted. I will return books In 5 days for full 
I refund of $1.98. 

{ Name , 

■ Address . . 

i City Zone Stata. 

■ CHECK HEBE If you are enclosing $1.98. thus saving 

| mailing _«*osta. _8ame Money-Back Guarantee. 



Canadian and Foreign Orders — $2.50 in Advance. 



Please mention Fiction House Magazine Group when answering advertisements 






110 



PLANET STORIES 



ing out wrong, you know!) I hope Mullen has 
more in future issues. Will he? 

Animat by Basil Wells. Pretty good but I'll 
bet a stack of Planet Stories that you cut hunks 
out of it! Seems disjointed. 

Hostage of Tomorrow is the first good story 
by Abernathy to appear in PS. He did good 
this time but the ending was a little weak. Don't 
say it wasn't! 

Now to march bravely into the VIZIGRAPH. 
But to join in the fight? Nope. Chad's Dad took 
care of things pretty well as did many of the 
others. I think it's about time this got dropped 
and let die out. Or fight it out in the fanzines. 
Anyway, Paul Cox wants to let it die or so he 
said in a fanzine. 

Ray Nelson gets number one spot for a good 
hunk of letter-hacking (and he's my friend anyway). Gee, this is hard. Who'll get 2 and 3? 
Why don't I write a good letter some time, and 
then I'll vote for me! (Honest Ed they call me.) 
John King gets the #2 spot and the Olivers 
get #3 for clamping down on the Big Controversy 
now raging thru the Vizi. 

Leland Sapiro ?ets honorable mention for his 
letter. But I wonder what's eating Bradley? He 
is certainly mad at Brackett I Speaking of Brackets how about having her do a story soon huh? 
Don't tell me you let her escape! While I'm at 
it, how about having some of those off -trail tales 
that used to grace PS's pages? Remember them? 
And what's happened to the Feature Flash ? And 
when are you gonna get PS going bi-monthly?! 
And . . : oh, stop tearing your hair! What's 
wrong with a few innocent questions? 

Well, I just gotta go now (as much as I 
hate to) so get busy doing something about those 
questions I ast! Willya? 

STFanatically, 

Ed Cox 

OFF TO GRUMPH ALPHA! 

1611 Ferry Street, 
_ _ Lafayette, Ind. 

Dear Editor: 

It is with sadness I note that our beloved Vizigraph has become a veritable battleground. Fully 
half of the letters therein deal with the problem 
of racial superiority and/or inferiority . . . Leave 
us drop the subject right now from the Vizi. 
(Amen — Ed.) 

t. T S5KEr g next t0 the cover ' I mmt admit that 
the FEM is superb, marvelous, etc., her legs in 

R^tI^JSIt *! e yS?} in S Anderson's technical sfeill, 

fm T T c£P.?M R i? ST 0F THE PICTURE IS 
LOUSY ! ! ! ! ! Do you hear ? LOUSY ! I It is also 
crude in the extreme. 

Going on to the stories, I find EZMD by Hasse 
well written space opera, quite interesting, but 
still hack. Why won't Hasse end his stories like 
Bradbury? Have Curt turn Loraine in to the 
police, or get killed by the Energons, or something. But no! In PS, when boy meets girl in 
97.5 cases out of 100 she gets him. 

Runaway was, get this, mediocre. The writing 
was poor. No further comment. 

Moon of Madness, ditto, ditto, ditto, 
t £S feliers In Silence bv Bradbury was EXCELLENT yet I rate it only second place because 
good though it was — 

The Star Beast was better, better, can your 



sluggish wits(?) grasp the fact? Mr. Damon 
Knight is rapidly becoming one of the foremost 
authors contributing to PS I His story was the 
best in the issue. Happy daysl Now you have 
two authors who can write. 

Lady Into Hellcat by Stanley Mullen, very 
good. Only one criticism to make, Lee Heydrick s 
first name should have been Rinehard, more 
Germanic you know, and perfectly suited for a 
police officer. 

Animat by Basil Wells, was not too good, 
particularly as the plot was stale, (Making it 
97.501 cases out of 100). N. F. C 

Hostage Of Tomorrow by Robert Abernathy 
I did not like. It presupposes a paradox of the 
first order. Stated briefly it is this: Hero gets 
into time machine and goes to Grumph Alpha, 
A,D. 2345. He doesn't like it at all, so he heads 
back to 19XX when there was still hope, and 
shifts the destiny of the human race onto the 
time track for Grumph Beta. Since he has been 
to Grumph Alpha it must obviously still exist, 
on a separate time tr.ck. Since the destiny 
pattern for Grumph Beta must have existed all 
the time, all our hero has done is to laboriously 
shift himself from pattern A to pattern B, changing both patterns slightly to produce patterns 
Aa, Ab, Ba, and Bb which have always had 
potential existence. See? 

Going back to the Vizi for a moment, I vote 
pictures to R. F. Nelson, Bill Oberfield, and R. A. 
Bradley. Those other guys play too rough. Why 
not get them to start a discussion on a nice 
harmless subject like ESP, or something? 

Yours truly, 

A. A. Gilliland 

HIDES US FROM HUBBY 

Apt. #201 
._ Veterans Village 

Dear Editor: Canton, New York 

Your latest Planet, Spring, has just been received and contents noted. No one but my 
husband even suspects that this item is in my 
possession. I have it well camouflaged among 
the preceding two or three years' issues. My 
best friends shall never get a peep at it— that is, 
until I have finished re-reading the Vizi. I do 
not give the code-key to the Vizi to just everybody. Too many of my neighbors have discovered 
a counter-code, which they phrase, quote, So 
What? end quote. This remark has me up on my 
high horse and down in the dumps. As a future 
member of the South- Side-of-the-Tracks Department of State, I am forced to formulate a policy. 
Praise and/or constructive criticism only. Merciful silence for the hopeless. 

Zcmmd— space jarg and perils and jumping to 
and fro with blasters and eyes like blazing pools 
of hate for them as likes big-game hunting. 

Hostage— -the GPs jump through the years, 
taking command of situations right and left, outsmarting the dirty villains and leap back to go 
on doing it in some other time. Just peachy if 
you aren't getting enough exercise. 

Rttnaway—this round of shudders (mild shudders) is for those who like to 'cringe just a wee 
at the notion of powerful alien life. 

Moon of Madness— the ugly tale of degradation for those who wish to wallow in moon-gore. 

Dwellers in Silence— A dash of unloneliness for 





fc^'*?"XE& 


^H 






JL^4^' 


gO 


^^^S^^ 


^P^P^lM 


lllj^ 






IsPillll^^P 


m 




Kraal 




"The book that makes men remember their youth!!"* 



JI4 PAGES OF RIB-TICKLING READING 



80 STORIES YOU WONT SOON FORGET 



TALES OF WOMEN AS YOU LIKE THEM 
BY MEN WHO KNOW THEM BEST 

Maybe youVa a bachelor, or mayba you're a married man and the etrln* Here's What Goe$ Oil 

leads to your wife's apron, but brother, you're going to learn about women **m>mmm A-*!** aiii wvmmmm 

4>n almost every page of "BACHELOR'S QUARTERS," the book that con- ff} BACHELOR S QUARTERS 

Centrates on the man's point of view. Every tale in this 764 page book is RA^TOB JL THE DOCTOB 1 ^ WIFE 

bitten by a master story-teller, by those who have understood and probed THE PQCTQR & THE TOCTUK > Wirt 

the deepest secrets of women as they really are. Here you will find sophisti- - nS*P PRATE "wOMAM 

*ated t worldly females, innocents, tigresses, designing, scheming women JIMMT ANW IMC VCOrtKMic ywrnMrs 

Who can make shambles of a man's life these and many more in the ^_ *«».« uAfte amat£?B 

most story-packed book that ever kept you up nights. Read for 10 days FREE, THE WOMAN WHO MADE ANATOIE 

at absolutely no risk. If you don't agree it is the most complete, most fasci- FRANCE 

hating encyclopaedia of WOMEN you have ever read, it won't cost you a Francis Cribble 

single cent. Rush the coupon today and get your copy while we still have one! THE MAN WITH ONLY RYE WIVES 



THE CRITICS LOVED IT! 

fUviewed by many of the largest newspapers, BACHELOR'S QUARTERS ha* 
been widely acclaimed. You'll discover the 
Reason yourself when you meet, between 
the covers of BACHELOR'S QUARTERS. 
Some of the most unusual 
offered you In print. 




SEND NO MONEY DUSKy RUTH Admiral Mark Kt. 

Enjoy this big book for 10 daya* free trial. r™..™! 

Meet Ctarf.se. Co-tte, Rinty. Kate and her IJ ~ i .*«P£e TUB ClSJaJrO 

sisters-in-adventure without risk to your THE HOUSE Or TMfc SINNER 

puree. Simply fill in and mail the free gift Caradoc Event 

r^-.^^::»-c'o.S.%^;~»ia n J , o THE LADY WHO COULDN'T BLUSH 

with the coupon and receive both books poet* Catulle MendeS 

^^:m^»r^Un B .H A ^ u E t°, R .'? THE GARMENTS OF A GIRL 

N ° Wl THE HONEY-MOOM SURPRISE F - C °° k * 

Clement Wood 

LOVE AND A FUR COAT 

Hjalmar Roderberg 

and that's only the beginning! 




Here** your opportunity 

to tour New York's famous 

Greenwich Villa**. This FREE 

copy of Greenwich Village with your order 

describes In detail homes of American artists, dwelling 

places of the poets, abode of the sophisticated. An in


B. It more Publishing Co., Dept. F-133 
45 East 17th St., New York 3, N. Y. 

b RUSH my copy el BACHELOR'S QUARTERS plu. 

1- FREE "GREENWICH VILLAGE.- Oe arrival 1 will depent with postman only $2.98 plu* po»ta«e. 1 may return 
th. book* for full refund witbitt 10 day* if eel compratalr 
I satisfied.. 



teresting and fsscinsting trip awaits you as you tour J g^^-^^ £.«•"• 



. Age


through the pages expertly described by John Cournos | Hamm 

■ City... .. — Zone State-. 

trv» 45 t. 17*- St.. N.Y.C. 3 Us»»»»s» »s -iei ■■ i m — — m «■ am i eieS 



. . . rush coupon now and get your copy. 



- Address.. 



ftlLTMORI P»« n 




111 






112 



PLANET STORIES 




those who like unloneliness (including me). I 
don't know where Ray -keeps finding his gentle, 
sympathetic space crews, but this yarn gives a 
clue. A gem, like most of his stories. 
The Star Beast and Hell-Cat— Silence. 
Animat— The de-robotizing of Jay Forsix was 
a clever idea— wish the conclusion had been 
fresher and the story long enough to work out 
the idea. 

Vizigraph— Ah I Meat I A fight to Nelson, who 
really reads and who can spot the inconsistencies 
which detract from my favorite reading and 
therefore maybe help improve the quality, getting 
me more for my money, which would be swell. 
A second to Cox. Anybody who does that much 
work should at least get a second for it, even 
if I don't agree entirely with his choices. A third, 
on a whimsy, to Henderson, just because he 
chose to talk about Tenn's Brooklyn Project, 
which I consider the last and only word on the 
subject of time travel, the only story to deal 
reasonably with the old paradox of the return— 
and the ending was fine writing with the leaving 
out of everything you could reason out for yourself. 

I don't mean to ignore the current (and of the 
centuries) issue of super-races, though I would 
rather see the issue appear in fiction, which might 
illuminate the problem more effectively than 
haranguing letters. I even have to get in my 
own quarter-credit's worth. I must confess that 
I don't guite see what a super-race is going to 
spend its time doing besides just sitting around 
dominating (a dangerous procedure, according to 



Toynbee). Who wants to be superman anyhow 
when you can have so much fun just being folks? 
My view of the destiny and evolution of man 
seems to include a growing consicousness of 
people as individuals (maybe even animals— consider Eckstein's Everyday Miracle and Lofting's 
beloved fantasy Doctor Dolittle). Chad and his 
dad and Proctor are certainly reasonable; but 
reason is handmaid to motivation. Perhaps I 
am so willing to accept their reasoning because 
nobody I can identify with a pure race (next to 
impossible anyhow) is viciously interfering with 
my work or my fun, and this work and fun are 
being made subtler and more interesting by a 
number of people whose "race" is not immediately identifiable as "super/* 

Elizabeth Curtis 
WHAT? NO MORE EGO BOO? 

Great Village, N.S., 
Canada 
Dear Editor: 

I may be one in ten thousand, but I do not 
think so— when I write to you and say that I 
think the Vizigraph a useless waste of good 
space in the magazine that might be utilized by 
printing another story. 

What do I care what Mr. Critic (?) thinks of 
the stories? Not one whit. If I don't like a story, 
I can pass it by and go on to something else. 
Of course, I have my preferences, but why 
should I inflict them on all your readers? It 
would be perfectly all right for me to write to 
the Editor which stories I liked best, as by the 
readers doing so the Editor is, I presume, guided 
in his selection of future stories. But why make 
it public? 

As far as I can see, the Vizigraph is controlled 
by a few rabid fans who call each other anything 
but ladies and gentlemen, all in a spirit of fun, 
I presume, but which with the slang and misspelled words is not funny to me at-all, but rather 
nauseating. 

Furthermore, they hold some of the writers 
up to ridicule, which, however much they do not 
like their stories, is not sporting or fair play. 
No doubt these writers have given their best, 
and I think the fans, in decency, should write 
to the Editor privately. 

You would say, probably, that these public 
letters are of public interest. I do not agree with 
you I think, if a vote was taken that a very 
small proportion of your readers, the ones who 
are always writing to the Vizigraph, would be 
in favor of it, instead of another tale. 

I hereby propose (not that it will be taken 
up) that you print a questionnaire regarding the 
Vizigraph to see whether I am right. My only 
doubt regarding the outcome of it is that I am 
doubtful whether the readers who do not write 
to the Vizigraph will answer. . . . 

Yours faithfully 

Arthur D. Hall 

(See page 59, this issue, Arthur. We put it 
there to be sure to catch the anti-V isigrafih 
readers— En.) y 



«f 



n 

5 



c/> 




M 



CM 



