STRANGE ADVENTURES ON OTHER WORLDS— 

PLANET 



Stones 



SPRING d^ 25^ 

From 
lo he came preaching seduction of 
the mind 

THE BRAIN 



A.N.C. 



XiMSEOFA THOUSAND WINGS 

I ""^"^'^^■fcha^jstars - nfliiiel^*"*-^^A?.GIS BUDRYS 



'AMM^MWM 




CROSSBOW ARROWS Specially designed 
heads Specify whether for Hunting or Fishing. (Sold only with Crossbow ) 60f each 




^OWER HUNTING CROSSBOW An exciting new sporting 
thrill' Aims and hits like a rifle Shoots anoAS like bullets 
KILLS all big North American game Deer Bea' etc 80 lb 
l)ull effective at over 200' range Silent — permits eitra 
shots at game Precision trigger action pm pomt accuracy 

Beginner', get amazing results NOW $19 95 

(NOTE When ordering this item, enclose S2 00 deposit) 



HUNTERS THROWING TOM 
AHAWK A Genuine Toma 
hawk with brightly pol 
ished 7" forged Steell 

head, perfectly balanced!, 

for throwing Ideal for Hunting Camping 
—has 3 chopping and a piercine blade 
With Leather Carrying Case NOW $4 99 





FUN FOR "FROGMEN" 



-COMMANOO" KNIFE Real 

"Commando ' weapon An 

all metal needle pointed, 

razor sharp 1?' kmfe that may save your life if you hunt 
or fish where dangerous animals or poison snakes ap 
pear Military Sheath _ NQw $4 97 



(French Style DUELING SWORDS 

^jType once used m deadly com
bat! It's fun. develops quick thinking 41 
blue spring steel, metal guards jubber safety 



tips 2 Swords and Instruction Book 

NOW . 



. $4 98 



%^ 





J SQUIRREL CALL Brings 



the squirrels to you! So natural they cant resist it 
they come right out into the open Wonderful for nature 
lovers and hunters Full directions _NOW $3 98 



^: 



Australian Type BOOMERANG Wonderful new 
sport Amazing "Mystery Stick" travels on 
225 ft. Circular flight and comes back to 
you' Th'S flight tested Boomerang is swift, 
silent and IS eflective against small game 
[itel'en! shotgun target Fine souvenir Full 
■nstfuctions NOW $2.49 




IT ALWAYS 
COMES BACK! 



•FIREBALL' SLINGSHOT 

SilenI Sweet Shootmg, 
Eitra Powerful— you get 
that "feel of accuracy" 

^with your first shots 

Balanced 7 Redwood stock, live 
rubber Slmg and Reinforced Pouch 
NOW $2 47 




SWIM MASK Clear vision 
for underwater diving and 
fishing Protects swim 
mer s eyes and nose Un 
breakable lens Rustless 
fittings and pure Ocean 
Green rubber NOW $2.48 



THROWING DAG 

6ER An exciting 
sport that pro 
vides lun and 
i thrills— indoors or 
outdoors. This knife is light m weight and 

Ieipertly balanced to stick Tempered steel 
blade with double bevel edges fmhossed 
Leather Hunf.n f r "iheath ^^ ^ ^ ^ NOW ^148 




ARROW BOW GUN 

New type Cross 
■ Bow shoots 12 in 
metal tipped arrows with powerful live 
action sling for bullet like smash at 
small game Kills rabbits, squirrels, 
pests 10 Ar.ows included NOW $4 95 



FINNISH HUNTING KNIFE A famous 
beautiful knife handmade m Finland 
Richly engraved Wade with 
deep blood grooves Flashy 
borsehead handle Tooled 
leather Sheath NOW $3.79 




PARATROOP BOOTS 
Perfect for hiking, 
hunting, farming, 
fishing. An eicelt 
ent pair of boots, styled after the remarkable 
lumping boots used by our famous paratroopers 
nder the roughest conditions— and worn with 
pride m the toughest, heman outfit there is' 
Sturdy leather Sizes: 6 1? E W.dtt> $11.95 



22 CAL REPEATER 
AUTOMATIC For 

sports and protec 
tion this gun f.res 

22 cal bla 
with a TERRIFIC 

BLAST Looks 

feels sounds like "the real thing 
6Shot Magazine Made of Carbon 
Steel Safety Catch No permit 
needed NOW $9 95 

Note This item not available to N T 

State residents 




FREE 

NO RISK HOME TRIAL 



WE GUARANTEE IT! We want you 
to inspect and enjoy this tine 
quality merchandise riKfit <" 
your OAn home You risk noth 
inR' 'f not delighted return for 
FULL PRICE REFUND Every arti 
cie we sell is CUARANTEfO' Or 
der from' this famous comoany 
and be convinced 

CHAMPION SALES 



GUARANTEED SAVINGS 



ARROW SLING GUN A new thrill 
huntin.^' Powerful Slmg Gun 
sends 12" metal tipped arrows 
thru metal guide 
barrel to 300' 
range Swifl Si 
lent Accurate — 
hills all small 
game 5 Arrows in 
eluded NOW $2 98 





SWIM FINS Swim 
Faster— almost double 
speed' Race and turn 
with a flip of your fins 
Ideal for underwater 
fishing and diving 
Pure Rustless 


NOW_ 


$4 49 Pair| 





UNDERWATER 
BREATHING 
SNORKEL. A re 

markable device-allows you to breathe 
easily while swimming with 
your head under water An 
automatic valve keeps out 
water when diving $3.49 



jL\^4.>-^-*' 


__i ORIENTAL 


BATTLE 
throwing 
J ft and 
-indoors 

tions 


KNIFE. 

It IS 

IS balor out 
_$224 


Designed for 
made to split 
anced to stick 
doors Rare so 


long distance 
a board at 3 

Great sportuvenir Instruc 




JaRMY training RIFLE. Learn the thrill ol h^., 
idling a regulation rifle and practice airing 
CO ordination with this bolt action model Army training 
rifle Trigger signal simulates actual f.ring Military sling. 
Safe action _ mow U m 



AUTOMATIC 

DATE 

INDICATOR 




TELLS 

• TIME 
•DATE 

• SPEED 
DISTANCE 



SPORTSMAN'S WATCH 

Ideal for outdoor use 

Measures speed, distance 

t Luminous Dial. Unbreakable Crystal, fine lewelled move 
ment With Eipansion Bracelet S8 95 fpius 90>' Fed tax) 



MAIL THt6 CQUP>ON 

CHAMPION SALES Dept WFH 

410 Madison Ave.. Nevy York 17. N. Y. 
■ RUSH SERVICE! Jusi cut out picturzs of 
1 articles desired and attach to this coupon. 



TROPICAL HELMET. 
Protect yourself from 
the hot sun when hik 
tng. fishing, hunting 
or at the beach. Same 
style used by Jungle 
hunters. Suspension 
type, adjusts to all 
heads NOW $3.95 



I enclose $1 00 Please send me the articles I have selected for NO 
RISK trial and e«amination On arrival t will pay postman the balance 
plus postage If I am not COMPLETELY SATISFIED. I may return in 5 
davs for refund of full purchase price 

NOTE: Not sold to minors under 1 7 STATE AGE 
(PLEASE PRINT) 

NAME 



ADDRESS. 
TOWN 



(No orders accepted from Canada I 



t 




t 

i 




I 



VOL. 6, No, 10 



A FICTION HOUSE MAGAZINE 



SPRING, 1955 



!!► Two Novels of Distant Worlds 

MrRAGE FOR PLANET X. ......... . Sfonfey Mulfeii 34 

The prize was sealed, its contents unknown. Yet numberfess scavengers from 
a dozen barbarfc moons; adventurers from nameless, semi-explored 
asteroids, arrived for the deathless auction ... all to bid, with guns and 
monies, for Roper's notorious loot. 

THE BRAIN SINNER Alan E. Nour^e 68 

An invisible network of human minds lay across the country, delicately 
tuned, waiting breathlessly for the first spark of contact from the unkown 
unpredictable telepathic Alien. 

!!► Four Star-flung Short Stories 

CAGE OF A THOUSAND WINGS . . Algis Budrys 4 

On wings of bltie-green and scarlet gold the mocking one rode the wind currents of pale and ghostly Ydlis. 

THE BEAST-JEWEL OF MARS y. e. Thies.en U 

The city was strange, fantastic, beautiful. He'd never been there before, yet 
already he was a fabulous legend ... a dire, hatefyl legend. 

HAGERTYS ENZYMES . . A. L. Haley 24 

There's a place for every man, and a man for every place ... but on robotharried Mars the situation was just a wee bit different. 

THE SPACE BETWEEN Hobert E. Oilberf 60 

Like Nathan Hale of old, Jak SP regretted having but one vitality to give for 
his planet . . . ond starry-eyed Drusilla. 

THE VIZIGRAPH . 2. 91 

Lair of joy and gloom. 



h 



Cover Illustration by Kelly Freas 



T. T. SCOTT, President 



JACKO'SUiLIVAN, Erf/*or 



MALCOLM REJSS, Mgr. Editor 



PLANKT STOini^S • Published qiiart^^rly l»y T.ove Komanc.^ PnhilNhlnjp C©.. Ine., l«r>« Summer Stt^t 
Biamforcl r«...i. 1 ho en t.r*. contents of this maffttzinp are copyrighted, IftOr* by Love Romaueerrublf«h^t' 
Co., Inc. R«>«*ii«^r<M] an Necond-cIasH matter S<-pt#*mber S«. ift-T^; at the Pont omoe at StAmf«wi ri««?. a ,1 f • ^. 
entry at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879 A I ?!%« rcm?v^ I^H.^^^^ 

euhscription: %\.m); additional postage for f'nnadal.V • foreign c^u (ri^r^J V«r l^vTA^J fL"^^ One-year 
AdvertiBing Director. Fictioo Uouse.^'liic.. 1658 SuinJ^r' Str'TsfuTforuTc^^^^ ^ ' pbInteS m uTl! 



ll 






hmd 



THE VIZIGRAPN 






Just shows to go you that editors— aye, even stf editors— can 
be as wrong as an eighteenth century space ship. We are referring, 
of course, to the listing "Cover lUustration by Algis Budrys" on 
the contents page of the Winter issue. 

Mr. Budrys explains how the foul-up has affected him in his 
amusing letter further along in these columns. To set straight the 
record, Kelly Freas rendered the cover but since the lazy fellow 



neglected to sign his painting I got the twisted idea that Mr. 
Budrys had done it . — l^li- .-- l t» i . . 



ntmg I got the twisted idea that Mr. 

_- . . . probably, too, because Budrys wrote a 

story to fit the Freas cover for the current issue . . . probably, too, 
because Budrys and Freas are buddies, and came to tlie office 
together bearing the Winter and Spring cover paintings . . . and 
probably, too, because tliis editor is just plain all mixed up . . . 
aye, even now. 

And speaking of illusrations, Winter winners are: 1) Warren 
F. Unk; 2) Ted E. White; 3) Jim Harmon. 

PEN AHD EASa 

New York City 
Dear Mr. O'SuUivan, 

Inasmuch as no explanation ever catches up with a mistake, why 
not designate Kelly Freas as the author of the bird-giri story? 
That way we'll come out even. 

And here I thought Kelly and I had exhausted all possible ways 
of collaborating on cover/cover story combinations. 

This explains much. For weeks, people have been coming up to 
me with "Hey — I hear you did a cover for PLANET." 

rd smile, dig my toe ia the sand, blush modestly, and murmur 
something about "No, sorry — ^cover STORY. Yup. Finally made it. 
Been trying to sell PLANET since I was twelve. Built it around 
a Freas cover. You should have seen it before he painted those 
feathers in!" 

Hell, I knew I lik<xi the guy, but I never dreamed Kelly was me 
all along. 

Oh— if at all possible, I'd like to get the central figure from 
the Eberle illustration for THE GRAVE OF SOLON REGH. You 
can keep the rest of it. All I want's the central figure; I've always 
had a fondness for that pose of Erich von Stroheim's. 

In parting, I'd like to observe that I wish I was a peon whose 
padrone was keeping him from getting in touch with a group of 
engineers who were trying to repair a disruption in Earth s atmospheric envelope. Then I could shoot my don and write the skyjoiners. 

Yours in confusion, 

A. J. Budrys 

P. S. My wife tells me this sounds as though I might be genuinely 
angry and indignant. Believe me, I'm not Lots of luck with 
PLAJSIET — it's still one of my favorite magazines, science-fictioa 
or otherwise. U this be idiocy, make the most of It 



THE VmORAPH 



Ed's Note: Right, Algis, no explanation ever catches 
up with a mistake . . . and certainly not my explanation which precedes your missive. But honestly 
now, wasn't it fun ... all that acclaim, I mean. 

WIDE-SCREEN ANSWER 

811 N. Milpas Street 
Santa Barbara, 
California 
Dear Editor, 

First of all, I thought I might sit down and 
relate how sicliceningiy unconvincing is a story containing a spaceman named Casey and a Jupiterian 
(awkward word, wot?) named, echhhh, Attaboy. 
Not only was the whole story very thin, not only 
was it hacked, but it was dragged down to the 
depths of something like . . . "Rockets blasting. 
Spaceman Hains dropped down through the atmosphere of the tiny planet, Bubbiznadgifgh, grasping 
the controls with a hard, space-tanned hand." Which 
as you well know is merely a variation of . . . 
"Spurs digging, Cowboy Hains galloped down 
through the pass to the tiny cow-town of Split Lip, 
Wyoming, grasping the reins with a hard, suntanned hand." Now, gentlemen of the jury, I ask 
you, in all fairness to people who like SCIENCE 
FICTION, why, why must this fellow A. L. Haley 
(?) turn out this sort of thing? Be serious — JUPITER'S JOKE is not science-liction, I refuse to believe 
anything else. 

Then I thought perhaps I would sit down and 
help back up the opinion of Paul Mittel — Mittlcb — 
Mutil . . . Mitt (And I thought I had difficulty 
convincing people to spell my name right.) that 
a story which supposedly does not take place in 
1954 containing characters using 1954 slang is not 
only not convincing, it is annoying. (We all know 
about Alley Oop, don't we?) Or perhaps, I said to 
myself, I should mention that I class those who 
casually mention to the unknowing millions that 
Snavely Sackrider is really a pseudonym for Cosmo 
Y Ramhandler WMth those who idly flick cigarette 
ashes into their coffee cups. You see, the coffee 
grounds usually turn the ashes green, gagging the 
waitress who picks up the dishes. Ah, the marvels 
of chemistry. Then 1 read a little further and found 
that Mittelbuscher liked me, or at least my letters, 
and I said to myself, you can't slam this chap, especially when he has such interesting and accurate 
views on writing, (to say nothing of his marvelous, 
accute appraisal of letters and letter writers — 
Aheh). 

Then, perhaps, I could be nasty and fly into a 
lavender rage and scream to high heaven that Winston Marks is an absolute moron, an incurable idiot 
to stand there with his facts hanging out and say. 
Ahem, my travelogue voice, Phobos, the nearest 
moon of the planet Mars, is 3700 miles from the 
planet, and presents a lovely large crescent to the 
inhabitants. Marks will soon go down the tubes 
unless he starts to be more accurate and say 
Phobos is 5800 miles from the planet and is quite 
small to the naked eye, since it is only 10 miles 
in diameter. But 1 liked the story, and think it 
drives home a very good point. Much as we hate 
to admit it, men, we can't get along indefinitely 
without women. I can safely say this without fear 
of letting any secrets. Tlie women know this fact 
as well as we do, and sometimes I wonder . . . 

AH of this only serves to prove that this joker, 
Norman J. Clarke, is in reality some sort of 
international spy, hiding his real purpose behind the 
views he propounds in his letter. Why? You ask 
me why? Because no one could be so positively 



insane as to really believe that sex is only a passing 
fad. I do hope Mr. Clarke is not trying to be 
empirical with his statements. I (personally) have 
noticed no signs of its popularity waning. But then, 
understand, I do not make a practice of living 
under a rock. Sex has, Mr. Clarke, proved to be a 
satisfactory method of propagating the race for quite 
some time now — longer than you or I are capable 
of grasping. Sex-urge is a cause of instability in 
.some cases. Plato, as you may know, decried sex as 
retarding his work. But then, I've heard that Plato 
was homosexual, so I don't pay much attention to 
this phase of the argument. We were, Mr. Clarke, 
created with sex, and throughout time it has been 
again and again proven that a man needs a woman 
more than he needs anyone else. I realize you could 
indefinitely point to cases where this has not been 
true or where the principle has been corrupted, but 
then I could equally long deflate your arguments. 
We were, after all created with the sex-urge and it 
is only our form of society which will dictate the 
manner in which we satisfy it, which, I belie\'e we 
could not be punished for, since we would have to 
be punished by He who created it in us. And 
lastly, why, Mr. Clarke, did you drop the subject 
of sex so suddenly? Was it a bit too hot to handle, 
or did you come up against something you were 
afraid you couldn't explain? 

Then, saving it till last, I was going to remark 
on the observation of Carol McKinney that there 
is some nastiness on tl^ wind about (stage whisi>er) 
Westerns. Personally, I consider it all an international plot against my rank. But never fear, the evil 
powers, headed by Spade Cooley, can never reap 
their insidious harvest of intimidation and infamy 
against science-fiction. Loyalty, that is our weapon! 
As long as there are those who will, science-fiction 
can never die. Chester Mountbattea can never succeed ! 

At last, someone realizes how sweet, lovable, and 
cuddly I really am. Carol, you have no idea how 
sweet you really are. At last someone loves me. 

Tonight ladies and gentlemen, we have presented 
a first-hand account of the manner in w4iich a fan 
writes a letter to the editor. Of course, we have not 
delved too deeply into the fan's mind, and have, of 
course, expurgated some of his thoughts. But tonight A fan letter has been written, and YOU ARE 
THERE. 

Yours for being lovable. 

Uncle Bill Tuning 

P. S. Val Walker, I suspect you of being a low, 
conniving bum. The University of California, largest 
educational institution in the world, and also 
the place where I attend college, will not admit 
Sage-runners like yourself, majoring in groundhog 
husbandry. Neither do I occupy myself reading that 
object named Tennessee Williams. As long as 
you're naming authors, old man, why not include 
Hemingway, the greatest of our time? 

Since you insist on slopping up the works, allow 
me to inform you that 1 was not referring to 
passion. I was not referring to marriage, I was referring to love, and although the two go hand in 
hand they're not synonymous,, you know, or do you 
know? I was reading about passion in Psychology 
and Life — Ruch, Mr. Walker, long before you Psych 
prof introduced you to it. And I suggest you wait 
until you finish your first semester of Philosophy 
before you bungle and call me a hedonist. You see, 
I don't mind you making an ass of yourself as 
long as you don't start shredding my statements to 
do so. And since you like modern, up-to-date emu{Cominued on page 91) 



CAGE OF A THOUSAND WINGS 



15 



Wood down his side, his gun pointed steadily up the companionway. 

"Brandon?" 

He could hear the hunter*s hoarse breath, 
now, but he held his fire, waiting. 

"Brandon, damn you!" 

The hunter ripped the blindfold from 
his eyes. "Are you dea — " Brandon fired 
once, and the last thing Hawkes saw was 
death flying at his eyes. 

He dragged himself blindly up the companionway until the running crewmen burst 
into the cabin. Then he could see again, and 
he got a bandage on his side, half -screaming 



at the pain. He sat awkwardly in the navigator's chair and plotted a course while one 
of the crew stood over him. 

His crewmen were drifters. They would 
drift farther, if he paid them. 

The ship swung around and pointed her 
stern at Earth's sun, her nose at the stars 
that hung in crystalline draperies wherever 
the eyes of a man could see. 

Tlaere were witches everywhere, and there 
was a ship to seek them in. And someday, 
perhaps, he might forget that other witch 
who drifted softly in the sky above tlie cliffs 
of Ydlis. 




The city was strange, fantastic, beautiful. 
He'd never been there before, yet already 
he was a fabulous legenddire, hateful legend. 




The Beast-Jewel of Mars 



By V. E. THIESSEN 



HE LAY on his stomach, a lean man 
in faded one piece dungarees, and 
an odd metallic hat, peering over 
the side of the canal. Behind $1"^^ the little 
winds sifted red dust into his collar, but he 
could not move; he could only sit there 
with his gaze riveted on the spires and 
minarets that twinkled in the distance, far 
down the bottom of the canal. 

One part of his mind said, This is it, this 
is the fabled city of Mars. This is the beauty 
and the fantasy and the musk of the legends, 
and I must go down there. Yet somewhere 
deeper in his mind, deep in the primal urges 



that kept him from death, the warning was 
taut and urgent. Get au*ay. They have a 
part of your mind now. Get away from 
the city before you lose it all. Get away 
before your body becomes a husk, a soulless husk to walk the low canals with sightless eyes, like those who came before you. 
He strained to push back from the edge, 
trying to get that fantastic beauty out of his 
sight. He fought the lids of his eyes, fought 
to close them while he pushed himself back, 
but they remained open, staring at tlie 
jeweled towers, and borne on the little 
winds the thin wail of music reached him, 




2— PLANET— Spring 



17 



18 



PLANET STORIES 



saying, Come into the city, come dowtt into 
the fabled city. 

He slid over the edge, sliding down tlie 
sloping sides of the canal. The rough sandstone tore at his dungarees, tore at his elbow 
where it toudicd but he did not feel the 
pain. His face was turned toward the towers, 
and the sound of his breathing was less than 
human. 

His feet caught a projecting bit of stone 
and were slowed for an instant, so that he 
turned sideways and rolled on, down into 
the red dust bottom of the canal, to lie 
face down in the dust, with the chin strap 
of the odd metallic hat cutting cruelly into 
his chin. 

He lay there an instant, knowing that 
now he had a chance. With his face down 
like this, and the dust smarting his ej^es 
tlie image was gone for an instant. He had 
to get away, he knew that. He had to mount 
the sides of the canal and never look back. 

He told himself, "I am Eric North, from 
Earth, the Third Planet of Sol, and this is 
not real.** 

^ He squirmed in the dust, feeling it bite 
his checks; he squirmed until he could get 
Up and see nothing but the red sand stone 
walls of the canal. He ran at the walls and 
clawed his way up like an animal in his 
^ haste. He wouldn't look again. 

The wind freshened and the tune of the 
music began to talk to him. It told of going 
barefoot over long streets of fur. It told of 
jewels, and wine, and women as fair as 
springtime. These and more were in the 
city, waiting for him to claim them. 

He sobbed, and clawed forw^ard. He 
stopped to rest, and slowly his head began 
to turn. He turned, and the spires and 
minarets twinkled at him, beautiful, soothing, stopping the tears that had welled down 
his cheeks. 

When he reached the bottom of the canal 
he began to run toward the city. 

When he came to the city there was a 
high wall around it, and a heavy gate 
carved with lotus blossoms. He beat against 
the gate and cried, "Oh! Let me in. Let me 
in to the city!" Tlie m.usic was richer now, 
as if it were everywhere, and the gate swung 
open without the faintest sound. 

A sentinel stood before the opened gate 
at tlie end of a long blue street. He was 



dressed in red silk with his sleeves edged 
in blue leopard skin, and he wore a belt 
with a jeweled short sword. He drew the 
sword from its scabbard, and bowed forward until the point of the sword touched 
the street of blue fur. He said, "I give you 
the welcome of my sword, and the welcome 
of the citj\ Speak your name so that it m^y 
be set in the records of the dreamers." 

The music sang, and the spires twinkled, 
and Eric said, 'l am Eric North!" 

The sword point jerked, and the sentinel 
straightened. His face was white. He cried 
aloud, "It is Eric the Bronze. It is Eric of 
the Legend." He whirled tlie sword aloft, 
and smashed it upon Eric's metal hat, and 
the hatred was a blue flame in his ejcs. 



TyHEN Eric regained consciousness the 
T V people of tlie city were all about him. 
They were very fair, and the women were 
more beautiful than music. Yet now tbey 
stared at him with red hate in their tyts. 
An older man came forward and struck 
at the copper hat with a stick. The clang 
deafened Eric and the man cried, "You arc 
right. It is Eric the Bronze. Bring the ships 
and let him be scourged from tlie cit}^" 

The man drew back the stick and struck 
agam, and Eric's back took lire with the 
blow. The crowd chanted, •'Whips, bring 
the whips," and fear forced Eric to his ittt. 
He fled then, running on the heedless feet 
of panic, outstripping those who were behmd him until he passed through the great 
gates into the red dust floor of the canal. 
The gates closed behind him, and the dust 
beat upon him, and he paused, his heart 
hammering inside his chest like a great bell 
clapper. He turned and looked behind to 
be sure he was safe. 

The towers twinkled at him, and the 
music whispered to him, "Come back, Eric 
North. Come back to the city." 

He turned and stumbled back to the great 
gate and hammered on it until his fists were 
raw, pleading for it to open and let him 
back. 

And deep inside him some part of hl% 
mind said, "This is a madness you cannot 
escape. The city is evil, an evil like you 
have never known," and a fear as old as 
time coursed through his frame. 

He seized the copper hat from his head. 



THE BEAST— JEWEL OF MARS 



19 



and beat on the lotus carvings of the great 
door, crying, *'Let me in! Please, take me 
back into the city/* 

And as he beat the city changed. It became dull and sordid and evil, a city of 
disgust, with every part offensive to the 
eye. The spires and minarets were gargoyles 
of hatred, twisted and misshapen, and the 
sound of the city was a macabre song of 
hate. 

He stared, and his back was chill with 
superstitions as old as the beginning of 
man. The city flickered, changing before 
his eyes until it was beautiful again. 

He stood^ amazed, and put the metal hat 
back on his head. With the motion the shift 
took place again, and beauty was ugliness. 
Amazed, he stared at the illusion, and the 
thought came to him that the metal hat had 
not entirely failed him after all. 

He turned and began to walk away from 
the city, and when it began to call he took 
the hat off his head and found peace for 
a time. Then when it began again he replaced the hat, and revulsion sped his footsteps. And so, hat on, hat off, he made his 
way down the dusty floor of the canal, and 
up the rocky sides until he stood on the 
Martian desert, and the canal was a thin 
line behind him. He breathed easily then, 
for he was beyond the range of the illusions. 

And now that his mind was his own again 
he began to study the problem, and to understand something of the nature of the 
forces against whidi he had been pitted. 

The helmet contained an electrical circuit, designed as a shield against electrical 
waves tuned to affect his brain. But the hat 
had failed because the city, whatever it was, 
had adjusted to this revised pattern as he 
had approached it. Hence, the helmet had 
been no defense against illusion. However, 
when he had jerked the helmet off suddenly 
to beat on the door, his mental pattern had 
changed, too suddenly, and the machine 
caught up only after he had glimpsed another image. Then as the illusion adjusted 
replacing the helmet threw it off again. 

He grinned wryly. He would have liked 
to know more about the city, whatever it 
was. He would have liked to know more 
about the people he had seen, whether they 
were real or part of the illusion, and if they 
were as ugly as the second city had been. 



Yet the danger was too great. He would 
go back to his ship and make the arrangements to destroy the city. The ship was 
armed, and to deliver indirect fire over the 
edge of the canal would be simple enough. 
Garve North, his brother, waited back at 
the ship. If he knew of the city he would 
have to go there. Eric must not take a chance 
on that. After they had blasted whatever 
it was that lay in the canal floor, then it 
would be time enough to tell Garve, and 
go down to see what was left. 

The ship rested easily on the flat sandstone area where he had established base 
camp. Its familiar lines brought a smile to 
Eric's face, a feeling of confidence now that 
tools and weapons were his again. 

He opened the door and entered. The 
lock doors were left open so that he could 
enter directly into the body of the ship. 
He came in in a swift leap, calling, **Garve! 
Hey, Garve, where are you?" 

The ship remained mute. He prowled 
through it, calling, ''Garve," wondering 
where the young hothead had gone, and 
then he saw a note clipped to the control 
board of the ship. He tore it loose impatiently and began to read. Garve had 
scrawled: 

"Funny thing, Eric. A while ago I thought I 
heard music. I walked down to the canal, and it 
seemed like there were lights, and a town of some 
sort far down the canal. I wanted to investigate, 
but thought Vd better come back. But the thing 
has been in my mind for hours now, and Vm going 
down to see what it is. If you want to follow, come 
straight down the canal." 

Eric stared at the note, and the line of 
his jaw was white. Apparently Garve had 
seen the city from farther away, and its 
effect had not been so strong. Even so, 
Garve^s natural curiosity had done the rest. 

Garve had gone down to the city, and 
Garve had no shielded hat. Eric selected 
two high explosive grenades from the ship's 
arsenal. They were small but they packed 
a lot of power. He had a pistol packed 
with smaller pellets of the same explosive, 
and he had the hat. That should be adequate. 
He thrust the bronze hat back on his head 
and began walking back to tlie canal. 

THE return back to the city would always 
live in his mind as a phantasmagora, a 
montage of twisted hate and unseemly 



20 



PLANET STORIES 



beauty. Wlien he came again to the gate 
he did not attempt to enter, but circled the 
wall, hat on, hat off, stiff limbed like a 
puppet dancing to the same tune over and 
over again. He found a place where he 
could scale the wall, and thrust the helmet 
on his head, and clawed up the misshapen 
wall. It was all he could do to make himself 
drop into the ugly city. 

He heard a familiar voice as he dropped. 
"Eric,** the voice said. "'Eric, you did come 
back." The voice was his brother's, and he 
whirled, seeking the voice. A figure stood 
before him, a twisted caricature of his 
brother. The figure cried, "The hat! You 
fool, get rid of tliat hat!'* Tlie caricature 
that was his brother seized the hat, and 
jerked so hard that the cliin strap broke 
under Eric's chin. Tlie hat was flung away 
and sailed high and far over the fence and 
outside the city. 

The phantasm flickered, the illusion 
moved. Garve was now more handsome 
than ever, and the city was a dream of 
delight. Gar\'e said, "Come,'* and Eric followed down a street of blue fur. He had 
no will to resist. 

Garve said, "Keep your head down and 
your face hidden. If we mec^: someone you 
may not be recognized. They won*t be expecting you from this side of tlie city.'* 

Eric asked, "You knew I'd come after 
you?'* 

"Yes. The Legend said you'd be back." 

Eric stopped and whirled to face his 
brother, "lie Legend? Eric the Bronze? 
What is this wild fantasy?" 

"Not so loud!" Garve' s voice cautioned 
him. "Of course the crowd called you that 
because of the copper hat and your heavy 
tan. But the Elders believe so too. I don't 
know what it is, Eric, reincarnation, prophesy, superstition, I only know that when 
I was with the Elders I believed them. You 
are a part of a Legend. You are Eric the 
Bronze." 

Eric looked down at his sun tanned hands 
and flexed them. He loosened the explosive 
pistol in its holster. At least he was going 
to be a well armed, well prepared Legend. 
And while one part of his mind marveled 
at the city and relaxed into a pleasure as 
deep as a dream, another struggled with 
the almost forgotten desire to rescue his 



brother and escape. He asked, **Who arc 
the Elders?" 

"We arc going to them, to the center of 
the city." Garve s voice sharpened, "Keep 
your head down. I think the last two men 
we passed are looking after us. Don't look 
back." 

After a moment Garve said, "I think they 
are following us. Get ready to run. If wc 
are separated, keep going until you reach 
Cit}' Center. The Elders will be expecting 
you.** Gan-e glanced back, and his voice 
sharpened, "Now! Run!'* 

They ran. But as they ran figures began 
to converge upon them. Farther up the street 
others appeared, cutting off their flight. 

Garv-e cried, "In here," and pulled Eric 
into a crevice between two buildings. Eric 
drew his gun, and savagery began to dance 
in his q es. The soft fur muffled sounds of 
pursuit closed in upon them. 

Garve put one hand on Eric*s gun hand 
and said, "Wait here. And if you value my 
life, don't use that gun.*' Then he was gone, 
running dcerlike down tlie street. 

For an instant Eric thought the ruse had 
succeeded. He heard cries and two men 
passed him nmning in pursuit. But then 
the cry came back. "Let him go. Get the 
other one. The other one.** 

Eric was scm an instant later, and the 
people of the city began to converge upon 
him. He could have destroyed them all 
with his charges in the gun, but his brother's 
warning shrieked in his ears, "If you value 
my life don't use the gun.** 

Tliere was nothing he could do. Eric 
stood quietly until he was taken prisoner. 
They moved him to the center of the wide 
fur street. Two men held his arms, and 
twisted painfully. The crowd looked at him, 
coldly, calculatingly. One of them said, "Get 
the whips. If we whip him he will not 
come back." The city twinkled, and the 
music was so faint he could hardly hear it. 

Tlnere was only one weapon Eric could 
use. He had gathered from Garve's words 
that these people were superstitious. 

He laughed, a great chest-shattering laugh 
that gusted out into the thin Martian air. 
He laughed and cried in a great voice, "And 
can you so easily dispose of a Legend? If 
I am Eric of the Legend, can whips defeat 
the prophes)'?" 



THE BEAST— JEWEL OF MARS 



21 



There was an instant when he could have 
twisted loose. They stood, fear-bound at his 
words. But there was no place to hide, and 
without the use of his weapons Eric could 
not have gone far. He had to bluff it out. 

THEN one of the men cried, 'Tools! It 
is true. We must take no chance with 
the whips. He would come back. But if 
he dies here before us now, then we may 
forget the prophesy/* 

The crowd murmured and a second voice 
cried, "Get the sword, get the guards, and 
kill him at once!" 

Eric tenscJ to break away but now it was 
too late. His captors were alert. They increased the twist on his arms until he almost 
screamed with the pain. 

The crowd parted, and the guard came 
through, his red silk clothing gleaming in 
the sun, his sword bright and deadly. He 
stopped Before Eric, and the sword swirled 
up like a saber, ready for a slashing cut 
downward across Eric's neck. 

A woman's voice, soft and yet authoritative, called, "Hold!" And a murmur of 
respect rippled tlirough the crowd. 

"Nolette! The Daughter of the City 
comes.'* 

Eric turned his gaze to the side and saw 
the woman who had spoken. She was 
mounted upon a black horse with a jeweled 
bridle. She was young and her hair was 
long and free in the wind. She had ridden 
so softly across the fur street that no one 
had been aware of her presence. 

She said, '*Let me touch this man. Let 
me feel the pulse of his heart so that I may 
know if he is truly the Bronze one of the 
Legend. Give me your hand, stranger." She 
leaned down and grasped his hand. Eric 
shook his arms free, and reached up and 
clung to the offered hand, tliinking, 'Tf I 
pull her down perhaps I can use her as a 
shield." He tensed his muscles and began 
to pull. 

She cried, "No! You fool. Come up on 
the horse," and pulled back with an energy 
as fierce as his own. Then he had swung 
up on the horse, and the animal leaped forward, its muffled gallop beating out a tattoo 
of freedom. 

Eric clung tightly to the girl's w^aist. He 
could feel the young suppleness of her body, 



and the fine strands of her hair kept swirling back into his face. It had a faint perfume, a clean and heady scent that made 
him more aware of the touch of her waist. 
He breathed deeply, oddly happy as they 
rode. 

After five minutes ride they came to a 
building in the center of the city. The building was cubical, severe in line and architecture, and it contrasted oddly with the exquisite ornament of the rest of the city. It was 
as if it were a monolith from another time, 
a stranger crouched among enemies. 

Tlie girl halted before the structure and 
said, "Dismount here, Eric." 

Eric swung down, his arms still tingling 
with pleasure where he had held her. She 
said, "Knock three times on the door. I 
will see you again inside. And thank your 
brother for sending me to bring you here." 

Eric knocked on the door. The door was 
as plain as the building, made of a luminous 
plastic. It had all the beauty of the great 
gate door, but a more timeless, more functional beauty. 

The door opened and an old man greeted 
Eric. "Come in. The Council awaits you. 
Follow me, please." 

Eric followed down a hallw^ay and into 
a large room. The room was obviously designed for a conference room. A great table 
stood in the room, made of the same luminous plastic as the door of the building. Six 
men sat at this conference table. Eric's guide 
placed him in a chair at the base of the 
T-shaped table. 

There was one vacant seat beside the head 
of the T, and as Eric watched, the young 
woman who had rescued him entered and 
took her place there. She smiled at Eric, 
and the room took on a warmth that it had 
lacked with only the older men present. The 
man at her right, obviously presiding here 
looked at Eric and spoke. "I am Kroon, the 
eldest of the elders. We have brought you 
here to satisfy ourselves of your identity. 
In view of your danger in the City you are 
entitled to some sort of explanation." He 
glanced around the room and asked, "What 
is the judgment of the elders.^" 

ERIC caught a faint nod here, a gesture 
there. Kroon nodded as if in satisfaction. He turned to the girl, "And what it 



^^ 



22 



PLANET STORIES 



your opinion, Daughter of the City?" 

Nolette's expression held sorrow, as if she 
looked into the far future. She said, "He is 
Eric the Bronze, I have no doubt." 

Eric asked, "And what is this Legend of 
Eric the Bronze? Why am I so despised in 
the city?" 

Kroon answered, "According to the Ancient Legend you will destroy the city. This, 
and other things." 

Eric gaped. No v/onder tlie crowd had 
shown such hatred. But why were the elders 
so friendly? They were obviously the governing body, and if there was strife between 
them and the people it had not shown in 
the respect tlie crowd had accorded Nolette. 
Kroon said, "I see you are pu22led. Let 
me tell you the story of the City. The City 
is old. It dates from long ago when tlie 
canals of Mars ran clear and green with 
water, and the deserts were vineyards and 
gardens. The drouth came, and the changes 
in climate, and soon it became plain that 
the people of Mars were doomed. Tliey had 
ships, and could buUd more, and gradually 
they left to colonize other planets. Yet they 
could take little of their science. And fear 
and riots destroyed much. Also there were 
those who were filled with love for this 
homeland, and who thought that one day 
it might be habitable again. Ali the skill 
of the aqcient Martian fathers went into 
the building of a giant machine, the machine that is the City, to protect a small 
colony of those who were chosen to remain 
on Mars." 

*This whole city is a machine!" Eric 
asked. 

"Yes, or the product of one. The heart of 
it lies underneath our feet, in caverns beneath this building. The nature of the machine is this, that it translates thought into 
reality." 

Eric stared. The idea was staggering. 
"This is essentially simple, although the 
technology is complex. It is necessary to 
have a recording device, to capture thought, 
a transmuting device capable of transmuting 
the red dust of the desert into any sort of 
material desired, and a construction device, 
to assemble this material into tlie pattern 
already recorded from thought." Kroon 
paused. "You still doubt, my friend. Perhaps 
you are thirsty after your escape. Think 



strongly of a tall glass of cold water, visualize it in your mind, the sight and the fluidity 
and the touch of it." 

Eric did so. Without warning a glass of 
water stood on the table before him. He 
touched the water to his lips. It was cool 
and satisfying. He drank it, convinced completely. 

Eric asked, "And I am to destroy the 
City?" 

"Yes. Tlie time has come." 

"But why?" Eric demanded. For an instant he could see the twinkling beauty as 
clearly as if he had stood outside tlic walls 
of this building. 

Kroon said, "There arc difficulties. The 
machine builds according to the mass will 
of the people, though it is sensitive to the 
individual in areas v.^here it does not conflict 
with the imagination of the mass. We have 
had strangers, visitors, and even our own 
people, who grew drunk with the power 
of the machine, v/ho dreamed more and 
more lust and greed into existence. Tliesc 
were banished from tlie city, and so strong 
is the call of the city that many of them 
became victims of their own cvUness, and 
now walk mindlessly, witli no tliought but 
to seek for the beauty they have lost here." 
Kroon sighed. "The people have lost tlie 
will to learn. Many do not even know of 
the machine. Our science is almost gone, 
and only a few of us, the dreamers, the 
elders, have kept alive the old knowledge 
of the machine and its history. By the collected powers of our imagination we build 
and control the outward appearance of the 

Cit)'. 

"We have passed this down from father 
to son, A part of the ancient Legend is that 
the builders made provisions for the machine 
to be destroyed when contact with outsiders 
had been made once again, so that our 
people would again have to struggle forward to knowledge and power. The instrument of destruction was to be a man termed 
Eric the Bronze. It is not that you are reborn. 
It is just that sometime such a man would 
come." 

Eric said, "I can understand the Bronze 
part. They had thought that a space man 
might well be sun tanned. They had thought 
that a science to protect against this beautitul 
illusion would provide a metal shield of 



THE BEAST— JEWEL OF MARS 



23 



some sort, probably copper in nature. That 
such a man should come is inevitable. But 
why Eric. Why the name Eric?" 

For the first time Nolette spoke. She said 
quietly, "The name Eric was an honorable 
name of the ancient fathers. It must have 
been their thought that the new beginning 
should wait for some of their own far flung 
kind to return." 

Eric nodded. He asked, "What happens 
now?" 

"Nothing. Dwell here with us and you 
will be safe from our people. If the prediction is not soon fulfilled and you are not 
the Eric of the Legend, you may stay or go 
as you desire." 

"My brother, Garve. What about him?" 

"He loves the city. He will also stay, 
though he will be outside this building." 
Kroon clasped his hands. "Noiette, will you 
show Eric his quarters?" 

ERIC followed Nolette through a hallway 
to a well furnished room. Walking 
behind her the graceful sway of her walk 
reminded him of the touch of her waist 
as he held it earlier when they rode, and he 
felt the blood racing through his veins. He 
was tempted to seize her shoulder, turn her, 
and take her in his arms. 

She indicated the room with a gesture. 
"You will be comfortable here, and you 
have only to wish strongly for food or 
drink. If your wishes do not conflict with 
those of the elders they will come into 
being." 

Eric asked, "And is this true of any wish? 
Suppose for instance I wished for — You." 

She looked at him steadily, "That would 
depend on the nature of your wish. If you 
wished to take me as your wife the elders 
would approve." 

Eric looked at her. He had hardly known 
her two hours. Yet the madness of the moment made him rash, and he asked, "And 
what of your wishes, Nolette?" 

She said, *'I am the Daughter of the City, 
and a virgin. If the Legend is to be fulfilled 
I would be wed before I die." 

He took a step forward and reached out 
to take her in his arms, but she slipped 
away, saying quietly, **Not now. I will go 
away and let you tliink. When you have 
decided call me in your mind, and the 



machine will let me know." She smiled 
briefly, and left him alone in the room. 

Eric was hardly aware of his actions as 
he seated himself in the comfortable chair. 
He fumbled about for his pipe. He must 
not be a fool. Perhaps if he thought quietly, 
and smoked, he could decide if this was a 
dream, if he had gone quietly mad in his 
space ship, and had been the victim of hallucinations. The chair was real to his (ouch, 
his pipe was gone, and he remembered 
leaving it in the navigators section of the 
ship upon his earlier return. The memory 
seemed real enough. He wished for his pipe 
again, and realized that now he held it in 
his hand. 

This was no mirage. He tamped tobacco 
created by the machine from Red Martian 
dust into the bowl of the pipe, and the 
smoke was as fragrant as ever. He could 
see how such luxury would stagnate a race. 
As the smoke curled around him he knew 
that two hours or two years were not important, and he knew what he wanted. He 
wished for Nolette. 

She came into the room, watching him 
quietly, suddenly shy. He said, ''It has come 
to me that I love you. Will you do me the 
honor to become my wife?" 

She said, **Yes, Eric. Oh! Yes!" and came 
running to him. Her kiss had all the passion 
of his own. 

An hour later she slipped from his arms, 
saying, "I must go and talk with the elder 
dreamers. We must be married today, at 
once. We have so little time. We must be 
husband and wife tonight." She slipped 
softly from the room. 

Eric watched her, marveling at his luck. 
He suddenly remembered that he had not 
seen his brother since he had arrived at the 
house of the elder dreamers. He wondered 
where Garve was, and wanted to talk to 
him. Perhaps if he thought strongly enough 
the machine would get the message tliought . 
to Garve. He concentrated. 

Ten minutes later Garve walked into the 
room. He said, "I thought I heard you calling. How'd you make out with the dreamers?" 

"Well enough. Don't think me mad, 
Garve, but Nolette and I are to be married, 
tonight." 

Garve's face grew red, then as white as 



24 



PLANET STORIES 



river sand. He said bitterly, "I should have 
let them kill you in the street, but how 
could I? After all ^e are brothers." 

"You love her too." 

"No! But I love this city. It is paradise, 
and now you will destroy it" 

Eric said, "The Legend again! Everyone 
believes it. Yet it is but a prediction. In time 
such a man as the Legend had to come, and 
some day one more greedy than myself may 
destroy the city. Perhaps I will refuse to 
carry out the destruction." 

Garv^e lauglied, a bitter cynical laugh. He 
cried, "You fool! How can you help yourself.^ Everyone believes you arc the Bronze 
one and the machine will make that come 
true. How can you defeat the machine?" 

Eric was staggered by a logic he had not 
even considered. 

"Piece by piece," Garve said, "the prediction is coming to pass. Now you are to wed 
Nolette, and that too is a part of the 
Legend." 

"That was predicted.^" 

"Yes. And tliat is not the end." Garve's 
voice was as sharp as the bite of a whip. 
"Do you know what else you will do?" 

"No!" A thin horror seeped slowly into 
Eric's mind. 

"You will destroy the Daughter of the 
City." 

Eric's e} es were wide. He shuddered and 
cried, "NO! NO!" 

Garve's face took on the glint of madness. 
He said, "But I will stop you. Ill stop you 
if I have to kill you." He turned and strode 
bitterly from the room. 

HORROR \^'as still fresh in Ericas mind 
when Nolette returned. "All is ready," 
she said. "Come now, my husband-to-be." 

Eric followed her into the chamber of 
the elder dreamers. Kroon stood at the 
doorway and greeted him as he entered. He 
said, "One cannot fight the truth, so we 
have consented to this marriage. Will you 
join hands?" 

The ceremony was simple, but beautiful, 
much like an Earth wedding, with the city 
making music that was beautiful beyond 
belief. But all the time Eric listened his 
mind was w^orking, and by the time he had 
kissed his bride at the end of the ceremony 
he Imew what he had to do. He walked 



back to their room with his arm around her 
waist, and his resolve weakened with each 
step. 

Yet when he reached the room he had 
the will to say, "I must leave you for a time. 
When I return our life together will begin." 
He kissed her again, and said, "It will not 
be long." 

He broke away, and left her. When he 
reached the hallway he felt once in his 
pocket to be sure the explosive grenades 
were still there. So far the machine had 
controlled his destiny. So far the very belief 
of the dreamers in his destiny had brought 
the predictions to pass. Very well now, he 
would destroy the machine, but not at the 
request of the dreamers. He would do it 
now, before there was tijne to consummate 
the horrible part of the prediction. Then 
he would come back to Nolette and his 
honeymoon. 

He ran along the hallways, always going 
down when he found a stairway, always 
seeking the central area below that had 
been indicated by Kroon in their first talk. 
And when at length he came out into a 
large room, with a maze of delicate electronic apparatus below, he knew he had 
arrived, and he pulled the grenade from 
his pocket. 

Yet before he pulled tlie safety release 
he could not but marvel a moment at the 
intricate science below him. Much was 
familiar, and much was unintelligible. 

As he stood he was seized from behind, 
and he twisted to find he was caught in the 
hate strengthened grip of his brother. Pain 
lanced through his arm, and Gar^^e gritted, 
"Drop it." Eric dropped the grenade, and 
it fell between them. Eric was suddenly 
glad that the safety had not been pulled, 
and then he was fighting savagely with his 
brother. 

He was older, and wiser in the dirty 
tricks of fighters from the planets. After 
a time he was able to set himself, and bend 
foru'ard. Where Garve had been behind, 
now he was flung up, over Eric's back in 
a sprawling arc. He fell, teetered for an 
instant, and then crashed into the delicate 
heart of the machine below. Glass tinkled, 
and a flare lit the room. Eric closed his 
eyes, afraid to look. Garve must have been 
electrocuted. 



THE BEAST— JEWEL OF MARS 



25 



ERIC opened his eyes to find the room 
subtly changed. It was roughly the 
same, but the walls were a rough sandstone, 
and the glamour was gone. He heard sounds, 
and saw Gar\^e struggling up from the 
wreckage belo^\ Both of them knew it was 
ended. The machine was beyond repair. 

Garve paused. He said, *lt*s over now. 
I suppose in a year or two I shall forget 
this. I am going away. Until I can forgive 
you I shall stay away. God grant you peace, 
for you have lost more than I." Garve's steps 
echoed hollowly on the stone corridor and 
he disappeared in the distance. 

Eric stood quietly. There was no happiness in him, only a nameless fear brought 
on by his brother*s words, a fear that he 
had forgotten something. 

Tlien suddenly he knew what it was. He 
remembered the ugly cit}^ When he came 
out of the corridor, out of this building, 
the city would be a foul sty again. And the 
people, he had not seen the people, but 
they would no doubt be horrible. Nolette, 
his wife — ^he could not let himself think of 
how she would look. It seemed Garve was 
right and the final prediction had come true. 
All was finished, even the Daughter of the 
City had been destroyed. 

He began to move up out of the subterranean room and back to the city. He 
reached the outer door, and did not even 
pause to look for Nolette, but set his teeth, 
and stepped out into the city. 

And there he was surprised. Here was 
no ugly city, only a very normal, ordinary 
one, with ordinary persons going about the 
streets, blinking at the changes. The lines 
of the city were still there, but the jeweled 
panes were ordinary glass. 

Eric tried to understand. Then suddenly 
he recalled his hatred of the city when he 
had been cast out, hi^ subconscious thoughts 
of it as evil. He had taken off the helmet, 
and for an instant he had been out of contact witli tlie elders, disoriented. In that 



instant the city had shown him his own 
concept of ugliness. That ugly city was as 
unreal as the fantastically beautiful one 
created by the elders, 

Eric turned, and went back into the building, looking for Nolette. 

He found her, standing with Kroon in 
the great room, before a table which was 
only laminated wood. She was a slender 
girl, gray ey^ed, pleasant to look at, but 
without the beauty and the music and the 
witchery of her counterpart. 

She said quietly, "It is finished, Eric, and 
we are not the two who married. It is 
finished, and the dream is ended." 
Eric said only, "Yes," watching her. 
She said, "I release you from the marriage. It will be a memory for us both, a 
wonderful dream that ended before it was 
consummated, a dream cut short too soon." 
Eric asked, "What will you do?" Her 
voice was hardly changed, and watching her 
he felt an odd pleasure. There was no wild 
racing of his blood, yet his interest was 
awakening. 

She said, "Go away, I suppose, as far as 
I can from this place." 

He liked the way she was taking this. No 
dramatics, no tears. 

He said, "I could take you back to Earth 
as a passenger. You might like Earth," He 
felt oddly eager as she considered. 

And then suddenly, he could not wait, 
and the words came tumbling out. "Nolette," he said, "you must come with me. 
I do not know how it will be with us yet. 
But somehow I feel that if we stay together 
things will be good." 

He waited for her decision, half afraid, 
half eager, and then saw a slow smile break 
the seriousness of her eyes. 

She said gently, "If tliat is what you 
wish." The smile widened, "A girl must 
follow her husband. Even I know that." 

Eric reached out and took her hand. "The 
ship is waiting," he said. "Let's go home." 



HAGERTY'S ENZYMES 

By A. L HALEY 

There s a place for every man and a man for 

every place, but on robot-harried Mars the 

situation was just a little different. 



HARPER BREEN sank down gingerly 
into the new Relaxo-Lounge. He 
placed twitching bands on the armrests and laid his head back stiffly. He 
closed his fluttering eyelids and clamped 
his mouth to keep the corner from jumping. 
"Just lie back, Harp," droned his sister 
soothingly. "Just give in and let go of 
everything." 

Harper tried to let go of everything. He 
gave in to the chair. And gently the chair 
went to work. It rocked rhythmically, it 
vibrated tenderly. With velvety cushions it 
massaged his back and arms and legs. 

For all of five minutes Harper stood it 
Then with a frenzied lunge he escaped the 
embrace of the Relaxo-Lounge and fled to 
a gloriously stationary sofa. 

"Harp!" His sister, Bella, was ready to 
weep with exasperation. ''Dr. Franz said it 
would be just the thing for you! Why 
won't you give rt a trial?" 

Harper glared at the preposterous chair. 
"Franz!" he snarled. "That prize fathead! 
I've paid him a fortune in fees. I haven't 
slept for M^eeks. I can't eat anything but 
soup. My nerves are jangling like a fouralarm fire. And what does he prescribe? A 
blasted jiggling baby carriage! Why, I ought 
to send him the bill for it!" Completely 
outraged, he lay back on the couch and 
closed his eyes. 

"Now, Harp, you know you've never 
obeyed his orders. He told you last year 
that you'd have to ease up. Why do you 
have to try to run the whole world? It's the 
strain of all your business worries that's 
causing your trouble. He told you to take 
a long vacation or you'd crack up. Don't 
blame him for your own stubbornness." 

Harper snorted. His large nose developed 
26 



the sound magnificently. "Vacation!" he 
snorted. "Batting a silly ball around or 
dragging a hook after a stupid fish! Fine 
activities for an intelligent middle-aged 
man! And let me correct you. It isn't business worries that are driving me to a crackup. It's the strain of trying to get some sensible, reasonable cooperation from the nincompoops I have to hire! It's the idiocy of 
the human race that's got me whipped! It's 
the — " 

"Hey, Harp, old man!" His brother-inlaw, turning the pages of the new colorama magazine, INTERPLANETARY, had 
paused at a double-spread. "Didn't you have 
a finger in those Martian equatorial wells 
they sunk twenty years ago?" 

Harper's hands twitched violently. "Don't 
mention that fiasco!" he rasped. "That deal 
nearly cost me my shirt! Water, hell! Those 
wells spewed up the craziest conglomeration of liquids ever tapped!" 

SCRIBNEY, whose large, phlegmatic person and calm professorial brain were 
the complete antithesis of Harper's pickedcrow physique and scheming financier's wits, 
looked severely over his glasses. Harp's 
nervous tribulations were beginning to bore 
him, as well as interfere with the harmony 
of his home. 

"You're away behind the times, Harp," 
he declared. "Don't you know that those 
have proved to be the most astoujidingly 
curative springs ever discovered anywhere? 
Don't you know that a syndicate has built 
the largest extra-terrestial hotel of the solar 
system there and that people are flocking to 
it to get cured of whatever ails 'em? Old 
man, you missed a bet!" 

Leaping from the sofa, Harper rudely 



28 



PLANET STORIES 



I 



snatched the magaxme from Scribney's 
hands. He glared at the spread which depicted a star-shaped structure of bottle-green 
glass resting jewel-like on the rufous rock 
of Mars. The main portion of the building 
consisted of a circular skyscraper with a 
glass-domed roof. Between its star-shaped 
annexes, other domes covered landscaped 
gardens and noxious pools which in the 
drawing looked lovely and enticing. 

*'Why, I remember now!" exclaimed 
Bella. "That's where the Durants went two 
years ago! He was about dead and she 
looked like a hag. They came back in wonderful shape. Don't you remember, Scrib.^" 
Dutifully Scribney remembered and commented on the change the Martian springs 
had effected in the Durants. "It's the very 
thing for you, Harp," he advised. "You'd 
get a good rest on the way out. This gas 
they use in the rockets nowadays is as good 
as a rest-cure; it sort of floats you along 
the time-track in a pleasant daze, they tell 
me. And you can finish the cure at the hotel 
while looking it over. And not only that." 
Gwifidentially he leaned toward his insignificant looking brother-in-law. "The chemists over at Dade McCann have just isolated 
an enzyme from one species of Martian fungus that breaks down crude oil into its components without the need for chemical processing. There's a fortune waiting for the 
man who corners that fungus market and 
learns to process the stuff!" 

Scribney had gauged his victim's mental 
processes accurately. The magazine sagged 
in Harp's hands, and his sharp cyc^ becama 
shrewd and calculating. He even forgot to 
twitch. "Maybe you're right, Scrib," he acknowledged. "G)mbine a rest-cure with business, eh?" 

Raising the magazine, he began reading 
the advertisement And that was when he 
saw the line about the robots, " — the only 
hotel staffed entirely with robot servants — " 
"Robots!" he shrilled. '*You mean they've 
developed the things to that point.> Why 
hasn't somebody told me? I'll have Jackson's hide! I'll disfranchise him! I'll—" 

"Harp!" exploded Bella. '*Stop it! Maybe 
Jackson doesn't know a thing about it, 
whatever it is! If it's something at the 
Emerald Star Hotel, why don't you just go 
and find out for yourself instead of throw


ing a tantrum? That's the only sensible 
way!" 

"You're right, Bella/' agreed Harper incisively. 'Til go and find out for myself. 
Immediately!" Scooping up his hat, he left 
at his usual lope. 

"Well!" remarked his sister. "All I can 
say is that they'd better turn that happy-gas 
on extra strong for Harp's trip out!" 

rpHE trip out did Harper a world of good. 
-L Under the influence of the soporific gas 
that permeated the rocket, he really relaxed 
for the first time in years, sinking with the 
other passengers into a hazy lethargy with 
little sense of passing time and almost no 
memory of the interval. 

It seemed hardly more than a handful of 
hours until they were strapping themselves 
into deceleration hammocks for the landing. And then Harper was waking with 
lassitude still heavy in his veins. He struggled out of the hammock, made his way to 
the airlock, and found himself whisked by 
pneumatic tube directly into the lobby of the 
Emerald Star Hotel. 

Appreciatively he gazed around at the 
half-acre of moss-gray carpeting, greentinted by the light sifting through the walls 
of Martian copper-glass, and at the vistas 
of beautiful domed gardens framed by a 
dozen arches. But most of all, the robots 
won his delighted approval. 

He could see at once that they had been 
developed to an amazingly high state of perfection. How, he wondered again, had tliis 
been done without his knowledge? Was 
Scrib right? Was he slipping? Gnawing at 
the doubt, he watched the robots moving 
efficiently about, pushing patients in wheelchairs, carrying trays, guiding newcomers, 
performing janitorial duties tirelessly, 
promptly, and best of all, silently. 

Harper was enthralled. He'd staff his 
oflices with them. Hang the expense! 
There' d be no more of that obnoxious personal friction and proneness to error that 
was always deviling the most carefully 
trained office staffs! He'd investigate and 
find out the exact potentialities of these 
robots while here, and then go home and 
introduce them into the field of business. 
He'd show them whether he was slipping! 
Briskly he went over to the desk. 



HAGERTrS ENZYMES 



29 



He was immcdately confronted with a 
sample of that human obstinacy that was 
slowly driving him mad. Machines, he 
sighed to himself. Wonderful silent machines! For a woman was arguing stridently 
with the desk clerk who, poor man, was a 
high strung fellow human instead of a 
robot. Harper watched him shrinking and 
turning pale lavendar in the stress of the 
argument, 

"A nurse!" shouted the woman. "I want 
a nurse! A real woman! For what you 
charge, you should be able to give me a 
television star if I want one! I won't have 
another of those damnable robots in my 
room, do you hear?" 

No one within the confines of the huge 
lobby could have helped hearing. The clerk 
flinched visibly. "Now, Mrs. Jacobsen," he 
soothed. "You know the hotel is staffed 
entirely with robots. They're much more 
expensive, really, than human employees, 
but so much more dficient, you know. Admit it, they give excellent service, don't 
they, now?" Tootliily he smiled at the enraged woman. 

"That's just it!" Mrs. Jacobsen glared. 
"The service is too good. I might just as 
well have a set of push buttons in the 
room. I want someone to hear what I say! I 
want to be able to change my mind once 
in awhile!" 

Harper snorted. "Wants someone she can 
devil," he diagnosed. "Someone she can get 
a kick out of ordering around." With vast 
contempt he stepped to the desk beside her 
and peremptorily rapped for the clerk. 

"One moment, sir," begged that harassed 
individual. "Just one moment, please." He 
turned back to the woman. 

But she had turned her glare on Harper. 
"You could at least be civil enough to wait 
your turn!" 

Harper smirked. "My good woman, I'm 
not a robot. Robots, of course, are always 
civil. But you should know by now that 
civility isn't a normal human trait." Leaving 
her temporarily quashed, he beckoned authoritatively to' the clerk. 

"I've just arrived and want to get settled. 
I'm here merely for a rest-cure, no treatments. You can assign my quarters before 
continuing your — ah — discussion v/ith the 
lady." 



The clerk sputtered. Mrs. Jacobsen sputtered. But not for nothing was Harper one 
of tlie leading business executives of the 
earth. Harper's implacable stare won his 
point. Wiping beads of moisture from his 
forehead, the clerk fumbled for a card, 
typed it out, and was about to deposit it in 
the punch box when a fist hit the desk a 
resounding blow and another voice, male, 
roared out at Harper s elbow. 

"This is a helluva joint!" roared tlie 
voice. "Man could rot away to the knees 
while he's waitin' for accommodations. 
Semce!" Again his fist banged tlic 
counter. 

The clerk jumped. He dropped Harper's 
card and had to stoop for it. Absently holding it, he straightened up to face Mrs. 
Jacobsen and the irate newcomer. Hastily 
he pushed a tagged key at Harper. 

"Here you are, Mr. Breen. I'm sure 
you'll find it comfortable." With a pallid 
smile he pressed a button and consigned 
Harper to the care of a silent and efficient 
robot. 

THE room was more than comfortable. It 
was beauriful. Its bank of clear windows 
set in the green glass wall framed startling 
rubicund views of the Martian hinterland 
where, Harper affectionately thought, fungi 
were busy producing enzymes that were going to be worth millions for him and his 
associates. There remained only die small 
detail of discovering how to extract them 
economically and to process them on this 
more than arid and almost airless planet. 
Details for his bright young laboratory 
men; mere details. .... 

Leaving his luggage to be unpacked by 
the robot attendant, he went up to the 
domed roof restaurant. Lunching boldly on 
broiled halibut with consomme, salad and 
a bland custard, he stared out at tlie dark 
blue sky of Mars, with Deimos hanging in 
the east in three-quarter phase while Phobos 
raced up from the west like a meteor behind schedule. Leaning back in his cushioned cliair, he even more boldly lit a slim 
cigar — his first in months — and inhaled happily. For once old Scribney had certainly 
been right, he reflected. Yes sir, Scrib had 
rung the bell, and he wasn't the man fo 
forget it. With a wonderful sense of well


30 



PLANET STORIES 



being he returned to his room and prepared 
to relax. ^ ^ 

Harper opened his eyes. Two roi>ots were 
bending over him. He saw that they were 
dressed in white, like hospital attendants. 
But he had no further opportunity to examine them. With brisk, well-co-ordinated 
movements they wheeled a stretcher alongside his couch, stuck a hypo into his arm, 
bundled him onto the stretcher and started 
wheeling him out. 

Harper's tongue finally functioned. 
"What's all this?" he demanded. "There's 
nothing wrong with me. Let me go!" 

He struggled to rise, but a metal hand 
pushed him firmly on the chest. Inexorably 
it pushed him flat. 

"You've got the wrong room!" yelled 
Harp. "Let me go!" But the hypo began to 
take eflect. His yells became weaker and 
drowsier. Hazily, as he drifted off, he 
thought of Mrs. Jacobsen. Maybe she had 
something, at that. 




rnHERE was a tentative knock on the 
-L door. "Come in," called Harper bleakly. 
As soon as the door opened he regretted his 
invitation, for the opening framed the large 
untidy nran who had ftoisily pounded on 
the desk demanding service wdiile he, Harp, 
was being registered. 

"Say, pardner," he said hoarsely, "you 
haven't seen any of them robots around 
here, have you.'*" 

Harper scowled.. "Oh, haven't Vr he 
grated. "Robots! Do you know what they 
did to me." Indignation lit fires in his pale 
eyes. "Came in here while I was lying down 
peacefully digesting the first meal I've enjoyed in months, dragged me off to the 
surgery, and pumped' it all out! The only 
meal I've enjoyed in 'months!" Blackly he 
sank his chin onto his fist and contemplated 
the outrage. 

"Why didn't you stop 'em?" reasonably 
asked the visitor. 

"Stop a robot?" Harper glared pityingly. 
"How? You can't reason with the blasted 
things. And as for using force — it's man 
against metal. You try it!" He ground his 
teeth together in futile rage. "And to think 
I had the insane notion that robots were 
the last word! Why, I was ready to staff 
my offices with the things!" 



The big man placed his large hands on 
his own capacious stomach and groaned. 
"I'm sure sorry it was you and not me, 
pardner. I could use some of that treatment 
right now. Musta been that steak and onions 
I ate after all that tundra dope I've been 
livin' on." 

"Tundra?" A faint spark of alertness 
lightened Harper's dull rage. "You mean 
you work out here on the tundra?" 

"That's right. How'd you think I got in 
such a helluva shape? I'm superintendent of 
one of the fungus plants. I'm Jake Ellis of 
Hagerty's Enzymes. There's good money in 
It, but man, what a job! No air worth mentionin'. Temperature always freezin' or below. Pressure suits. Huts. Factory. Processed 
food. Nothin' else. Just nothin'. That's 
where they could use some robots. It sure 
ain't no job for a real live man. And in 
fact, there ain't many men left there. If 
old man Hagerty only knew it, he's about 
out of business." 

Harper sat up as if he'd been needled. 
He opened his mouth to speak. But just 
then the door opened briskly and two 
robots entered. With a horrified stare, 
Harper clutched his maltreated stomach. He 
saw a third robot enter, wheeling a chair. 
"A wheel chair!" squeaked the victim. "I 
tell you, there's nothing wrong with me! 
Take it away! I'm only here for a rest-cure! 
Believe me! Take it away!" 

The robots ignored him. For the first 
time in his specta^rular and ruthless career 
Harper was up against creatures that he 
could neither bribe, persuade nor browbeat, 
inveigle nor ignore. It shattered his ebbmg 
self-confidence. He began waving his hands 
helplessly. 

The robots not only ignored Harper. 
They paid no attention at all to Jake Ellis, 
who was plucking at their metalic arms 
pleading, "Take me, boys. I need the treatment bad, whatever it is. I need all the 
treatment I can get. Take me! I'm just a 
wreck, fellers — " 

Stolidly they picked Harper up, plunked 
him into the chair, strapped him down and 
marched out with him. 

Dejectedly Ellis returned to his own 
room. Again he lifted the receiver of the 
rooni phone; but as usual a robot voice 
answered sweetly, mechanically, and mean


HAGERTTS ENZYMES 



31 



inglessly. He hung up and went miserably 
to bed. 

THERE was something nagging at 
Harper's mind. Sometliing he should do. 
Something that concerned robots. But he 
was too exhausted to think it out. 

For five days now his pet robots had put 
him through an ordeal tliat made him flinch 
every time he thought about it. Which 
wasn't often, since he was almost past 
thinking. They plunked him into stinking 
mud-baths and held him there until he was 
well-done to the bone, he was sure. They 
soaked him in foul, steaming irradiated waters until he gagged. They brought him 
wierd concoctions to eat and drink and then 
stood over him until he consumed them. 
They purged and massaged and exercised 
him. 

Whenever thej^ let him alone, he simply collapsed into bed and slept. Tliere was 
nothing else to do anyway. Tliey'd taken 
his clothes; and the phone, after an announcement that he would have no more 
service for two weeks, gave him nothing 
but a busy signal. 

"Persecution, that's what it is!" he 
moaned desperately. And he turned his 
back to the mirror, which shov/ed him that 
he was beginning to look flesh-colored instead of the parchment yellow to which he 
had become accustomed. He closed his mind 
to the fact that he was sleeping for hours 
on end like the proverbial baby, and that 
he was getting such an appetite that he 
could almost relish even that detestable 
mush they stnt him for breakfast. He was 
determined to be furious. As soon as he 
could wake up enough to be. 

He hadn't been awake long this time before Jake Ellis was there again, still moaning about his lack of treatments. "Nothin' 
yet," he gloomily informed Harp, "They 
haven't been near me. I just can t understand it. After I signed up for the works 
and paid 'em in advance! And I can't find 
any way out of this section. The other two 
rooms are empty and the elevator hasn't got 
any button. The robots just have to come 
and get a man or he's stuck.'* 

"Stuck!" snarled Harp. Tm never 
stuck!" And I'm damned if 111 wait any 
longer to break out of tl^is — this jail! Listen, 



Jake. I've been thinking. Or tfying to, with 
what's left of me. You came in just when 
that assininc clerk was registering me. I'll 
bet that clerk got rattled and gave me the 
wrong key. I'll bet you're supposed to have 
this room and I'm getting your treatments. 
Why don't w^e switch rooms and see what 
happens.^" 

"Say, maybe you're right!" Jake's eyes 
gleamed at last with hope. "I'll get my 
clothes," 

Harp's eyebrows rose. "You mean they 
left you your clothes.?" 

"Why, sure. You mean they took yours?" 

Harp nodded. An idea began to formulate. "Leave your things, will you? I'm 
desperate! I'm going to see the manager of 
this madhouse if I have to go down dressed 
in a sheet. Your clothes would be better 
than that." 

Jake, looking over Harper's skimpy 
frame, grunted doubtfully. "Maybe you 
could tie 'em on so they wouldn't slip. And 
roll up the cuffs. It's okay with me, but 
just don't lose something when you're down 
tliere in that fancy lobby." 

Harper looked at his watch. "Time to go. 
Relax, old man. The robots will be along 
any minute now. If you're the only man in 
the room, I'm sure tliey'U take you. They 
aren't equipped to figure it out. And don't 
worry about me. I'll anchor your duds 
all fight." 

Harper had guessed right. Gleefully from 
the doorway of his new room he watched 
the robots wheel away his equally delighted 
neighbor for his first treatment. Then he 
closed the door and began to don Jake's 
clothing. 

The result was unique. He looked like a 
small boy in his father's clothes, except for 
the remarkably aged and gnome-like head 
sticking up on a skinny neck from a collar 
three sizes too big. And he was shoeless. 
He was completely unable to navigate in 
Jake's number twelves. But Harper was a 
determined man. He didn't even flinch from 
his image in the mirror. Firmly he stepped 
over to Jake's telephone. "This is room 
618," he said authoritatively. "Send up the 
elevator for me. I want to go down to the 
lobby." 

He'd guessed right again. "It will be 
right up, sir," responded the robot operator. 



32 



PLANET STORIES 



Hopefully he stepped out into the hall and 
shuffled to the elevator. 

ONLY the robots were immune to Harper 
Breen's progress across the huge suave 
lobby. 

He was a blot on its rich beauty, a 
grotesque enigma that rooted the other visitors into paralyzed staring groups. Stepping 
out of the elevatoi^ he had laid a course for 
the desk which loomed like an island in a 
moss-gray lake, and now he strode manfully toward it, ignoring the oversize trousers slapping around his stocking feet. Only 
the robots shared his self control. 

The clerk was the first to recover from 
the collective stupor. Frantically he pushed 
the button that would summon the robot 
guard. With a gasp of relief he saw the two 
massive manlike machines moving inexorably forward. He pointed to Harper. "Get 
that patient!" he ordered. "Take him to the 
— to the mudbaths!" 

''No you don't!" yelled Harper. "I want 
to see the manager!" Nimbly he circled the 
guard and leaped behind the desk. He began 
to throw things at the robots. Things like 
inkwells and typewriters and card indexes. 
Especially, card indexes, 

"Stop it!" begged the clerk. "You'll 
w reck the system! We'll never get it straight 
again! Stop it!" 

"Call them off!" snarled Harper. "Call 
them off or I'll ruin your switchboard!" He 
put a shoulder against it and prepared ta 
heave. 

With one last appalled glare at the madman, the clerk pidced up an electric finger 
and pointed it at the approaching robots. 
They became oddly inanimate. 

"That's better!" Harper straightened up 
and meticulously smoothed the collar of his 
flapping coat. "Now — the manager, please.'* 

"This — this way, sir." 'With shrinking 
steps the clerk led Harper across the width 
of the lobby among the fascinated guests. 
He was beyond speech. Opening the inconspicuous door, he waved Harper inside and 
returned doggedly to his desk, where he began to pick up things and at the same time 
phrase his resignation in his mind. 

Brushing aside the startled secretary in 
the outer cubicle, Harper flapped and shuffled straight into the inner sanctum. The 



manager, who was busy chewing a cigar to 
shreds behind his fortress of gun metal 
desk, jerked hastily upright and glared at 
the intruder. "My good man — " he began. 

"Don't 'my-good-man' me!" snapped 
Harper. He glared back at the manager. 
Reaching as far across the expanse of desktop as he could stretch, he shook his puny 
fist. "Do you know who I am? I'm Harper 
S. Brcen, of Breen and Helgart, Incorporated! And do you know why I haven't even 
a card to prove it.'^ Do you know why I have 
to make my way downstairs in garb that 
makes a laughing stock of me? Do you know 
why? Because that assinine clerk of yours 
put me in the wrong room and those damnable robots of yours then proceeded to make 
a prisoner of me! Me, Harper S. Breen! 
Why, I'll sue you until you'll be lucky if 
you have a sheet of writing-paper left in 
this idiot's retreat!" 

Hayes, the manager, blanched. Then he 
began to mottle in an apoplectic pattern. 
And suddenly with a gusty sigh, he collapsed into his chair. With a shaking hand 
he mopped his forehead. "Afj robots!" he 
muttered. "As if I invented the damned 
things!" 

Despondently he looked at Harper. "Go 
ahead and sue, Mr. Breen. If you don't, 
somebody else will. And if nobody sues, 
we'll go broke anyway, at the rate our guest 
list is declining. I'm ready to hand in my 
resignation." 

Again he sighed. "The trouble,'* he explained, "is that those fool robots are completely logical, and people aren't. There's 
no way to mix the two. It's dynamite. Maybe people can gradually learn to live with 
robots, but they haven't yet. Only we had to 
find it out the hard way. We — " he grimaced disgustedly — "had to pioneer in the 
use of robots. And it cost us so much that 
we can't afford to reconvert to human help. 
So — Operation Robot is about to bankrupt 
the syndicate." 

Listening, an amazing calm settled on 
Harper. Thoughtfully now he hooked a 
chair to the desk with his stockinged foot, 
sat down and reached for the cigar that 
Hayes automatically offered him, **Oh, I 
don't know," he said mildly. 

Hayes leaned forward like a drowning 
man sighting a liferaft **What do you 



HAGERTTS ENZYMES 



33 



mean, you don't know? You're threatening 
to take our shirts, aren't you?'* 

Meticulously Harper clipped and lit his 
cigar. "It seems to me that these robots 
might be useful in quite another capacity. I 
might even make a deal with your syndicate 
to take them off your hands — at a reasonable price, of course— and forget the outrages I've suffered at your establishment." 

Hayes leaned toward him incredulous. 
''You mean you want these robots after 
what you've seen and experienced?" 

Placidly Harper puffed a smoke ring. "Of 
course, you'd have to take into consideration 
that it would be an experiment for me, too. 
And there's the suit I'm clearly justified in 
instituting. However, I'm willing to discuss 
the matter with your superiors." 

With hope burgeoning for the first time 
in weeks, Hayes lifted his head. "My dear 
Mr. Breen, to get rid of these pestiferous 
robots, I'll back you to the hilt! I'll notify 
the owners at once. At once, Mr. Breen! 
And while we wait for them, allow me to 
put you up as a guest of the hotel." Coming around to Harper, he effusively shook 
Harp's scrawny hand, and then personally 
escorted him not merely to the door but 
across the lobby to the elevator. 

Harper gazed out at the stunned audience. 
Tliis was more like the treatment he was accustomed to! Haughtily he squared his bony 
shoulders inside the immense jacket and 
stepped into the elevator. He was ready for 
the second step of his private Operation 
Robot. 

BACK on Earth it was a warm, misty 
spring day — the kind of day unknown 
to the planet Mars. Bella and Scribney, superb in new spring outfits, waited restlessly 
while the rocket cooled and the passengers 
recovered from deceleration. 

"Look, Scrib!" Bella clutched Scribney's 
substantial arm. "It's finally opening.'* 



They watched the airlock open and the 
platform wheel into place. They watched 
the passengers descend, looking a trifle 
dazed. 

"Tliere he is!" cried Bella. "Why, doesn't 
he look wonderful! Scrib, it's amazing! 
Look at him! 

And indeed, Harper was stepping briskly 
downward, looking spry and fit and years 
younger. He came across to them actually 
beaming. It was the first pleasant expression 
they had seen on his face in years. 

"Well, you old dog!" exclaimed Scribney 
affectionately. "So you did it again!" 

Harper smirked. "Yep, I turned a neat 
little deal. I bought out Hagerty's Enzymes 
and staffed the plant with the hotel's robots. 
Got both of 'em dirt cheap. Both concerns 
going bankrupt because they didn't have 
sense enough to swap their workers. Feel I 
owe you a bit for that tip about enzymes, 
Scrib. so I made out a block of stock to you. 
All right?" 

"All right?" Scribney gulped. Why, the 
dried-up little turnip was human after all. 
"All right! Yes, sir! But aren't you going 
to use some of those robots for office help? 
Aren't they etBcient and all that?" 

Harper's smile vanished. "Don't even 
mention such a thing!" he yelped. "You 
don't know what you're saying! I lived with 
those things for weeks. I wouldn't have one 
around! Keep 'em in the factory where 
they belong!" 

He giim.psed the composed, wonderfully 
human facq of his secretary, waiting patiently in the background. "Oh there you 
are, Smythe." He turned to his relatives. 
"Busy day aliead. See you later, folks — " 

"Same old Harp," observed Scribney. 
Then he thought of the block of stock. 
"What say we celebrate our rise to a position in the syndicate, honey?" 

"Wonderful!" She squeezed his arm, and 
smiling at each other, they left the port. 



5~-PLANET— Spring 



34 




MIRAGE FOR TLANET X 

By STANLEY MULLEN 

The prize was sealed, ifs contents unknown. Yet scavengers 

from a dozen barbaric Moons; adventurers from nameless, 

semi-explored asteroids, arrived for the deathless auction. 

, . . To bid on Roper's notorious hot. 



THEY were bringing in the prisoners 
who had escaped from Phobos. Sand 
skimmer ambulances had raced to the 
spaceport OHtside the terraced Martian city 
and waited. Dust devils danced on the wide, 
wind-whipped Martian plains. Grannar of 
the Police and his silent companion examined each body as it was lowered from the 
rescue ship. 

Death anywhere is an ugly business. On 
Mars, you get used to bodies that never rot. 
Deep-freeze temperatures hold down decay 
bacteria, and the dry, cold air quickly des


sicatcs the tissue. Bodies turn into mummies that look and weigh like so much 
shredded wheat. But these corpses were 
worse — they were meaningless parodies that 
might never have been men. In primal disgust, Torry studied each one in turn, then 
shuddered and shook his head. 

Grannar was tough minded, or stronger 
stomached. Police routines had taught him 
not to shudder. 

*'You can get used to this,*' he observ< 
enjoying Torry's revulsion. *'Since you d 
known Roper, we thought you could help 




36 ^]^ANET 

us identify him. Tlianks for coming along." 
''Had I a choice?" asked Torry bitterly. 
Hie policeman's laugh was brutal, explosive. "There is always a choice. You can 
do as you're told or be dragged in screaming." 

^ Torry grimaced. "Much more of this and 
ril be dragged out screaming." 

The prisoner-escapees, wliat was left of 
them, were an unpleasant siglit. Explosive 
decompression in airless space does curious 
things to men's bodies. Blood boils in the 
veins and flesh bursts from internal pressures. Also, there are heat-cold curiosities, 
with half a body burnt raw on the sunward 
side, and the rest frozen iron-hard with a 
lacy overlay of snowflake patterns in red. 

Holden was still alive, by a miracle. Forward compartments had held together when 
the makeshift spacer blew its flimsy self inside out. He was alive but not talking. They 
brought the bulging mass of pulped, purple 
flesh back to Mars and dumped it in a 
basket. There was no face, no eyes, no recognizable hands or feet. For the time that 
remained to him, Holden would be less 
than a functioning animal, fed by tube, 
cared for by people he could not see or 
hear, living a precarious existence on the 
raw, black fringe of life. Holden was 
through talking. And for any practical purpose, through living. 

"Too bad," said Grannar, looking into 
tlie basket. "He could have told us about a 
lot of things ... if he'd wanted to." 

"Holden was a nice guy before he knew 
Bart Roper," Torry snapped angrily. 
"You sound pretty bitter about Roper." 
"I should be. I know him better than you 
do. I am bitter about Roper." 

"Because of HoIden.>" pressed Grannar. 
"Not . . . Holden. But it might as easily 
have been me in that basket. Six years ago 
I was Roper's partner. I got out quickly 
when I found out some of his business 
methods. And I had very little he could 
steal from me then. A lot of people have 
a variety of good reasons to hate Roper. 
Just say that I'm one of them." 

Grannar whistled a Martian tune. The 

sound was shrill and eery in the thin air. 

"You may as well ride back to the city 

ki the police car with me," he sugf^ested 

"We can talk — " ^ 



STORIES 

"Talk!" blurted Torry. He swore savagely. "All this ugly business for nothing. 
You haven^t found Roper yet. You don't 
even know if he made good his escape from 
your prison moon. In short, you don't know 
anything." 

"True, up to a point," agreed the policeman quietly. "There arc always many things 
I don't know. So I concentrate on the few 
things I do know. For example, you're very 
much interested in finding Roper. I'm wondering why. You can tell me about tliat on 
our way back to the city. About Roper himself, I know a few minor facts. Nobody has 
ever escaped from Phobos, the prison moon, 
but Roper may have managed it. With outside help, he got materials and fittings smuggled in to construct a scratch spacer. It blew 
up, as we know, but Roper may have expected that. In a good spacesuit, he could 
have survived. Since we still haven't found 
him, dead or alive, he's probably circling 
somewhere in a private orbit, wairing to be 
picked up." 

"It could be a long wait. One man is 
hard to find in all that s|>ace." 

"Not necessarily. A code transmitter powered by transuranic alloys would keep sending indefinitely. And Roper could have 
agreed upon being piclvcd up at some point 
of a fixed orbit by his outside friends. We'll 
find him, I think. In the meantime, we have 
you . . , and some questions. Wait in my 
car. ril be with you as soon as I thumbprint some papers." 

nnORRY stumbled across the barren sand 
J" wastes of the spaceport, pitted or glazed 
here and there by old take-off blasts. Without trouble he located the half track vehicle 
bearing police insignia. He got in and settled himself sourly to await Grannar's probing third degree. He meditated grimly on 
Roper, himself, and his reasons for coming 
to Mars. ... 

Had it only been last night he arrived? 
It seemed eternities ago. Coming in from 
Earth by short orbit express, green with deceleration sickness, he had wondered why he 
was in such a rush. After four years a cold 
trail would not get any colder. It had not, 
of course. It was hot when he arrived and 
had been getting hotter by the minute. Only 
tlie fact of being aboard tlze express at the 



MIRAGE FOR PLANET X 



37 



lime of the prison break had cleared him in 
Grannar*s eyes of being involved physically. 
And even that alibi did not erase suspicion 
from Grannar's suspicious nature. 

Grannar was shrewd and deadly, a born 
hunter of men. Since the Martians never 
trust eadi other, most of the policing is done 
by hirelings from other planets. Grannar 
was an Earthman originally. But he was a 
long way from home, and twenty years on 
Mars had made him more Martian than the 
natives. He was hard, smart, dangerous, and 
a tough man to fool. 

Torry had learned that at once last night. 

But Grannar' s return to the police car cut 
short his reverie. Torry watched the official 
cross the spaceport toward him, impressed 
by the lithe grace and sureness of movement over treacherous sand. Mars does 
something to a man who stays there. The 
body dries up and the soul withers, but if 
he survives, a man grows into something 
lean and leathery with pantherish strength 
and easy, poised motions. 

Grannar vaulted to the driver's seat and 
slammed on power. With a skirl of steering runners, the half track took off towai'd 
the bubble city of New Chicago, named 
without tenderness by some long forgotten 
exile. Grannar drove with careless violence, 
but the half track skimmer shot among the 
dunes and low, liclien-clad hills wiSiout 
incident. 

There is no truth to the charge that it 
takes as long to get from the spaceport to 
New Chicago as it does to reach Mars from 
Earth. But the distance is impressive and the 
going rough. Grannar talked as he drove, 
seeming casual, but his questioning had 
the same icy skill and unerring judgment. 

"We'll start at the beginning," he said. 

*'There is no beginning,*' Torry jerked 
out angrily. "I got in last night. Fresh from 
the spaceport and customs, I put a coin in 
the public visiphone and asked Central Information about Roper. Central had no information and returned my coin. It was a 
police trap. Your men picked me up, 
searclied me with a Geiger counter and 
found the coin. You keep faintly radioactive coins in the visiphone machines for 
Central to return w^hen someone is curious 
about police business. It came out even. 
You found out 1 was curious about Roper, 



and I found out he is police business, and 
his case is current. Do you think I'd be 
fool enough to call such attention to myself 
if I knew about Roper's prison break?" 

"You might be. And it might be smart. 
That way you'd find out what the police 
knew and what they were doing. And it 
could be an alibi in case the breakout was 
delayed. We'll skip those possibilities for 
now. You were mulish last night about certain questions. I'm still not clear about why 
you are so desperate to find Roper. Why?" 

Torry smiled coldly. "That's easy. I have 
to find him for a legal release. Preferably 
dead, which will make things easier for 
ever)^body. But if he's alive, I want his signature and prints on some papers." 

"Why? What papers?" 

Torry hesitated. "It's a touchy subject. A 
personal matter. Nothing to do witli the 
police." 

"Ill be the judge of that. Keep talking." 

"Have you ever spent five years on an 
asteroid all by yourself?** 

Grannar grunted. "Fortunately not. 
Twenty years on Mars is bad enough for 
me. Have you?" 

Torry's face twisted in bitterness. "I 
have, I cracked up my one-man spacecan 
while prospecting in the asteroids. I was 
there five years until a survey ship happened 
by. There were minerals, low grade transuranics, but good enough to work when 
you had nothing else to do. I worked out 
the whole asteroid and had a good payload 
for the survey ship when it brought me 
back. Not a big fortune, but a stake that 
looked pretty good to me. I'm not rich now, 
but I can get along without skipping meals." 

"What's the connection with Roper?" 

"None in that part of it. I went prospecting after I'd dissolved my partnership with 
Roper. Times were bad, and I couldn't tic 
up with a decent job. There was a girl — " 

"There usually is. Who was she? " 

"Rose Mead, then. She promised to wait 
for me. She didn't. She's Roper's wife now. 
Not that I blame her too much. A year can 
be a long time, and five years is longer 
when you're a castaway on a small asteroid. 
Nothing to look at but a skyful of stars. 
Nothing to breathe but hydroponic<ycle air. 
No food but your homemade synthetics 
and the green stuff you grow in your chemi


m 



38 



PLANET STORIES 



cal vats. You work and eat and sleep, and 
any idea can become an obsession. Sometimes it's one woman, sometimes an imaginary harem. I had a 3-d picture of Rose. It 
helped to hold me together, or maybe it just 
channeled an idea that was bound to go 
haywire/' 

*'You're beginning to make sense," commented Grannar. "So you have an obsession 
about Roper's wife?" 

"I call it that. But I figure that all my 
money is nc^ worth much if it won't buy 
just one thing I've dreamed about for five 
long years. There's a technicality about 
divorcing a man who's away from Earth, in 
space. Rose is funny about it. But she's 
agreed that her marriage was a mistake. 
She'll marry me if I can prove Roper is 
dead, or can get a release from him." 

"Is the girl worth all this trouble?" 

rpORRY grinned cynically. "Probably not. 
J- But Rose is a good, sound, practical 
minded girl. Maybe my money looks goad 
to her. Roper left her four years ago with 
hardly any resources. For myself, after five 
years of dream stuff, a solid human girl like 
Rose looks pretty good. Dream stuff looks 
fragile, but it's mighty tough eating for a 
daily diet." 

"So you want to find Roper. Preferably 
dead, you say. Does that include pushing 
him off a cliff if you find him?" 

Torry snorted, "It could. That depends 
on Roper." 

The policeman echoed the snort. "Roper 
is dangerous. You may have forgotten how 
tricky and ruthless he can be. Sounds to me 
like hunting a tiger with a butterfly net." 
Torry smiled viciously. "Even that can be 
done ... if the net is big enough and strong 
enough. I'm counting on a curious twist in 
Roper's mind. I'm a challenge to him — the 
one man so far he failed to swindle or corrupt. He pulled a fast one about Rose, but 
he knows I wasn't there to fight back. It 
galls him. And if he knows I'm here, alive, 
and looking for him, maybe he'll find me 
and try to wipe out the one flaw in his 
record." 

Grannar shot a glance of grudging admiration, but shook his head. "At the moment, I wouldn't count on it. He'll be busy 
and we'll see to it that he is. But if you 



want to go looking for him, maybe I can 
help you," 

"Do you know where he is?" 
"No, but I can give you some hints 
where to look." 

"Why?" Torry was baffled. 
"Two reasons. Maybe more, but two will 
do. I'm a cop, so I hate men like Roper, 
If he's on Mars Til get him sooner or 
later because I'm a good cop. And it's my 
job. I hate crooks, so I'll kill him or catch 
him and send him to Phobos for keeps. The 
second reason is that I hate Mars. It's a 
tough world — what government there is is 
corrupt and vicious. Offend the wrong people or stir things up, and you're out without 
your pension. You can even get hurt. I want 
out while I'm still ahead, with enough 
money to go back to Earth and live decently. 
And so far I haven't that kind of money." 
"I don't see the connection," protested 
Torry. 

Grannar's bushy eyebrows crawled up and 
down like caterpillars. 

"There's big money in this Roper business. There has to be for anyone to take the 
risk of arranging a breakout from Phobos 
that costs plenty." 

"Roper must have something pretty good 
this time to attract help like that. What 
is it?" 

Grannar shrugged. "I don't know. My 
guess is transuranics — the heavy metals beyond uranium in the atomic table; the stuff 
that powers planets. Without it our whole 
economy breaks down, and we can't even 
afford to make air for places like Mars. 
But you've mined it yourself. You know 
how rare and valuable it is." 

"I know," said Torry. "You think Roper 
has a new source?" 

"Maybe that, and maybe he's discovered 
or stolen a cheaper way to process or transport it." 

"It figures," admitted Torry. "Roper was 
always interested in transuranics, and always looking for a squeeze play like that. 
He'd be able to make his own terms, 
wouldn't he? Including squaring the charges 
against him?" 

"Just about any terms he dictated," grated 
the detective. 

"Why tell me this?" 

Grannar's eyes narrowed. "You want 



MIRAGE FOR PLANET X 



39 



Roper for your own good reasons. I want 
him for mine. My hands are tied but yours 
are not. If you want him, go after him. I'll 
help, short of risking my job. Fm oflfering 
to make a deal with you. It occurs to me 
that a couple of smart men could make a 
real killing by knowing the right time to 
buy a few shares of stock in transuranics. A 
man like me might even make enough to 
retire to Earth, comfortably." 

*'You're beginning to make sense," said 
Torry. "What makes you so sure I'll cut 
you in for a slice?" 

Grannar laughed harshly. "My nuisance 
value, for one thing. My usefulness for another. I'm an honest cop. But there's nothing in the rule book that says I can't pick 
up valuable information on the side while 
I'm doing my job. And nothing that says I 
can't put pressure on you to help me do it. 
Besides, why should you balk at doing me 
a favor when you're doing yourself one at 
the same time?" 

"I'm still listening." 

"New to Mars, aren't you?" 

"New enough. I've been here before, but 
a long time ago and not for long then. 
Why?' 

"Do you know anything about the local 
set-up, the governments?" 

"Not much. It's a kind of anarchy, I 
think. The big companies and even the labor 
racketeers have private armies like the old 
goon squads. Legal government is just a 
front for feudal gangs, with the police sitting politely on the lid. Lobbies and pressure groups are the real bosses. Is that 
right?" 

GRANNAR whistled his aimless Martian 
tune. "You said it. I didn't. Not out 
loud. I never even think it in a room that 
might have microphones or scanners. Mars 
is interesting, beautiful, with shreds and 
tatters of an old, picturesque culture clinging to ivy-patterns to the new, modern, cosmopolitan, industrial set-up. It says that in 
the books and travel ads. Out here in the 
clean and lifeless air of a worn-out planet 
I can have the precarious luxury of hating 
it. I want out, and you're going to help me 
get out." 

"Why stay anyhow?" 

'^Because I'm ft cop and it's the only job 



I know. And bad as it is, it's better than 
nothing. You've heard the yarn of the brash 
young rookie in Earth's Sahara City, the guy 
famous for arresting the police commissioner's daughter. I'm that cop. I hung a 
ticket on her for traffic violation. It turned 
out she was drunk and speeding away from 
an accident that killed somebody. The mess 
was too ugly to hush up, so she went to 
prison and I went to the sticks for keeps, 
I resigned and came here. So I learned to 
keep my mouth shut, do as I was told, and 
never to move an inch out of line with the 
people who count." 

"You're breaking my heart," Torry said 
bitterly. "Go on." 

"Roper's not alone in this. Somebody 
with money and political inifluence arranged 
that escape, probably picked him up off the 
wreck. Before he went to Phobos he was 
mixed up with Trans-Uranic Miners Union, 
and also with a Martian pressure group 
headed by old Sen Bas, the importer. He 
may still be. I want no trouble with either. 
With you it doesn't matter. Maybe you'll 
dig up a lot of interesting facts before you 
get yourself killed." 

"Get to the point." 

"Spacefreight. Two large boxes consigned to Roper and Holden, his partner. 
Still unopened, held in the unclaimed spacefreight warehouse. Charges are high and 
Roper was broke. He tried to get money 
from Trans-U and the Martians, but neither 
was buying a pig in a poke. Not then. Maybe they are now. He must have convinced 
his backers, somehow. But they can't get 
the space crates either unless I say so. Roper 
and his pal tried robbery to raise money 
and landed on Phobos. I put the craves under police seal." 

"Why weren't they condemned and 
opened?" 

"Too much red tape and money. The 
transport company can sell the stuff legally 
for charges, but only at public auction, unopened, and bids start at charges plus storage. Are you interested?" 

Torry frowned. "My funds are not unlimited. ..." 

"That's a chance we'll both have to take. 
I'm taking a chance on you anyhow, but 
don't try any smart tricks. I always cover 
bets. The boxes will be officially released for 



40 



PLANET STORIES 



tomorrow's auction. All I ask is a look inside at Roper's gimmick, whatever it is, so 
m know whether to buy transuranics or 
not If 70U buy the boxes the contents are 
yours. Fair enough?" 

Torry grunted. "If they sell low enough 
you'll get your look after I've had mine." 

"See that I do/' warned Grannar. "And 
a word of advice. You can't import weapons 
to Mars, but there's no law says you can't 
buy one here and sleep with it. Shall I 
drop you at your hotel?" 

The half track was nearing the domed 
city. A gigantic half bubble of polarized 
plastic rose from the plain to enclose botli 
the old Martian town and the bustling, 
strident metropolis of New Chicago, From 
the desert the dome was nearly invisible, 
but the architectural jumbles looked like a 
forest of lighted Christmas trees appearing 
by magic in the swift dusk of the red 
planet. 

Torry grinned. "You're forgetting I spent 
my first night in jail.'' 

Grannar scoifed, "Routine, one in jail, 
one in a hotel, the next in the morgue. . , .** 



II 



AN AUCTION of unclaimed, refused or 
damaged spacefreight held more surprises and excitements than a Martian wedding. All shipments were sold *'as is, unopened," which offered endless possibilities 
to a daring purchaser. 

Anything could pop out of a sealed 
space crate when the container was broken 
into, and sometimes it did, literally. One 
unlucky bidder got seven full grown grull 
cxts, shipped from Venus in suspended 
animation. His purchase caused seven minor 
riots until company guards with gas guns 
could subdue the savage killers. Loot from a 
dozen inhabited worlds and a hundred half 
explored moons and asteroids littered the 
floor or spilled from damaged cases. 

Bids ran high and two dozen small fortunes changed hands as Lots 1 to 24 went 
up at auction and were knocked down. Any 
bid on unclaimed freight was a gamble, the 
one form not taxed to death by a greedy 
government. And the inhabitants of New 
Chicago were gamblers, or tliey would not 
have been there. The crowd was mixed and 



polyglot; human and half -human species 
rubbed elbows and tempers to a fine frenzy. 
"Lot 25," sang the auctioneer. "Who'll 
open?" 

^ To avoid attracting attention, Torry had 
bid half-heartedly on several previous items, 
breathing a sigh of relief when bids pyramided and tlie lots sold to someone else. 

This time, he merely sparked off the bidding, only to have a Martian importer jump 
down his throat with an offer of twice the 
amount. Torry dropped out as the bidding 
climbed in dizzy spirals, and the diipment 
went to the impatient Martian for the price 
of a small spacelinc. Laughter rippled over 
the auction lofts as the boxes were opened 
and found to contain forty sinall air conditioners of a type useless on Mars, 

Lot 26 sold badly after that disappointment. It proved to be a treasure of rare 
luminous birds from Venus, and collectors 
inimediately offered the fortunate purchaser 
triple his money for the lot. 

"Lot 27," roared the auctioneer before 
excitement could die down. "Two large 
boxes to be sold separately. No information 
on these . . . except that they were held 
overtime in storage and have just been released from police seal. The space crates 
are undamaged. Who'll open?" 

Torry felt like a small child back on 
Earth, clutching moist bronze pennies in his 
hot, grimy fist as he ran to the corner candy 
store. Nerves and muscles contracted in his 
throat. He opened his mouth but no sound 
came out. 

"Fifty credits," shouted the Martian who 
had bought Lot 25. "I want to recoup my 
losses." He stared belligerently at Torry. 
Somebody else doubled the bid. 
Torry found a shadow of his voice and 
redoubled.^ Grinning evilly, the Martian 
raised again, but not before he shot a wary 
glance across the room. Torry met the challenge, then following the direction of the 
Martian's glance, he spotted a Martian girl 
standing near the doorway. She was so 
swathed in blue Venusian spidersilk as to 
be practically invisible, and there was time 
for only a general impression. But Torry 
did not miss the head-nod signal, instructing the Martian male to bid for her. After 
the man's previous performance, Torry 
braced himself for spirited competition. 



BlIRAGE FOR PLANET X 



41 



Up and up went the bids . . . astroGomically. 

At twenty thousand credits tlie Martian 
hesitated for an automatic mute appeal to 
the feminine figure. The girl nodded again, 
but that moment's doubt cost tiie Martian. 
". . . Third and last time. Sold to the 
Earthman , . . for twenty thousand credits^." 
Torry swallowed hard. He saw the girl 
glide toward him through the crowd, moving as smoothly and silently as a ghost. 

Like a maniac the Martian charged to the 
platform, croaking a loud protest Argu* 
ments became heated, voices were raised in 
harsh clamor, then blows struck. Grinning, 
Torry watched the scramble. A knc^ of uniformed company guards surged around the 
battling Martian and hustled him from the 
auction rooms. A gas gun was used finally 
to subdue the raging sportsman. While 
Torry waited for attendants to bring him the 
box and his purdiase receipts, he looked 
again for the girl but she had melted into 
the crowd." 

Interest was now roused to a high pitch. 
The auctioneer went into his spiel in whatever alien language auctioneers use, and it 
was only by knowing in advance what was 
being said that anyone could make sense of 
the garble. 

". . . Other half of Lot 27," droned tlie 
husky voice. "How about a thousand credits 
to open?" 

*'One thousand," Torry bid hoarsely. 
He felt sweaty and feverish at the same 
time. Mentally he calculated his remaining resources. A little more of tiiis, and the 
show would be out of his price class. 

Bidding was rapid. In jumps the price 
went up from twenty to thirty thousand. 
The Martian's hysteria seemed to have infected everyone. At thirty-five tliousand, 
bidding slowed. 

"Thirty-six thousand," Torry bid. 

MOMENTS lengthened and Torrj'-'s 
breath came slowly back. It was the 
absolute limit of his available cash, and the 
auction terms were cash on the spot. 
Numbly, he realized that his bid, it it were 
accepted, used up more than half of his 
fortune from five years of lonely work. 

"Thirty-seven thousand," offered a buUtii mated voice. And a barrel-bodied mine 



owner from lobololy thrust himself forward 
as if to give authority to his bid. 

Torry had shot his wad. He could not 
raise the bid, and it meant loss of the second 
box. Slowly, the starch dissolved out of him 
and he let his excitement wilt. 

With bidding so high, the auctioneer was 
not impatient. He studied Torry hopefully. 
Tlie moment extended. The gavel raised, 
slammed down, 
"Going once." 

A thrusting hand delved into Torry's 
pocket where he clutched grimly at his 
sheaf of paper credits. For an awful moment he thought his pocket was being 
picked. Then crisp, rustling paper bulged 
his pocket, and realization bulged his eyes. 
There was no time for thought or argument. In blind confusion, he drew out a 
packet of paper money and stared at it, A 
cruel fist jabbed into Torry's ribs. 

'*Going twice . . • at thirty-seven thousand." 

"Forty thousand!" screamed Torry. 
Bids climbed again, to fifty thousand, to 
fifty-five, then to sixty. At sixty-hi^'o thousand, the fat man from lo gave up. 

"Sold," droned the auctioneer. "I hope 
the man from Earth has the money, and his 
money's worth. Now, Lot 28, five cases, 
one broken open. The rest. . . ." 

Torry did not hear any more. He turned 
and stared blankly at a vision in blue spidersilk. Gossamer fabric so swathed the girl, 
covering so densely in so many folds, that 
she had no more form than an ear of corn. 
A face showed dimly through layers of 
diaphanous cloth, but no features were clear 
enough to have real definition. 
"Who are you?" gasped Torry. 
"Your partner." The voice, as smootli and 
silken as the garments, seemed bodiless, 
but it suggested purringly that the girl was 
not. "Don't be so obvious about it. We 
won't open the boxes here. Hire men to 
move our loot and 111 have a robotruck 
waiting outside the freight doors in five 
minutes. Be there." 

Torry nodded dumbly. She vanished 
again, so quickly that he almost wondered 
if he had imagined her. But her money was 
real enough. He fumbled it, paying grimfaced attendants, tl^n hired men to move 
the heavy crates to the freight elevator. At 



42 



PLAHET STORIES 



street level, with the boxes blocking most 
of the entrance, he waited. 

A wheeled robotruck quickly appeared 
and the girl descended the ramp. Like a 
blue fury, she directed the men and had the 
space crates loaded in a brace of minutes. 
Ihen a hand snaked out from the fabric 
folds. 

"Half of eighty-two thousand is forty-one 
thousand," she said. "We can settle up 
now." 

"Half of sixty-two thousand," objected 
Torry. 

"You don't know me very well," she 
murmured. "It has to be all or nothing." 

The gun against his stomach decided 
Torry. "Don^t be like that. You win. He 
shrugged. "1 guess were both taking a 
chance at that. Forty-one thousand is a 
heavy investment in curiosity." 

The gun vanished. "You've no idea how 
much of a chance we're taking," she mused 
aloud. "People are curious. Yo Tyal is a 
fool, and I didn't dare attract attention by 
bidding myself. Half of the Trans-U 
Miners' goon squad was at that auction just 
watching me. You should know what that 
means." 
"Should ir 

"You should — if you don't. But we can't 
stand here talking like moonstruck lovers. 
Not unless we're tired of living. Which is 
it, partner, me or the goon squad.>" 

"You, I guess." Torry laughed grimly. 
"Though if I'd known about the goon 
squad I'd have given you less argument." 

Her head tossed under the myriad veilings of spidersilk. She scrambled aboard 
the robotruck and pressed the motor stud. 
"Come on, then," she ordered sharply. 

The truck was in motion almost before 
Torry could leap to the seat beside her. 

Going at suicidal speed through the twisting alleyways of the old cHy, Torry felt 
hopelessly confused and lost. Worse, the 
girl kept glancing over her shoulder,' and 
her driving suffered. It was reckless enou;>h 
at best. 

"You drive," Torry urged. "Unless you're 
psychic you can't watch Adhere you're going 
and where we've just been. If anything's 
following us, it's probably just an ambulance looking for business." 

"Moke sure," i^he ordered breathlessly. 



At first Torry could distinguish nothing 
but a blurred rush of shadowy buildings 
whirling away behind them as if being 
drawn toward some colossal whirlpool. But 
he sensed pursuit, just as the girl had, perhaps because she seemed to expect it. Then 
he saw two huge dark vehicles race into 
view just before she swerved the robotruck 
around a corner and shut off rear vision. 

"We are being followed," he grudged. 
"Now where, partner.^" 

"Home, I had thought," she said. "But 
we'll never make it. And I don't want those 
wolves going through our place. It's bad 
enough without that." 



I 



rpHE robotruck hit a straight stretch. PenJ- cil beams of light licked out from the 
street-shadows behind. Fire flowers blossomed, but the noise of heavy explosions 
was lost in the roar of racing motors. Showers of dust and flakes of fiery, disintegrating 
masonry deluged the careening robotruck. 

Hurtling around a blind corner, the 
truck aimed itself into a narrow opening 
betw^een buildings. Metal ground and 
screamed in abrasive contact with stone but 
the robotruck rebounded and careened down 
side alleys, around sharp corners, and over 
moving walks fortunately deserted. With 
the ner\'eless skill of an old trucker, the 
girl wrestled some sanity into the vehicle 
and chose her route from the most unlikely 
possibilities. At last, after a splint through, 
a tangle of dark avenues and narrow alleys 
she brought the robotruck to a brake melting 
halt in the deep shadow of high, blankfaced buildings. 

"See what I mean?" she said, voice loud 
and shrill in the silence that seemed deafening with the motor cut out. 

Shuddering, the girl crouched behind the 
seat shield and fumbled inside her garment 
for the gun, alert for signs of pursuit. 

"Relax," advised Torry. "We're alone 
for the moment. Wherever we are." 

"It's an abandoned warehouse. Belon r^s to 

my grandfather," she gasped. "Can you get 

those boxes inside with only me to help.*' 

"Of course, if there's tackle, some wheels 

and a ramp." 

With a coded light-key the girl opened 
heavy doors and got necessary equipment. 
Fortunately, she was stronger than shQ 



MIRAGE FOR PIMfET X 



43 



looked, and about as fragile as steel wire. 
She gave Torry no more mercy tlian she 
gave herself. It Was still a mean job. 

Inside the vast, echoing interior, Torry 
and his companion seemed as unimpressive 
as ants in an auditorium. Huge, vaulted 
lofts were dusty with disuse. The huge 
cubes of the space crates looked like unmarked dice, rolled by giants, and forgotten. 

Torry was tired and irritable. "I've 
played along with you," he said. *'Now that 
we're here I'd like some facts. Because of 
the boxes, 111 assume your connection with 
Roper. Who are you, and what is all this 
about?" 

"Don't you know?" demanded the girl. 
Laughing an icy trill, she threw back the 
veiling spidersilk from head and face, 
bunching the material neatly behind her 
neck. Her face was oddly elfin, and distorted to curious proportions by the Martian half-mask of delicately etched glass. 
Wide set eyes of periwinkle blue tilted at 
the corners, and the smile of her swordsla^h mouth was both teasing and disarming. Torry was suddenly glad that there 
had been no such face as hers to remember 
during his five-year exile. 

"I'm Tharol Sen," she murmured. "My 
grandfather is Sen Bas, the Martian importer. Does that explain anything?" 

"It may," said Torry, "but not to me. I'm 
a stranger here, myself. Long ago I was 
Roper's partner. We heard he was dead. 
You might say I'm acting for his estate." 

"Roper is still alive, very much alive. 
And don't worry, he can look after his own 
affairs." 

An ugly thought struck Torry, then, 
though he had gnawed at the idea before. 
"You don't happen to be one of his aflfairs?" 
Her smile vanished. The dark hair 
swirled like black smoke as she tossed her 
head. Her eyes turned dark and cold with 
the arrogant pride of her ancient race. 

"That was a bad choice of words, partner," she said with a haughty stare. "I have 
promised to marry Bart Roper." 
Anger surged hotly in Torry. 
"Bad choice of words for you, not me. 
Roper can't marry you or anyone else. 
"Whatever arrangement you have — " He 
stopped. "Did he happen to mention a wife 



back on Earth?" He hoped the flash of resentment in him was for Rose, not for himself. 

"Roper said she was dead," the girl answered, "Perhaps he believes she is dead. 
In any case, it doesn't matter. Martian law 
does not recognize marriages on other 
planets. He can pay her oS and I'll see that 
he forgets her." 

"Perhaps." Torry mastered himself. "I'd 
still like to know what I paid all those 
credits for." 

"Why not open the boxes and find out?" 

FROM a trapdoor locker she brought 
tools, an atomic torch and a huge wrecking bar. The boxes yielded easily to persuasion. 

The first box, which was smaller, contained an assortment of lenses. Banks of 
atomic-electric batteries hooked up into an 
intricate arrangement of cop}>er wire coils 
did not explain any puzzles. Nor did the 
contents of the larger case, which were 
mainly a folding framework of metal suspending endless layers of foil or metalcloth 
too finely woven for the eye to follow. Tlie 
foil or fabric was eery stuff, as unsubstantial 
as curdled moonlight. Like liquid mercury, 
it seemed almost alive as it crawled away 
from die touch. 

"I thought the only mirages you could 
buy came in bottles," commented Torry unhappily. 

"Don't be a fool," rasped the girl in a 
strange tone. "It is a mirage . . . for Planet 
X. I thought you knew more since you 
knew Roper. But I'll stand by my agreement. All or nothing, both ways. I'd better 
explain. And now that you're in, try to act 
intelligent. I'll tell you all I can, then we'd 
better get this equipment to . . . to my 
grandfather before anything else happens." 

A buzzer near the metal sliding doors 
droned a warning. The girl's face turned 
upward toward a blinking red alarm light. 

"I'd say something was already happening," said Torry. 

"Someone's in the alley outside," gasped 
Tharol Sen. "It can t be the police. They 
wouldn't dare interfere." 

"Then who?—" 

"Probably Ferax of Trans-U Miners 
Union. Or his strong-arm squad. If they 



IflMita 



44 



PLANET STORIES 



find us here with . . . with that they^ll kill 
both of us. I don't know what to do.'* 

"Why don*t you stop fooling with that 
silly blaster gun? Give it to me and find 
yoursdf a hole to crawl in. This is my department. Let me do the worrying." 

She laughed. "I might do just that." She 
handed over her pop-gun. It was a typical 
woman's weapon, squat, flat and short-barreled. Up close it could vaporize a man, but 
it would have no range worth mentioning. 
Torry grinned at it in contempt. Motioning 
her out of the line of fire, he crouched behind the wrecked crates. 

A heavy crash echoed through the cavernlike vaults as force was applied to the metal 
doors. But the doors were dur-steel, two 
inches thick. They held, but the interior 
reverberated with harsh metallic clangor. 
Two more blows sounded, then a lengthening silence. A circle of redness glowed incandescent on the metal, spreading over the 
panels like spilled paint. Waves of heat 
sprang outward. Heat haze danced in the 
cool air as visible vibrations of blinding 
crimson radiated from the softening door. 
Runnels of melting steel channeled the 
metal surface, dripping to spatter on floor. 
The girl was busy with something, but 
with his tyts riveted on the door, Torry 
could not spare her any attention. He imagined she might be trying to hide the contents of the boxes. 

"They'll be through in a minute," she 
whispered. 

Torry nodded. Drops of water splashed 
down suddenly. Torry felt it on hands and 
face, glanced upward. Rain, inside a building in a domed city! He must be crazy. But 
it was real. Drops became a deluge, slashing down in increasing torrents. Water sizzled on the incandescent door, and clouds 
of steam burst upward, obscuring everything. Pools formed, joined. In moments 
the floor was inches deep in water. 

** Automatic sprinklers," said the girl. 
"Set for any upward shift of temperature." 
Steam clouds cleared. A needle of light 
burned through. In rifts, Torry saw the 
door dissolve, slide suddenly into a bubbling, spitting mass that spread in fiery 
rush across the floor. In wild rush came 
dark figures, dancing gingerly to avoid 
tongues of hot metal. Torry fired carefully. 



He kept finger on stud until the blaster 
charge was used up. He flung the useless 
weapon. But the dark figures were gone. 
The doorway, with ^2,gging leaves of soft 
metal, was empty. 

"That's all, sister," he said, turning. 

She was gone. Something like a blue flash 
whisked out of vision. Th^re was only the 
metal framework supporting a cylinder of 
the woven quicksilver. And, as he watched, 
it vanished. 

More dark figures blocked the doorway. 
They came at him in a surge of reckless 
violence. He stood up and met them with 
empty hands. Then darkness struck through 
his brain. 



Ill 



rnORRY opened one eye cautiously. He 
-L was in bed, a soft bed with clean linens. 
Beside the bed loomed a monstrous figure. 
Something that might have been, and was, 
a Venusian t)pe-R mutant. It seemed not 
quite human, and big even for a Venusian. 
But it was not a stranger. 

*Terax!" whispered Torry, opening both 
eyes. 

"It's been a long time," said the Venusian 
in thick accents. 
"Not long enough." 

Ferax laughed brutally. His head was a 
hairless globe of coarse leather, into which 
some humorist had punched a parody of 
human features while the material was still 
pliable. Nothing about Ferax looked pliable 
now. 

"You're still tough, Torry. And you're 
keeping fast company these days. But you'll 
never learn to work with your brain instead 
of your fists or a gun." 
^^ Torry smiled with bruised, pulpy lips. 
"Look who's talking. You're getting soft, 
Ferax. Last time your boys worked over 
Roper and me we couldn't walk or talk 
for a week. And I hear you're in fast company yourself since* you gave up strikebreaking and took over union racketeering. 
You may be a big name now, but you're as 
ugly as ever. And to me, you'll always smell 
like the skunk in tl^ie perfume works." 

Ferax bellowed happily. "Smells are more 
subtle in higher brackets, that's all. In a 
stinking world, nobody smells too pretty. 



MIRAGE FOR BE ANET X 



45 



Not even you, and certainly not your girl 
friend — or is she Roper's?" 

"Tharoi Sen? Roper's, I guess. You'll 
have to ask them. I barely saw the girl myself. I just got in night before last, spent 
a day answering questions for the police, 
then rested up one night before buying myself a package of trouble. Nobody tells me 
anything, so I'll have to guess. Is Roper 
behind this rat race?" 

Ferax grunted. "I could almost believe 
you don't know. So Til tell you. He*s in 
with a Martian power grab. They need 
transuranic metals to power their underground cities. The stuff is scarce and expensive. Everyone's looking for new sources 
and well have to find some soon or our 
whole economy will break down. The Mar* 
tians arc in the same jam, desperate." 

**Roper has a new source?" 

"Not new. We all know where the metals 
are. Neptune's big moon, Triton. And 
Pluto. Tlic trouble is getting tliem out."^ 

Torry shook his head. "But you've mined 
under bad conditions before. Triton and 
Pluto should be no worse than some." 

**Not the mining. Transportation. Freight 
rates from Pluto or Triton would eat up 
all the profits. And take too much time. 
Who wants to spend twelve years hauling 
in one shipload of ore? The answer is, nobody. The Martians can afford the money 
since they're already paying top rates for 
wlutevcr we can supply. But we think 
Roper has a short cut for transportation — " 

"If he has I'd better get in with him. 
Sounds like a very good profit." 

Ferax cliuckled. "I know better than that 
You and Roper hate each other worse than 
you hate me. Besides, I can offer a better 
deal. He'll only swindle you out of your 
cut, and you know it. Throw in witli me and 
you'll stay alive, plus a slice of whatever I 
take." 

"Are you serious about tliat? If so. Til 
have to think it over. Is there any use asking you where I can find Roper?" 

"No use at all," said Ferax, grinning. "I 
don't know. If I did, I'd go there after him. 
If you do I'll have you followed. You always did have a genius for picking the losing side, which makes it a pleasure to fight 
you. You're free to go as soon as you're 
strong enough. If you decide to play things 



my way, let me knov/. FU give you a pass, 
day or night. Getting into union headquarters is like breaking into the mint, I live like 
a minor king, and the place is a fort." 

Torry snorted. "It's probably safer tliat 
way, when so many people hate your guts." 

Ferax shrugged. "For that compliment 
FU give you some free advice. Don't tell the 
police about that shooting fray in the warehouse. You're nobody, and the police would 
love to clear the union and your Martian 
tw'irp by using you for scapegoat. You or 
the girl killed six of my best hardheads. 
Also, if you see her or old Sen Bas, watch 
yourself. They're both trickier than snakes 
and a lot more poisonous." 

"One thing more," said Torry. "What 
happened to the girl?" 

Ferax opened eyes wide. "You tell me. 
She was gone, along with the stuff from tlic 
boxes. My men found you sprawled out unconscious from a blow on the head. You 
were suckered, friend. Suckered." 

Ferax produced a metal ident card impregnated with coded electronic inks. "Tliis 
will keep you out of jail if your cop friend 
has any such ideas. Also, it will get you in 
here to see me anytime, day or night, if you 
change your mind." 

Torry laughed, but accepted the card uneasily. "That will be the day or night. ..." 

LIKE all police stations, the building 
reeked of unwashed bodies and harsh 
disinfectants. In Grannar's office, Torry 
faced out the storm. 

"Amateur!" said Grannar in disgust. 
"Why did I ever get mixed up with you?" 

Torry glared back at him. "Our lovej'dovey arrangement is brittle enough to break 
off any time you want it that way." 

Grannar shook himself like a wet dog. 
"Not yet. Whether you know it or not, you 
did pick up some interesting facts. I guess 
Tharol Sen has tricked smarter men than 
you. And she'll probably keep that partnership bargain, since Martians are funny 
about honor in a business deal. Since she 
was the one at the auction we can assume 
that the Martians picked up Roper from the 
wrecked escape ship and that he's alive." 

"I'm sure she knows where Roper is," 
said Torry. "Now if I knew where to find 
her—" 



46 



PI4ANET STORIES 



"That's easy enough/' Grannar told him 
acidly. "Her grandfather has a big place in 
the old Martian sector, about twenty acres 
on the surface and Thol knows how many 
cubic miles of tunnels and cellars underground. He calls himself an importer, and 
after his own quaint way, he is. Any vice 
for a price. Sen Bas' Garden of Delights is 
a combination gambling den, freak show, 
amusement park, carnival and emporium of 
forbidden drugs and narcotic liquors. We've 
tried raiding the joint but gave that up. Too 
risky, with their mines and booby traps, and 
the Martians just scamper into the holes 
and get lost. Below ground is a rabbit warren of caverns and tunnels and vaults that 
used to be for gro^ ing and curing mushrooms and commercial molds. We know the 
girl is there, somewhere, but — " 

"But you're afraid to go in after her.^" 
"Not quite that. If ordered on regular 
police business I'd go poking into even that 
Martian hornet's nest. But we have nothing on her or Sen Bas, and only a suspicion 
that Roper's hiding there. Since you muffed 
something easy, like the auction, I doubt if 
you could manage to get in, let alone locate 
her or Roper.'* 

"Who says I muffed anything?" demanded 
Torry irritably. "I know what was in the 
boxes, though I didn't tell the girl I knew. 
It's a matter transmitter, the only one in the 
Solar System. An inventor back on Earth 
was knocked on the head and his working 
model stolen. He's alive, but has lost his 
memory, and the plans were taken along 
with the model. Roper's big secret is stolen 
property, but getting it back may be a problem. I didn't guess what it was till the girl 
•used it to escape from the warehouse. Probably they want the thing to bring back heavy 
metal ores from Triton or Pluto. I've learned 
more in three days than you did in four 
fears." 

Grannar bowed sardonically. '*Oh, sure. 
I apologize. And now I'm sure you can lay 
hands on a man with a perfect escape 
method — from anywhere to anywhere. The 
ratholes were bad enough, but this really 
does it." 

"The girl is still a good lead," said Torry 
quietly. *Tm going after her. Are you, or 
do I have to ask help from Ferax?" 

"Suit yourself about Ferax. I won't risk 



my job on a chance Roper might be 
there — " 

"How much is your job worth.^" asked 
Torry, with a sneer. 

Grannar's face twitched. "For half that 
dough you threw away at the auction, I 
could buy a plankton farm on Earth. ..." 

Torry^ licked his lips and left. Back at the 
hotel he cashed a bank draft and put twenty 
thousand credits in currency into an envelope with a note and sent it to Grannar. 
The note began: 

Vve always wanted to buy a policeman. Now you can afford to do your 
job. I'm seeing Ferax first, but with or 
without his help, Vm going after Roper. 

Terse instructions followed. Torry did 
not expect too much of Grannar, but the 
nian represented law and authority as far as 
either existed on Mars, and dealing with 
Roper, Ferax, and the Martians all at once 
was scarcely a one-man job. 

rnRANS-U MINERS UNION housed it-A. self in a citadel remarkable even on 
Mars. It occupied the center of a large area, 
cleared, floodlighted and surrounded by a 
charged wire fence. Inside the defense circle 
were booby traps triggered for the first careless step off marked pathways patrolled by 
robot guards. Torry's metal ident card got 
him through the gateway by tripping electronic relays, and each incorruptible robot 
guard passed him after being shown the 
card. 

At the building doorway he had to 
satisfy a series of dubious and hard bitten 
human questioners, but his pass and the 
magic name of Ferax got him inside. 

Doors opened. Robot voices directed him 
across echoing lobbies to a bank of elevators. 
In a locked cage he descended five floors 
below surface level. In the corridor another 
bodiless voice spoke: 

"End of the hall. Door on the right" 
Torry followed directions. The ritual was 
getting on his nerves. His footsteps eclioed 
hollowly. The place smelled damp and 
moldy as a tomb. Opening the door on the 
right with a wave of his keyed pass, he 
realized that it was, in a sense, a tomb. 
There was a body in it. A dead body. 



I 



MIRAGE FOR PiA^ET X 



47 



Ferax sprawled across an ornate desk of 
Venusian chibar wood and kru4eather. 

Luminous particles from a blaster discharge still danced in the air. A lingering 
bite of charred, exploding j3esh stung the 
nostrils. There was little left of the torso, 
but a lolling globular head identified the 
corpse. A discarded gun clanked as Torry's 
foot kicked it. He hesitated, then picked it 
up and renewed the charge. It was an automatic reflex of defense, and fingerprint evidence was not likely to matter now. If 
found on the spot he would have little chance 
for explanations. 

The thing had happened only minutes 
ago. Whoever did it, the kfller must still 
be close at hand. A roving flicker of pale 
radiance warned Torry that a scanner was 
in use. By whom? From v/here? No complex 
mental processes were needed to convince 
Torrj' tliat he was in a bad spot. Tlie goon 
squads were notorious for acting first and 
asking questions afterwards. 

Getting into the citadel to see Ferax had 
been interesting enough. Getting out again 
promised to be more so. If he ever got out. 

The office door was opening slowly. Silently Torry glided behind it. Reaching 
around it, he snatched cloth and flesh and 
dragged a struggling form into the room. 

"Tharol Sen!" The girl was panting, her 
periwinkle eyes wide and glazed with horror. 

Torry subdued her writhings by jamming the blaster muzzle hard into her 
flesh. 

'Talk low," he ordered. "But talk fast. 
Why did you kill Ferax.^" 

''I didn t. I found him like that, just a 
moment ago. I heard the blaster and looked 
in quickly. Then I hid in the office across. 
I heard something and came back here. 
That's all I know." Her voice ended on a 
wail. 

Torr}' jerked up the elfin face and studied 
it savagely. For some reason he believed 
her. But there was more to explain, even if 
someone else had killed tlie labor racketeer, 
and little time for explanations. 

"How did you get in here.^" he snapped. 
''And why?" 

She threw back her head in a characteristic gesture. Her eyes sparkled. 

-Roper had come here. He was so long 



that I got worried. I came through. ..." 
She stopped talking suddenly. 

'Through the transmitter? I know about 
it, so you can call it by the right name." 

Tharol Sen nodded numbly. 

'That means Roper killed him." 

The girl jerked angrily. ''Bart Roper 
wouldn't do that. He wouldn't kill an unarmed man. Probably you killed him, and 
just want to throw the blame on ... on us." 

Torry ignored her. "Roper would be too 
smart to leave any evidence. So I'll leave it 
for him." From his pocket he took a small 
lighter with a name engraved on it, quickly 
scrubbed it free of prints and dropped it on 
the floor as if it had fallen in the excitement of murder. It would not carry conviction, but it would be proof of Roper's presence and his reputation would do the rest. 

"You fool," said Tharol Sen. 'Tm a witness, and I saw you do that. I'll testify." 

"Do that," taunted Torry viciously, "if it 
ever comes to a trial. Who'll believe you? 
And I don't think the strong arm boys will 
wait for a trial. If you can get back through 
that transmitter screen, we'd better do it before someone finds us here." 

"Take you?" she snarled. "I'd rather die 
here." 

"You have that choice." 

She changed her mind. Torrj' did not 
misread the flash of wicked triumph on her 
face. He did not have to. 

"All right," she yielded. "Bart Roper will 
know how to take care of you. Come ahead, 
if you dare. The transmitter screen is in the 
opposite office." 

Torr}^ sighed bitterly, "I'll chance Roper. 
Fve already had one session with the 
goons." 

THE quicksilver screen was three-dimensional, and possibly four, since it seemed 
to exist in t^^o places at once and linked 
them without regard to intervening distance. 
It was a hollow cylinder supported by metal 
framework, and the insubstantial fabric 
glowed and pulsed with electrical airrent. 
Inside was darkness and a sense of infinite 
space. Walking through the odd fabric one 
encountered nothing material, but a prickling touched every skin surface, then soaked 
through the bone centers. 

Leaving the force field of the screen wjls 



48 



PLANET STORIES 



more exhilarating, and almost painful. It 
was like breaking an electrical contact; muscles jerked spasmodically, hair stood on end, 
and hot sparks discharged from any moist 
portions of the skin. Torry had not realized 
how drenched his body was in cold sweat. 
He stepped out, gasping. 

He stepped into paradise, or hell. Unreality. 

Martian subcellar gardens are startling to 
outsiders. In the air was the bitter tang of 
narcotic incense. Smoke distorted vision. 
Nightmarish fantasies of mobile murals in 
rich colors writhed on the walls. The ceiling 
was an illusion of sky and stars, complete 
witli intricacies of celestial mechanics, and 
the flooring resembled grassy sward, set 
with miniature pools and cool, gurgling 
streams, crossed by arching bridges of 
car\^ed and tined ivory. Singing birds and 
trilling winged serpents filled the air with 
sound and motion. Luminous bubbles rose 
and burst above lighted, musical fountains. 
Musicians toyed with the acrid melodies of 
ancient Mars, and only close inspection 
proved the dancing girls 3-d projections. 

It was a painstaking reproduction, pitiful 
and exquisite, of the richly barbaric and 
luxuriant youth of a now-dying planet. To 
a Martian, it would have been nostalgic and 
lovely. To Torry, fresh from the scent of 
blood and death, it was a garish mockery, 
like a painted corpse. 

Torry recoiled painfully, both from the 
setting and from the living man who 
seemed part of it. 

Sen Bas was as dried and shriveled as a 
Martian mummy. Only his eyes seemed 
alive. 

"You can put away your gun," said Sen 
Bas, his wrinkled face a mask of malicious 
humor. "You are in no danger here." 

Oddly, there was no feeling of menace, 
and Torry found himself putting away his 
weapon. Will powder beat from Sen Bas as it 
does from hypno machines, and his personality held fearful compulsion. 

"But he's — " began Tharol Sen hysterically. 

Still smiling, Sen Bas nodded like a 
bizarre doll witli a swinging pendulum attached to its head. "No matter. Since we 
made a deal with Roper when we picked 
him up off Phobos, we must do as he says 



... in some matters. Roper has gone ahead. 
He wants this man, Torry, sent to him . . . 
there. There is use for him . . . where Roper 
has gone. Until then, he is our guest, and 
we must show him every courtesy." 

Torry studied the old man calmly. "You 
can use place names, Sen Bas. I know about 
the transuranics on Triton and Pluto. But 
how could Roper have gone ahead when 
we were using the transmitter? It can't be 
three places at once." 

Sen Bas frowned. "No, it cannot. Unfortunately, it has many limitations. This 
is a second model copied by my engineers 
for study and experiment. To our distress 
we have learned that ores of the heavy 
metals cannot be transmitted since their 
radioactivity has an effect on the force field. 
But now, with trouble coming, this model 
must be destroyed." 

From a pouch Sen Bas drew a tiny subsonic whistle upon which he blew a soundless note. Martian technicians quickly appeared. Sen Bas issued commands, and the 
transmitter was rapidly dismantled and removed to incinerators. 

"Good idea," approved Torry. "Ferax is 
dead. The police — " 

"I know. The transmitter is not as instantaneous as it seems to the user. Time 
also is distorted, a^ well as space. Hours 
have passed. You are the last person known 
to have seen Ferax, so you are wanted by 
the police and others for questioning. I was 
not certain you would come through the 
screens, so my agents are scouring the city 
for you. Roper has gone ahead to Triton, 
and wants you to join him there where we 
can make contact." 

"How long will that take.^" 
Sen Bas blinked. "Who knows,^ My scientists say it depends on the relative positions of Triton and Mars. The best time will 
be in five or six days, but you may have to 
go sooner. Tharol Sen can show you around, 
and when the time is right, she will take you 
to the transmitter. It is securely hidden 
where the police will not find it. In the 
meantime — " 

"I'm a prisoner?'* 

Sen Bas giggled. "Not exactly. Say, my 
guest. Your only jailers axe outside. Let us 
hope they will stay there until you can go. to 
Roper ... as he requested." 



MIRAGE FOR PLANET X 



49 



"Roper must have been in a hurry to get 
away," grated Torry. 

"He was. For excellent reasons. A Solar 
Survey ship is due off Triton at any time. 
Roper wanted to be in sole possession of the 
satellite, with samples to make good his 
claims to minerals." 

Suddenly, everything happened at once. 
Shrill alarms blared from a dozen quarters. 
Red lights flared ominously. A fusillade of 
shots broke out. 

Sen Bas swore luridly in Martian. "The 
police!" 

Heavy explosions thundered overhead. 
The ceiling cracked, opened wide. An avalanche of steel and stone and breaking glass 
roared into the subcellar gardens. Dust 
clouds blinded Torry. 

IV 

FROM the collapsing roof tons of debris 
poured into the underground gardens 
and spread over the floor like advancing 
mountains. Dust choked, Torry staggered 
blindly before it in panic to avoid being 
caught and buried. It was like a swift, 
deadly race with an engulfing landslide. 

Free of the confusion and deafening 
tumult, he turned to look about for Sen Bas 
and the girl. In the dust cloud it was impossible to see anything. Masses of masonry 
and fused glass from the collapsing cavern 
roof continued to detach themselves and 
crash down in random uproar. Cautiously, 
Torry picked his way over the mounds of 
rubble, searching. 

A feeble cry led him to Sen Bas. The 
aged Martian looked like a tattered bundle 
of red rags., Half buried under a hillock of 
shattered stone and twisted steel, the old 
man showed little sign of life, save for 
still-glittering eyes and husks of sound 
emerging from bloodless lips. Spreading 
stains of red seeped from beneath the prisoning blocks. 

*Tf I can lift the stones, can you drag 
yourself out?'* asked Torry. 

"Don't — think — so!" gasped Sen Bas. 

"Where can I find help.>" 

"Don*t try. Go — quickly. Save yourself. 
Tlie alarms — ^police — maybe union killers. 
Go — " 

4— PLANET— Spring 



"Not yet," snapped Torry. "We'll worry 
about the rest after I get you out." 

The old man protested. "I'm — old. Does 
not matter. Get to— transmitter. My people 
must have — " 

Ignoring him, Torry worked. Feverishly 
he searched for and found a length of reinforcing steel. With it, he dug into debris 
of glass and stone and tortured steel. Mass 
by mass, he levered it up and rolled it aside. 
Fingers raw, steel bending in his hands, he 
strained to uncover the writhing, bleeding 
form of Sen Bas. At last he wedged up the 
last mass and reached under to drag out the 
ancient Martian. Sen Bas screamed as he 
came free, but the agony left his face. 

"You're hurting him," raged Tharol Sen. 
She stumbled toward them, her face a mask 
of hate. 

"No!" cried Sen Bas. Gathering breath, 
he whispered, "He saved me." Then pallor 
flooded his pinched features. 

Torry knelt beside him, not even looking at the girl. "Shut up!" he ordered. "Get 
bandages — painkilling drugs. He's badly 
crushed, bleeding to death. Don't argue. 
Hurry!" 

Sen Bas blinked. "Do as he says. . . ." 
Tharol Sen disappeared. 

Alone, Sen Bas stared curiously at his 
rescuer. "I should have ordered you both 
to the transmitter. My men could care for 
me ... if it matters." 

"Not soon enough. Roper can wait," 
Sen Bas shook his head. "Roper might. 
My people cannot. We need heavier metals 
to power our underground cities. We are a 
dying race." 

"You're a dying man. Don t talk." 
The old Martian composed his features 
with great dignity. "What better time? Our 
need is desperate. We must claim the transuranics on Triton. Even though they must 
be freighted here, since they cannot be 
brought through the transmitter. We tried 
it, and failed. You know Roper. Will he 
deal fairly with us?" 

Torry shook his head sadly. "No." 
Sen Bas did not seem surprised. "I feared 
that. Will you?" 

"I'll try, though I'll have to do what 
seems best when I get to it." 

Sea Bas relaxed. "That is good enough. 
Did you come to Mars to kill him?" 



50 



PLANET STORIES 



A shiver v/renchcd Torry, his eyes glazed. 
"I haven't decided yet" 

"Perhaps it would be best. But he will 
not be easy to kill, Tharol Sen will take you 
to him. Perhaps by the time fate has to 
choose between you and Roper, her blindness will be gone, and she can make a clear 
choice of her own. ..." 
"How did you — '* 

With a convulsive grimace, Sen Bas was . 
dead. Moments later, when Tliarol Sen appeared loaded with medical supplies, Torry 
glared at her. Her face a chalk mask, she 
whimpered. 

"Forget it," Torry said angrily, 'lt*s too 
late for tears.'* 

"Why did you try to save him.^" 
"If you have to ask, you'd never understand." 

Tharol Sen shuddered. "I don't understand anything about you. XX^lio you are. 
Why you hate us so — " 
"Who says I do.^" 
"Roper, He says — " 

"Never mind what he says. I suppose 
there's no use trying to convince you that 
he never tells the truth if a lie will serve 
as well. He's a known criminal, a thief and 
swindler, and even a murderer. A man who 
abandoned his wife on Earth, and a small 
child he's never seen. Frankly, I don't understand you, and I'm not sure I'd want to. 
You're quite determined to marry him.^" 
"Quite." Tharol Sen stiffened. 
"Well, that's your hard luck. He's no 
good. No good for you, or anyone. Not 
even for himself." 

"Nothing you can say matters. He told 
me about that wife. She's too sane, too 
normal and practical for him. He thinks 
that I—" 

Torry Vv-as not listening. Contrasting 
Tharol Sen with Rose, he was almost inclined to agree with Roper, and envy him 
sucli a loyal and spirited defender. The girl 
was pure-blood Martian, with all the eery 
beauty of the strange race. She was young 
but vibrantly alive and human. There was 
emotional depth in her, and a passionate 
savagery that might inspire a man to passion, or to devotion, depending upon the 
man. 

"Besides," finished Tharol Sen, "there is 
no other man like him," 



"Not quite like him, fortunately." Torry 
laughed bitterly. *Tm a lot like him, if 
you haven't noticed. But nicer . . . and sometimes smarter." 

"That's a matter of opinion," she said 
acidly. "Yours and mine. But you do resemble him. You're , . . you're not — " 

"I'm afraid I am. Vm ashamed to admit 
it, but Bart Roper and I had tiie same 
mother. He's my half-brother." 

TTER face was puzzled. "Then ^'hy — " 
J--*- Torry tightened visibly. ''I don't know. 
Or maybe I just don't want to face it yc^. 
We hate each other as only brothers can. 
You'd better know that before you take me 
to him. I may have to kill him." 

Tharol Sen sneered. "I don't think you 
can kill him. I'll take you to him because 
both Roper and my grandfather wanted me 
to. Roper can deal with you as he sees fit. 
But if I think you're a danger to him, I'll 
kill you. Understand that." 

Torry shrugged. "On that basis Fll accept 
your help. Now you'd better find that transmitter. I suspect that the explosions were 
the police or the goon squads breaking in." 

"They were," she said nastily. "They ran 
into booby traps in the upper levels. It will 
take them a while." 

"I wouldn't count on too much time," 
warned Roper, "Grannar is a smart policeman, and the goon squads seemed to know 
their work." 

"This way." 

Tharol Sen was coldly aloof, and seemed 
both preoccupied and depressed, which was 
natural. She went ahead, wordlessly, and 
Torry followed, lost in his own reflections. 
At the far end of Sen Bas' wrecked garden 
was a steel-arched doorway, high, sombre 
and gothic. Beyond, and below, lay the 
sprawling vastness of vaults and caverns 
which was the Martian underworld. Long, 
curvangs ramps led downward into a complex of subsurface workings far below New 
Chicago. 

They descended and slipped quietly across 
large, echoing platforms whose dimensions 
were lost in gloom. Metal-shod stairways 
spiraled upward and downward into invisible infinities. E>eep shafts vibrated with 
strange sounds the ear could not catch or 
identify. Freight tunnels were yawning 



I 



MIRAGE FOR PLANET X 



61 



maws of darkness, like the staring, sightless 
eyes of some mythical monster created on 
too large a scale for man to understand. 

Torry grew tense and nervous. He began 
to sense patterns of shivering, eery movement about him. Walls and ceilings closed 
in suddenly, and he could make out vague, 
monstrous forms set into niches within walls 
carved of bedrock. Old-Martian gods in 
sculpture — leering stone spectres, goblinlike, and subtly obscene. 

Tharol Sen paused. Her hand sought 
Torry's and drew him close, but not in 
friendliness. She whispered harshly, w^arning him to silence and extreme caution. 

''I was wrong. The police have broken 
through. Some are already in the vaults.'* 

She followed a maze of barely visible 
threadlike guidelines of luminosity set into 
the metallic tiling. A few steps more 
brought them to a wide platform, from 
which many tunnel mouths opened. Along 
one wall ranged banks of elevators. Beyond 
were ranks of empty pneumatic tube cars on 
tracks which angled in sharp descent into 
wells a level below the platform. Spidery 
Martian hieroglyphs labeled various shafts 
and the tube terminals. Tharol Sen studied 
the markings closely before making her 
choice. 

"I have been here only once before," she 
complained. "It is not easy to find the way. 
But I think the police w^ill have more 
trouble." 

She selected a pneumatic tube car. Torry 
boosted her to the door flap. She settled herself in the tiny seat cradle, then from inside, 
extended him a helping hand. For the first 
time she noticed his blistered palms and raw 
fingers. He grunted painfully as she drew 
him up beside her. 

'7 should have bandaged your hands," 
she mused. 

Torry snorted. "Can you drive this shuttle? It has more gadgets than a space ship." 

"One way to find out," murmured Tharol 
Sen icily, poking a slim finger at a keyboard 
of colored studs. Distant machinery w^hirred 
and whined. Flaps banged shut and the 
shuttle car shot forward and down at sickening speed. Tharol Sen laughed, and the 
sound was of ice chips trickling on metal 
foil. 

Air whipped angrily about the shell of 



thin metal. There was no gut wrenching 
nausea of acceleration, only sharp awareness 
of speed. Movement became a blur streaming past the transparent plastic cartop. It 
was like being part of a hollow missile fired 
fron an air gun. As the car's original impetus diminished, speed dwindled. The car 
dipped and sloweci, then ran into a stop 
valve, like a piston in a closed c}'linder, and 
stopped on a dense cushion of compressed 
air. 

Another vista of platforms radiated 
away from the terminal. 

Gripping Torry's hand, Tharol Sen dragged him firmly along the platform, then 
down a steep slant to the lowest levels. At 
intervals, radilumes provided glaring light, 
but shadows of raw fantasy lingered curiously near the walls. Tomblike oppression 
gathered around them. Panic grows quickly 
underground; weight of rock pressing overhead translates itself to the brain in terms 
of claustrophobia. 

METALLIC decking became raw stone 
floor, and an endless tunnel unwound 
before them. Torry lost all track of direction, even the primary up and down. They 
went through underground workings like 
city streets lined with open front factories. 
Gray, barren vistas of workrooms were relieved by the stark symmetries of sleek 
machines, shielded atomic converters, and 
patiently revolving turbines. Here was the 
marvelously efficient underground economy 
of the old Martian civilization, still functioning and serv'ing the remnants of a great 
race of builders and scientists. 

On soaring cantilevered balconies and in 
alcoves, Torry glimpsed cliflF like structures 
of offices and dwellings. Giant compressors 
labored to force a mighty pulse of breakable 
air — but the atmosphere was w^arm, dry and 
stifling. Runnels of sweat ran down Torry's 
body and vanished in quick evaporation; 
fever and exertion alternated in him; he 
blew hot and cold as energy burned away 
too quickly, and as drying sweat produced 
intense, quick chills. Temperatures dropped. 
Air seemed denser and was poisonously 
clouded with dust, but it was cool. Slowly 
it became chill and depressing with a hint 
of dampness in it. They came into a maze 
of galleries and pits, tunnels and vaults, less 



52 



PLANET STORIES 



I 



used and uninhabited portions of the deepworkings. 

It was like a world apart, a place of dim 
storage bins with natural refrigeration, of 
packing sheds piled high with mountains of 
commercial molds, bales of dry, compressed 
and packed mushrooms. It smelled stale and 
foul, the air hideous with a powdery mist of 
mold dust and spores, and the incredible 
mustiness of mushroom spoilage. These 
caverns were empty of life, as if the troglotlyte Martians had long ago joined their • 
mummied dead. 

Weakness suddenly caught up with Torry. 
Dizzy, he caught in panic at Tliarol Sen for 
support Grudgingly, after a mtoment's hesitation, she granted the help. 

"I'm sorr)'," Torry apologized. "It*s been 
a rather active tliree days. I guess Ferax and 
his boys hurt me more than I had thought." 

"They are good at hurting people," admitted the girl. "You still want to go on in 
tiiis condition?" 

"Don't mind me. Just give me a minute." 
Torry was painfully aware of her strong, 
slender body beneath the filmy garments of 
spidersiik. To change the subject, he said, 
"Don't tell me you're planning to venture 
out to Pluto or Triton in that costume?" 

Tharol Sen made a face. "Hardly. There 
are spacesuits ready. We'll need them, don't 
worry. Roper says Triton is hardly livable at 
all, even protected. You'll find out if you've 
the nerve to go through with me." 

"So Planet X is not even a planet, just 
one of Neptune's moons?" 

"Perhaps it was a planet once. Both Pluto 
and Triton are not like tlie rest of the solar 
system planets. They may have been two 
stray worlds from outer space, captured long 
ago by our sun. For their size tliey have 
inass out of all proportion. The quantities 
of heavy metals beyond uranium give them 
extreme weight and density. Pluto has a 
density of over fifty times that of water. 
Triton not so much, but still greater by far 
than Earth's densit)^ which is roughly five 
or six times that of water. Though smaller 
than Mercury or Ganymede, Triton has a 
gravity only slightly less than Earth's and a 
far denser atmosphere blanket." 

Torry laughed grimly. "That's a big 
speech for you." 

"Too long a speech," she agreed irritably. 



"Especially with the police close behind 
us. 

Torty siglied. "Okay. We'll go on. This 
is a lot of trouble over one slimy mirage 
salesman." 

"Mirage salesman? Why do you call him 
that?" 

"Simple enough. Tliat's all he's ever peddled. Pot of gold at the end of the rainbow 
to tempt tlie greedy and unwary. And rainbows are circular, with no beginning and no 
end. Haven't you ever heard the term?" 

"I have now. I wondered, that's all. There 
are mirages on Triton. He'll have plenty to 
sell." 

Torry snorted. "I can see you've bought 
one." 

Flasher signals on ihe wall began to 
blink rapidly. 

They moved steadily onward, faster than 
before, into a still more shadow}^ region. 
Light itself seemed to exist only at long intervals where age-old radilumes peformed 
a feeble service. The spongy floor of rotten bedrock m^s scummed over with moss 
to make for slippery footing. Formations of 
natural rock seemed like stage furniture designed by elves and gnomes, in which stone 
mimicked monstrosities of the vegetable 
world. Fat, knotted stalagmites suggested 
tree trunks, and the darkness overhead appeared like shadowy densities of foliage. 
Seepage had fretted the walls into lacy 
limestone traceries like a fern forest. They 
went on, with tense silence savage between 
them. 

Alarm blinkers flashed light codes of 
rapid pursuit. 

"Your people must have had much contact witli the police to have worked out 
such a set-up," obscrv^ed Torry. 

Tharol Sen nodded. "We have been persecuted for cc-nturies. Not many Earthfolk 
have ever been here. Nor any others but my 
own people," 

"Yet the police seem to be finding their 
way." 

Tharol Sen frowned. "That puzzles me/' 
she admitted. "How could they come here 
at all unless someone has betrayed us?" 

From close behind sounded the loud buzzing of a radiation detector. A thin pencil 
beam flashed at them and splashed wetly 
over the cavern wall ahead. Rock shattered 



MIRAGE FOR PLANET X 



53 



in a brittle, crunchy explosion. Murderous 
chips deluged the tunnel. 

Torry lunged at the girl, dragging her 
down in a savage fall. More beams of light 
licked out, this time from several directions. 
Continuous thunders roared and reverberated, stunning ears and brains with concussion and sound. Roughly, Torry thrust the 
girl into a wall niche for shelter. 

*The police!" wailed Tharol Sen. 

''Looks as if we're trapped. We'd better 
give ourselves up." 

She stared at him with contempt. "You 
still have your gun. If you're afraid, give 
it to me." 

"One gun against a dozen. No thanks." 

Waiting a lull in the blast uproar, Torry 
called out. His voice rang hollowly in the 
cavern, still shuddering with echoes of the 
explosions. 

"Hold your fire. We're coming out." 

Grannar's voice answered, "Throw out 
your gun first." 

Torry complied. His gun rattled on the 
floor of rock. 

Pushing Tharol Sen sullenly before him, 
Torry stood clear. In a moment, the tunnel 
was full of uniformed figures. 

Grannar studied Torry w^ith some amusement. "You needn't have gone so fast. I got 
your note, but your trail ran into a dead 
end at Ferax's office. It took time to pick 
it up again but we found it beside Sen Bas' 
body in his gardens. Clever deal, Torry. 
Using radioactive dust on your shoes like 
that. Shall we handcuff Tharol Sen and 
take her back?" 

"No," answered Torry glumly. "She's 
going to show us the way to Roper." 

"So you betrayed us?" asked Tharol Sen, 
contempt making her face ugly. 

"That's a matter of opinion." 

Grannar broke in. "Better pick up your 
gun, Torry. You may need it. How many 
men shall we take?" 

Torry shrugged. "That depends on the 
number of spacesuits available. How many, 
Tharol Sen?'^ 

"Three," she replied bitterly. "Do you 
think two of you dare tackle Roper alone?" 

"I think so. How about it^ Grannar?" 
, The policeman grunted. 
.' The matter transmitter was already set 
up. Upon its folding framework the screen 



glittered like woven quicksilver, vibrating 
to the hum of electro magnetic flow. 

"Will this take us directly to Roper?" 
asked Grannar. 

"Not quite," said Torry, grinning. "It's 
a delicate adjustment. Mars and Neptune 
both in motion, and Triton's orbit and axial 
rotation to consider. We'll be somewhere 
on Triton — " 

"But Triton has more land surface than 
Earth. Can we find — " 

Torry gestured. "She'll find him for us. 
Have your men stand by and switch on the 
transmitter every three hours." 

Dressed for space, the three entered the 
screen. 



PLANET X — or Neptune's moon, Triton 
- — was a vast mirage with many facets. 
Atmosphere was as dense and still as water 
in ocean deeps. Sky was cloudless, but not 
clear, apparently built up of different layers 
of gases, and the light was both glaring and 
erratic. At a distance of over three and a 
half billion miles from the Sun, most of the 
light was not sunlight, and the little that 
came through the air ocean was filtered and 
absorbed into curious colors and intensities. 
Other illumination sources were auroral 
displays, radioactive hotspots that glowed 
like eery ghosts, and volcanic outbursts of 
crimson or gold. 

Surface pressure of the atmospheric ocean 
was extreme, and the gas densities and 
weird light gave an uncanny submarine 
illusion. Venturing onto the surface of 
Triton, Torry felt like a diver in that longpast period when man's last frontier on 
Earth had seemed the ocean deeps. Gravity, 
greater than on Mars, but less than Earth's, 
gave a sense of buoyancy; the spacesuiting 
was not unlike ancient diving costume; and 
the thickness of the atmosphere itself suggested deep, still water. 

Most disturbing of all were the mirages. 
All the familiar effects of Earth mirages 
were present but magnified and even multiplied into infinite complexities. To a scientist of optics or meteorology, Triton 
would be a superb laboratory. To Torry, 
it was — 

Near madness. . . ! 



54 



PLANET STORIES 



Mirages by hundreds and thousands floated 
betw^een surface and zenith, or hugged the 
ground like captive nightmares. Pinnacled 
dream mountains rose from bases of empty 
air. Pliantom battlements and mock castles 
stormed upward from nothing. Magnified 
rockeries became goblin cities, looming near 
or far in equal scale. Water glittered in the 
sky and on the ground, and floating debris 
became fleets of fairy argosies. Lateral mirages played eery jokes with distance. All 
images seemed unreal, and diffraction 
haloed tliem with misty, rainbow coloring. 
Triton itself was bleak, savage, merciless, 
nearly windless but for vagrant currents of 
slow-moving dense air, like currents in an 
ocean. 

By levels, temperatures were absurdly 
high or low, depending upon location or 
freak circumstances. It was a lifeless world, 
inhospitable to man. But it wore a mask and 
costume of exotic, lying beauty, and masquerade was hard to distinguish from the 
harsh realit)\ Anything definite was hard to 
distinguish. 

Grannar turned up the microphone in his 
helmet, and his words rattled from Torry's 
speaker. 

"How can we find Roper in such a madhouse as this?" he roared. 

Torry winced as the amplified outburst 
thundered in his ears. 

"Simple enough," he replied. 'Tine detective )^ou are. There's a radio compass 
built into Tharol Sen's suit Roper's sending 
all the time. She'll go to him like a homing 
pigeon." 

"Pigeon is right," muttered Grannar. 
"Hope it's not too far. A little more of this 
would make me neurotic. Can we trust 
her?" 

Torry laughed. "Yes and no. She hates 
us, but she'll lead us to Roper. That transmitter is his only way back to Mars. And 
hers, too. Isn't that right, Tharol Sen?" 

Fortunately her reply did not come 
through clearly. 

Following the radio compass, which behaved erratically due to magnetic discharges, 
they moved through the wilderness of the 
mirages. Progress was deceptive, without 
reliable landmarks. Rugged terrain made 
treacherous going. Megalithic cities and 
monstrous mountains appeared and disap


peared like patterns in a kaleidoscope. In 
the eccentric lighting, vision itself seemed 
to flicker as treacherously as a three-d projector running out of balance. Constant distortions and fading out produced mental 
nausea and physical insecurity, 

Torry was not sure where his next step 
v/ould take him. One instant he seemed to 
flounder on tlie edge of abyss. The next, he 
would be climbing what seemed an interminable mountain, only to have solid floors 
of rock shimmer and vanish before his 
eyes. It was impossible to see where they 
were going, or even be certain what it was 
like where they had just been. Only the 
needle of the radio compass held any steadiness at all, and that jerked into wild whirlings now and then as magnetic currents 
ebbed and flowed in the ground. 

They seemed, through rifts in the mirages, to be traversing a monstrous field of 
jagged boulders, inclined slightly upward. 
Even these rocks were not always as substantial as they looked, but for the most 
part, they were real obstacles. The thought 
crossed Torr}^'s mind that it would be a bad 
place for an ambush if Roper were so inclined. 

When the facts materialized his fears, tl)e 
pencil beam of a blaster cutting through the 
mirages seemed only part of a dazzling 
auroral display. 

rpHE explosion that followed demonJ- strated its reality. Rock chips and larger 
fragments rained about them. In the dense 
medium of atmosphere, the shock wave 
was terrific, and even his spacesuit did 
not completely insulate the blow. All three 
were flung about as if by earthquake. Torry 
missed his footing and went down in a long 
sprawl, which saved his life. 

The second blaster flash would have targeted him dead center. It flickered harmless 
over him, touched the nearby boulders to 
sudden glare, then lost itself in fearful detonation. Dodging the hail of debris, Torr>^ 
crawled quickly to shelter behind a larger 
boulder. With gauntleted hands, he tested 
its solidity before he trusted himsel to relax. 

A harsh cry of pain and terror echoed in 
his ears. Its tones held desperation. And the 
voice was Grannar's. 

By concentrating Torry could dimly make 



MIRAGE FOR PLANET X 



55 



out the figure of the detective. Grannar lay 
in tumbled heap, threshing wildly and trying to hold shut great rents in his space 
suit. He seemed to be injured, for one leg 
was motionless while the rest of his b(xly 
worked in convulsions. 

Torry left his shelter and bounded toward 
the casualty. He bundled Grannar roughly 
to his feet and hustled him into the nearest 
tangle of solid rocks. A hastily aimed blaster 
beam hurried him at the task. Crouching 
down, he examined Grannar. The policeman was conscious, swearing valiantly. His 
leg was broken. Inside the space suit it 
would be impossible to set the fracture. And 
outside, the toxic gases of Triton would 
make short work of human breathing. Even 
the rents in the suiting were dangerous. 

Working quickly, Torry clipped togetlier 
the rents and sealed them hermetically with 
compound from the repair kits. 

"That's the best I can do," he told the 
policeman grimly as his eyes searched in 
vain for a sign of Roper. ''You'll have to 
stand the rest till we can get out of here 
and back to Mars." 

*'What are our chances of getting out?" 

A man does not shrug in a spaccsuit. 
''Not good," said Torry. "Roper can keep 
us pinned here as long as he likes." 

"How long d*you think that'll be?" 

Torry grunted. "Till he gets tired of it 
and decides t® stalk us and kill us. Or till 
I go out and get him." 

"I see. It's like that, eh? Where's the 
girl?" 

"Who knows? She's either hiding out in 
the rocks, like us, or she's found a way to 
join Roper. Does it matter?" 

"Not to me," mused Grannar. "I just 
hoped maybe she wasn't as rotten as Roper 
. . . that she might give us a chance." 

"Don't count on it," said Torry spitefully. "She might be as pure as an angel, 
but Roper's sold her a bill of goods. Feeling 
as she does about him, she'd kill either of us 
as quickly as Roper would." 

They waited in silence, while mirages 
came and went around them, as light 
shifted, or slight currents stirred in the turbid air. If Roper were a mirage salesman, 
he had certainly made his stand in the 
wholesale house. Under other circumstances, 
Torry might have found the displays inter


esting, even entertaining — but at the moment, his reflections were as poisonous as 
the air on Triton. 

Colors flared and faded like a crossspectrum of inferno. 

Grannar was restless with the pain in his 
leg. His squirming infected Torry, who 
leaned out above the barrier of rocks waving his hand violently. As he hoped, he attracted attention. A thin wire of light kissed 
the rocks of the barrier. Chips pelted like 
hail, and the force of the blast set up thunderous echoes in his helmet. 

"He must have rigged a scanner of some 
sort. Such shooting is too good for a man 
with mirages in his eyes. Would something 
like infra-red help?" 

"I don't know," groaf td Grannar. "In 
any case, we haven't the time or the means 
to work out a scanner." 

"I think I'll try crawling out of here. If 
I keep low, I might be able to work around 
and come up behind him. Is it all right with 
you if I give it a try?" 

"Why not? Outside of your life, what 
have you got to lose?" 

"I hate to leave you here unless you want 
it that way. But there's not much future for 
you, anyhow, if I stay." 

"Do whatever you like. I guess I owe 
you something, and I like to pay my debts. 
Any otlier last wishes?" 

"Just one. I want him. ..." 

"Roper? You want to kill him?" Granner 
sounded bafi3ed. 

"Kill or cure." 

"I don't understand." 

"You want him on 
He's wanted on Earth 
That gives you priority, 
and get extradition for him to Mars, which 
means quick death in the atomic disintegrators, or slow death in the prison mines. 
On Earth, they have a clinic for incurables 
like Roper. It's a free choice for them, 
euthanasia or voluntary submission to the 
chnic." 

Grannar hesitated. *7 know about that. 
But isn't such a treatment almost as dangerous as being killed outright, and a lot 
tougher on the subject?" 

"It can be," granted Torry flatly. "Sometimes the hypnotic memorj^-blanking or tlie 
shock treatment wrecks the brain. And the 



Mars for murder, 
for lesser crimes. 
You can demand 



56 



PLANET STORIES 



glandular surgery and liormone dosage can 
turn a man into a freak and monster. If it 
works, the criminal is rebuilt mentally and 
morally, re-created with a new personality, 
and completely new educational background. 
He's hardly the same man, and often his 
old friends can't recognize him physically/' 

Grannar*s eyes narrowed. "In Roper's 
case, that might be an advantage. Of course 
I'm familiar with the clinic and its work 
in rehabilitating incorrigibles But do you 
think any treatment could work the miracle 
with Roper?" 

"I don*t know and don't care. People like 
Roper help make life colorful and interesting. But the)^'re too hard on everyone 
around them. His adolescent-stasis carries 
his own damnation for him. He's miserably 
unhappy, along with everj^one who knows 
him. He imagines he*s smarter and superior 
to other people, and that it's his duty to 
prey on them. Mentally, he's a rottenspoiled child. But a dangerous one. Like 
the one rotten apple, he spreads his rottenness through the whole barrel." 

*'rm familiar with that theory of crime 
but I don't go along with it. I'm not convinced you can unspoil a rotten apple, and I 
doubt if it's worth while to try." 

"No matter," said Torry grimly. "If they 
fail on him, they'll destroy him. Either way, 
it will make a better world for everyone. 
Probably I hate him more than you do. But 
I'm willing to ghc him this last chance if 
you'll let me." 

Grannar laughed ironically. ''Have it your 
x\'ay, if you can take him. It's out of my 
hands, actually. Though, as a cop, I'd be 
better satisfied if you burned him down 
here, I'll settle for your clinic. It's a nasty 
enough choice, anyhow. If you can capture 
or kill him, go ahead. I'll gladly resign my 
sliare of the brute to you. And you'll earn 
it. Do you really think you can crawl out of 
here and circle him?" 

ToTty glanced sourly at the flickering mirages. "I can try," he said slowly. 

TT WAS a mirage that saved Torry. 
J- Going proved even rougher than he had 
expected. Squirming over unknown terrain 
is hard, even in conditions of fair visibility. 
On Triton, with its constantly varying light, 
and the ever-present confusion of mirages, 



it was fantastic. The cumbersome space suit 

was no help. 

Darkness thickened around him, but the 
mirages grew worse, zs he toiled up the 

slope. Loose stones rattled about him in tiny 
avalanches, and he went more carefully, lest 
tliey betray him to Roper. Sweat bathed him 
inside his insulated costume, and steam 
misted the helmet's face plate before he 
could get the thermal conditioners functioning properly. A bad foothold earned him a 
nasty fall, and the rough suiting and acid 
sweat combined to burn painful blisters on 
hands and knees. 

In grim determination approximating 
madness, he plunged upward and onward. 
He found an eroded ravine and groped 
blindly along it, wondering what fearful 
liquids had gashed sucli a gully on such a 
nightmarish world. 

Alien dusk gathered, and in the hollow 
of the ravine writhed coils of living light. 
At intervals, he avoided tlie hot glaring 
flares of radioactive hotspots. Torr)^ followed the barren fissure, and strange sounds 
and fleeting light-phantoms followed him. 
And a river of dense, sluggish air funneled 
upward through the gully, whispering of 
ugly, forgotten events upon a forgotten 
world. In the uneasy sky overhead, electrical 
discharges wove networks of colored lightnings, which crackled and hissed as static in 
his earphones. 

Nearing the upper end of the gully, Torry 
halted and took stock of his surroundings. 
He estimated progress, and wondered how 
he w^ould ever find his quarry. His quest 
seemed one more mad illusion in the sequence of mirages. He freed his blaster 
from its magnetic belt clip and examined it 
for charge. Crawling with the weapon in his 
hand was awkward, but it would be suicide 
to be caught reaching for it. Grimly he 
worked his way to the notch of the ravine 
and poked out his head. 

Ironically, it was the mirage that saved 
him. 

A lateral mirage, distorting both distance 
and direction, showed him a sharp image, 
inverted, of Roper aiming carefully in the 
opposite direction. 

instantly, Torry let go his grasp and dropped. He fell and rolled savagely, while the 
lance of light stabbed overhead, and the ex


MIRAGE FOR PLANET X 



57 



plosion started small landslides around him. 
He screamed in momentary panic. Pre\'enting a helpless plunge into an abyss which 
opened before him was a chore. And the 
abyss itself proved only illusion. Solid wall 
blocked his fall and stunned him for a terrible moment. Miraculously, he retained a 
grip on his gun. 

He lay quietly, while rocks continued to 
rattle upon his helmet and spacesuit. Someone was descending toward him. It could be 
only — 

Roper. 

The visible face behind the plate of transparent plastic could have been poured in the 
same mold as Torr}^*s. It was younger, finerfeatured, but it was shrewd, self-indulgent. 
Roper had enjoyed his life of crime, and it 
had agreed with him. He looked healthy, 
humorously handsome and extremely wellfed. 

He stared at Torrj^, and the expression on 
his face changed as he saw the blaster. He 
started a movement toward his own clipped 
weapon. 

"Don't try it, Bart," ordered Torry 
sharply. "I think I'd enjoy killing you." 

Bart R-oper sighed deeply. "You took unfair advantage of me," he complained. "I 
thought you were hurt or killed. I was coming to see — " 

"To make sure of me, if you*d missed.^ 
Maybe not. Maybe you did have a human 
impulse for once. FU try to think so. And 
you can see how much it hurts when someone takes advantage of any human weakness. It hurts, doesn*t it?" 

Roper nodded slowly. "It does. So youVe 
got me! Don*t be so proud of yourself. It 
wasn't that hard. I was cooked from the 
nK>ment your police pals got their hands on 
the transmitter. It was my only way out. 
You know that, of course. I just wanted the 
pleasure of taking some of you with me. 
I'm not going back to Mars. The disintegrators, or life in the prison mines don't 
appeal to me. So you'd better kill me now." 

"I will if you force me," Torry told him 
wearily. ''But I'm not making it that easy 
for you. There's a choice, but you won't like 
it. I've made a deal with Grannar. You can 
die now, or you can go back to Earth to the 
clinic." 

"The clinic!" shrieked Roper. "You know 



what that means. I wouldn't fee the same 
person. Maybe not even human." 

Torry steadied his eyes on his brother, 
Tm not sure you ever were human. But 
you need treatment They'll knock out your 
thymus, drug you and shock you and carve 
you till you'll never know yourself. You 
won't be an antisocial monster with the 
emotional stasis of a child. You won't be 
an}i;hing you've ever been. But you may 
be a man. And you'll stop hurting people, 
or they'll stop you for good. The choice is 
yours — right now. So make up both our 
minds before I decide to shoot." 

Roper yielded with a grimace of distaste. 
"You win, Torry. You always did, sooner 
or later. I was quicker, but you were 
smarter. I guess Rose was the last of your 
toys ril ever swipe. And it's back to kindergarten for Bart Roper." 

Torry relaxed, though he still did not 
lower his gun. 

"You'll be going back on the survey 
ship, Bart. That way, you'll have a long 
voyage in the brig to meditate on your 
sins. But on Earth, you'll have Rose. You're 
a married man there, with a wife and child. 
Rose still loves you, Bart. When you steal 
something, it stays stolen. I'm not going 
back, so you'll get Rose after all." 

Roper lauglied coldly. "That's what I 
meant about your being smarter than I am. 
You always come out ahead." 

Torr)^'s eyes followed a moving mirage 
to a notch high on the walls of the gully. 
The glitter of cold metal was not illusion. 
Tharol Sen held a gun on him, unwaveringly. 

"You can come out now," Totty said to 
her. "It's all over." 

Tharol Sen lowered her gun and walked 
unsteadily toward them. 

"Why didn't you shoot?** Roper stormed 
at her angrily. "You could have killed him 
before he pulled the trigger." 

Inside her face plate. Torry could see her 
eyes dim with hot tears. 

"Yes, I could have," she said brokenly. 
"But maybe I've seen enough mirages to 
recognize one. ..." 

MANY Martian hours later, three people 
watched the survey ship blast off from 
Triton. Before the ship left, Grannar had 



58 



PLANET STORIES 



been taken aboard and removed from his 
spacesuit long enough for drugs to be administered and his legs set and splinted. 
Now, with painkilling narcotics deadening 
him, the policeman was scarcely aware of 
the departing ship with his prisoner aboard, 
consigned bodily to Earth and its clinic for 
incurable criminals. Grannar had relaxed 
into a dope-daydream of a comfortable future on Earth as a plankton farmer, with 
nothing to do but read minifilm detective 
stories. 

Watching the ship vanish beyond a skyf ul 
of mirages, Torry tried vainly to conquer a 
feeling of depression. Loneliness swept over 
him, as if with the sudden termination of 
his obsession about Roper, his life had lost 
most of its meaning. It occurred to him 
suddenly that Tharol Sen must be feeling infinitely worse. With a quick glance toward 
Grannar to make sure that the policeman 
was all right, Torry climbed slowly to the 
eyrie in the high rocks where the girl had 
hidden herself. Like a doll in a space suit, 
Tharol Sen huddled together, staring upward as if toward some vanishing illusion. 

Shared loneliness sometimes loses its 
sting. 

But Tharol Sen ignored Torry 's presence, 
and he felt acutely embarrassed. 

*Tou'll be better off without him," Torry 
said, consoling her. "And life will be much 
simpler." 

*T know that," she replied sharply. 
"What else did you want?" 

Torry laughed. 

"Business, I guess. According to Solar 
Spacelaw, we three are sole owners of Triton 
and its mineral rights, since we were on the 
spot and in possession when the survey ship 



arrived. Your people will have the transuranics they need. But the stuff won't work 
in the transmitter, so it'll have to go in the 
hard way. High freight charges will cut 
down the profits, so I don't think any of us 
will get rich. I'm sure that Grannar will 
sell his rights cheap. And as far as I'm concerned, Fd rather your people had the stuff 
at cost, so I'll sign over my rights to them 
for the forty-one thousand credits Fve invested. Also, you can claim salvage rights 
on the transmitter of a third of the value, 
and I'm sure the inventor will be happy to 
have it back at that. I won't ask any part of 
the salvage claim. Money just weighs me 
down anyhow." 

"That's very generous of you," murmured 
Tharol Sen. "My people will be very grateful to you." 

"And you," he asked. "Just how grateful 
will you be?" 

Her eyes blinked, then stared soberly 
through the face plate of her helmet. "Ask 
that again — " 

"It's not part of the deal, of course. But 
you bragged that you could make Roper forget a girl back on Earth. I need some full 
time forgetting, and I wondered if you'd 
like to try tlie same stunt for me." 

Tharol Sen studied him for a long moment before answering. 

"When we're out of these helmets," she 
said softly, "you can kiss me. Just once. For 
gratitude. Afterward, much later, we can 
think about the rest, and discuss it with 
dignity. If you're staying on Mars, why not 
look me up . . . sometime?" 

"Why not?" asked Torry, grinning. Then 
without waiting for the kiss, he made his 
decision. "And I'm staying on Mars. ..." 



I 



In this moment 



T!h€ prayer lingers still . . . across the 
idble (IS Dad begins to serve ... if 
brushes Mother's still-bowed head . . . 
it caresses Sally's fist as she reaches 
for the promised drumstick. The words 
of thanksgiving are being mode real 
in this moinent—gratihid.e from a good 
provider to the Great Provider . . • 
in this time of secunt]^ together. 



The most precious ^t we give or 
receive is the gift of security. Only in 
a land like ours are we free to choose 
security as a goal of living. 

And through this choice we achiove 
another great gift. For, secure homes, 
one joining another, make up the 
security of America* 




Scivtng for security it tasy — on the Payroll 
Savings Plan for investing in United States 
Savings Bonds, 

This is all you do. Go to your company's 
pay office, choose the amount you want to 
gftve — a few dollars a payday, or as much 
as you wish. That money will be set aside 
for you before you even draw your pay. 
And automatically invested in United 
States Series "E" Savings Bonds which are 
turned over to you. 



If you can save only |8.7S a week on the 
Plan, in 9 years and 8 months you will havt 
$2427.30. 

U.S. Series "E" Savings Bonds earn interest at an average of Z% per year, compounded semiannually, when held to maturity! They can go on earning interest for as 
long as 19 years and 8 months if you wish. 

If you want interest at currem fmeotn9 ask 
yoar bank about 8% Series "H" Bonds whieh 
p»y interest iemiannuttlly by Treasmy check. 



ffbe U.S. Government doe* not pay for this odveHiBemtnt, It la d«««teJ ly thU puhUattion in 
' mfoptratwH with iks A4verti»ina CouneU 0»*d tk4 Magaxin* FnhlinUr* ©/ Avutr^e<k» 




59 



irfWifci 



THE SPACE BETWEEN 

By ROBERT ERNEST GILBERT 



Somewhat like Nathan Hale of old, Jak SP regretted having 

but one vitality to give for his Planet . . . 

and the starry-eyed Drusilla. 



ONE hour and forty-one minutes before 
deceleration, the spacecopter materialized off to right, matching precisely the 3360 kilometers per second speed 
of the Box. Jak SP34509260 jerked erect in 
answer to blinking red lights and screeching 
collision whistles. The dark glass and liquid 
ozone of the control cabin windows gave 
but a distorted view of space, although 
enough to show the sleek shape outside. 

Drusilla GW41 4249834, asymmetric in a 
flowing, floreated, red robe, clamji^ed slender 
hands over her ears and squawled, *'What 
now, Jak? You know I have a headache! 
Can't you be considerate?'* 

Jak pressed a switch, to stop the whistles, 
and hoped she would not faint again. His 
wide mouth drooping with concern, he said, 
'It's O. K., sweetjet. That spacecopter did 
it. See?" ^ 

He activated all viewers. 
With rotorwings and fins retracted, the 
spacecopter resembled a thick, but sharply 
pointed, needle. Jak increased the magnification of Number 3 viewer until he could 
read the license, SE— YNWGR. "From Enceladus!" he said. "Saturn's second moon. If 
I'd known she had a station, we could have 
looked there for a doc. Did you take that 
tomato juice off my uniform?" 

Drusilla's gray eyes squinted. She stood 
with such rigidity that her feet floated clear 
of the deck. She said, "I informed you I'll 
accept no substitute for the Wollongong 
Obstetric Hospital on Earth, and I didn't 
dean your uniform. That cleanser makes me 
vomit." 

"Sorry, sweetjet," Jak mumbled. He 
wislied he could say something just once 
without upsetting her. He magnetized his 
shoes and pulled Drusilla down from the 
60 



ceiling. "I v/as thinking of you," he 
pleaded, "but don't you worry. We 11 be on 
Luna in a bit over four earth-days. From 
there to — '* 

Drusilla pulled loose and flitted to Number 3 viewer. "Why couldn't you have a 
plane like that?" she demanded with a 
dramatic gesture at the needle shape. "The 
Box!" That's what this wreck looks like, a 
prehistoric boxcar!" 

"But, sweetjet, I've told you. Streamlinmg is useless except in atmosphere. The 
Box is the most economical construction 
for — " 

"What's that insignia?" Drusilla interrupted. "Like a skull and two bones. What 

IS -It?" 

Jak turned the knob to maximum magni^ 
fication. "Umm. I believe that's an old pictograph for poison. Perhaps they're carrying 
some poisonous cargo, and — '* 

"In a yatch?" Drusilla sneered. "Why 
can't you have a yatch?" 

"My salary, I hoped to pick up enough 
ore m tlie Rings, this trip, but we had to 
bring you back, and — " 

"You act as if it were my fault!" Drusilla squeaked. 

The plates of the Box vibrated slightly as 
the spacecopter threw out magnetic grappiers and reeled in until the fuselages 
touched. The airlock of the slender plane 
opened to release three spacesuited figures. 
"Men!" Drusilla gasped. Her hands flew in 
mstinctive twitches to red tattooed lips, blue 
tattooed eyelids, and green dyed hair. 

Jak's pointed chin seemed to grow longer. 
He sighed. He shook his head and muttered, "Probably want to borrow a welding 
rod, I remember once in the Albert Group, 
a miner boarded me looking almost devi



€1 



62 

talized, and all he wanted was a can opener 

"Spare me the anecdotes," said Drusilla, 
surveying her surgically tilted nose in a 
small mirror. "That's all I've lieard for 
three months." 



PLANET STORIES 



1 



TAK S shoulders heaved in a greater sigh. 
^ He hoped for no more trips like this 
one. During endless earth-days he had 
cruised the Cassini Division of the Rings of 
i)aturn picking up a little yttrium, antimony 
and platinum, with Drusilla sunk in depths 
of boredom and rarely leaving the plane. 
Ihe arrival of the viewnote informing her 
that her Self Portrait had won first prize 
in the Interearth Photographic Salon had 
elated her for several days; but then she 
iiad announced, one earth-morning the development of an acute case of pregnancy 
Since the much published history of Lar 
BW16177 on Hungaria throbbed vivid in 
his mind, Jak could do nothing except set 
a course for Luna, carrying half empty ore 
bins and four months of unexpired leave. 
A bulb on the instrument panel blinked 
to signal the opening of the outer airlock 
door. Jak said. "If I can't greet them in 
uniform, I'll have to go like this." He adjusted his trunks and stood by the airlock 
which placed him head down in relation to 
Drusilla posing by the strangely silent 

Lar BW16177, stranded on the asteroid, 
had been devitalized horribly when, under 
low gravity, the fetus had developed with 
unprecedented rapidity. Jak had set the 
fastest course he thought safe for Drusilla 
6,240,000,000 kilometers at 1 G acceleration, 208,000,000 kilometers in free fall 
and 6,240,000,000 kilometers at 1 G deceleration. He had tried to keep Drusilla 
occupied with her photographic hobby and 
Its current triumph, although he could not 
understand why her picture had won first 
prize. It had no color, being done in blacks 
grays, and whites, and showed every detail 
of her face. It looked about like something 
Daguerre would have done in 1839 Jak 
much preferred modern photography with 
its soft colors, pleasing blurs, and striking 
abstractions. Hia own hobby was woodcarv
Wood. 



The inner door of the airlock opened. 
Ihe three men in space-suits walked across 
the ceiling and down the bulkhead to the 
deck. Jak saluted the faces almost invisible 
beliind colored glass and made gestures askmg the visitors to remove their helmets. 
Une of the men turned and clanked off 
along the narrow passage. Another unsealed 
and removed the helmet of the tall man 
who seemed to be the leader 

Drusilla actually blushed and giggled. 
Jak who considered himself above petty 
embarrassment, felt rather ashamed himself, 
for the visitor had never had his facial 
hair removed. It grew profusely in a disgusting fringe between nose and upper lip 
and formed a horrid black triangle on the 
point of his chin. Jak rubbed a shaking 
l.and over his own smooth cheeks and 
shaven head and stimmered, "Welcome to 
the— the Box. How's your hobby.? I— I am 
Ky SP34509260, and this is Drusil^ 
GW414249834. How may we helpV 

The man with the hairy lip paid litde 
attention to the traditional greeting, nor did 
he reply. His black tyes smoldered at Drusi a. In a vibrant voice, he purred, "DrusiUa, Latin, meaning 'with dewy eyes' 
How appropriate! What a rare and sweet 
old name! I detest these ugly modern 
names. 

The eyes flashed to Jak. "I presume 
your name is a horrid modern one.'" 

Jak maddened with indignation, snapped, I told you I'm Jak SP34509260. Who 
are you, and how may we help.? In about 
an hour and a half — " 

"Silence!" shouted the visitor. 
This brutal direction shocked Jak into 
acquiescence. An even greater shock stunned him when the other man who had remained in the cabin removed his helmet 
This one, Jak decided, must be mentally 
dencient, or else he would have had a 
plastidoc treat the red scar tissue covering 
the left side of his face. Jak could not understand the semicircle of black cloth over 
the man's left eye. 

The leader bent his torso toward Drusilla as much as the spacesuit allowed, and 
said, "My true name and serial number 
you shall never know, fair lady; but for 
practical purposes, I have adopted the name 
of the most famous pirate of the early 



THE SPACE BETWEEN 



63 



Twentieth Centuty, Earl Flim. You may call 
me Captain Flim." 

The third man came back through the 
passage. He looked ordinary enough, although he had let his hair grow. He reported, "No one else aboard, captain," 

Flim said, "Excellent, Ger. Destroy all 
communication apparatus/' 

Ger pulled a wrench from his tool kit and 
took a preliminary slash at tlie radio. Completely puzzled, Jalv protested, 'AVait! Wliat 
do you mean 'pirate?' Pirate? What — " 

*' Silence!" Flim roared. 

Only then did Jak notice the pistol. Since 
the successful conclusion of the Crime War, 
when Organized Crime, the greatest blight 
that ever sapped a planet, was eradicated, 
guns could be found only in museums. 
Even before the War, guns had become a 
rarity among the law abiding citizenry; 
since the slaughter of fifteen thousand people a year in hunting and home accidents in 
the State of America alone had brought 
about anti-firearm laws and sent tlie gun 
the w^ay of the private automobile. 

OF COURSE, tlie small criminal divisions 
of the Earth Patrol and the Space Patrol 
still carried pistols, although more as ornaments than weapons. The pistol in the clip 
holster on Flim's right leg seemed to be 
fhe standard Patrol arm — not a "needle 
gun," or a "disintegrater," or a "heat ray," 
or any other impractical dream weapon, but 
a Morgia, 30-shot, 6 mm, semi-automatic 
pistol with adjustable optical sight. The 
Morgia alarmed Jak sufficiently to prevent 
him from interfering as Ger tore into the 
radio with wTench and pliers. 

Drusilla squeaked and drifted aside. 
"There, there, fair lady," Flim crooned. 
"No harm shall come to you." 

"Watch wdiat you call her!" Jak rasped. 
"I demand to know what you're doing! 
There's no time for your hobby. Drusilla 
needs obstetric attention, and Em — " 

"Silence!" Flim turned to Drusilla. "Ah, 
fair one, you shall have every attention, 
obstetric and otherwise. Fear not. Such gorgeous green hair! Those lips! Do I detect 
the master touch of Per BTl4l4?" 

Drusilla managed to subdue her blushing and said, "Yes. He did my eyelids too. 
Do you like them?" 



"Blue as the skies of Earth!" Flim's gaze 
dropped. "However, in that robe, I cannot 
tell—" 

"What — " Jak tried to shout in mounting disgust at this performance. 

"Stupid!" Drusilla spat. "Can't you sec 
w^iat Captain Flim is? Don't you remember 
that tridie we saw on Mars about Jean 
Lafitte? Daun TA1924 was Jean, and he 
rode his Model T Ford into New Orleans to 
help Olehickory Jackson. He wa5 a pirate, 
and that's what Captain Flim is." 

Flim murmured, "True, fair lady. I follow a great tradition! Jean Lafitte, Robert 
Kidd, Mary Ree, Henry Morgan, and Long 
John Ag! The old Brotherhood of the Coast 
shall become the brotherhood of the space 
between worlds ripe for plunder. Among 
tlie cosmic motes — " 

"You need a psycodoc," Jak said, proud 
to create an interruption himself for once. 
"How can you be a pirate? No one is. Tlie 
Space Patrol w^ould put you in Corrective 
School for twenty semesters if you were. 
That's a worse negative action tlian falsehood in advertising!" 

"I am a pirate," Flim said in defiance of 
Jak's logic. "The Space Patrol! Avast! The 
Space Patrol is fit for nothing but rescue 
and exploration. No pirates? What of the 
Crime War? The noble cause of Organized 
Crime put planes into tlie void. They sent 
one of the first to Luna in tlie old days." 
Jak could see no other course but to belie\^e the man, whose brain had obviously 
deteriorated. He said. "Check. You're t 
pirate. Why? Why is he wrecking my equipment, and why are you armed?" 

"Because there is nothing exciting!" Flim 
declaimed. "The whole Solar System is 
humble drum. I would have ridden the starplane to new adventure, but they refused 
me. On Earth, tliey made me a microcataloger maintainer. Me! Its sole benefit w^as 
to acquaint me with the great piratical traditions of the past by revealing records 
available only to qualified scholars. No, 
there is nothing both legitimate and exciting to do any more." 

Jak said, "Why don't you find a quick 
cure for dementia praecox? That hasn't been 

done." 

"I dislike your tone," Flim rasped. 
"Looge! Silence him!" 



64 



PLANET STORIES 



Tlie scarred man, wlio had stood without moving, blinked his visible eye and 
grunted, "Yer, uh, what?" 

"Silence him!" 

"Oh. Er, how?" 

"Knock him down!" Flim cried. "Beat 
him! Use your fists!" 

Drusilla giggled. "Now we'll see if 
you're brave as you always tell me, Jak." 

JAK gaped at her in amazement. "Drusilla," he wheezed. "Are you turning 
against me completely? After all— our child! 
I know you're attracted to this man. AH 
women are attracted by anything vulgar, 
but — " 

Drusilla placed one hand on her hip and 
fluffed her hair with the other. "All you've 
ever done for me is give me three boring 
months in the Rings," she said. 

Jak stood with open mouth, and Looge 
squeezed past Flim. Grasping his right 
wrist with his left hand, Looge drew back 
his arm. "No, no," Fhm said. "Use one 
hand at a time!" 

Looge mumbled and cocked his right 
arm. With no gravity, the force of this 
movement yanked his magnetized boots 
from the deck and sent him sprawling 
across the astrogator's couch. 

Flim stroked the loathsome triangle of 
hair on his chin and sighed, "How decadent 
we are these days! He does not even understand brutality." 

"Bring over the rest of your crew," Jak 
said. "They may." 

With nauseous pride, Flim bellowed, 
'This is my crew! We three against the 
void! Ger, find a plank!" 

Ger turned holding a mess of loosened 
wiring in his hand and asked, "A what?" 
"A plank." 

Drusilla said, "I know what you mean. 
Jak has one in quarters. He does woodcarving. Of all the silly hobbies — " 

"Don't be so helpfwl," Jak told Drusilla, 
'Xeave that plank alone. It's the only piece 
of red cedar this side of Oak Ridge." 

"You shall walk it," Flim predicted. "It 
Is one of the most famous piratical traditions. In shark infested waters, a plank was 
extended over the side of the ship and all 
male prisoners were required to walk out 
it until they fell to their — death." 



Jak shuddered at the pirate's calm use of 
the ugly archaic word. Flim inclined his 
head to Drusilla. "You, of course, fair lady, 
will be spared so awful a fate. When this 
creature, who, I perceive, has used you 
most cruelly, is no more, we shall see the 
stars together." 

Drusilla simpered and tittered. Jak 
belched (the ultimate expression of disgust) 
for he had never seen a woman behave in 
such an abnormal manner. He resolved to 
discuss the matter with the Eugenics Counselor^ as soon as he reached Earth, if he did. 
Flim's intention to devitalize him seemed 
but an impossible threat since Jak had never 
seen anyone go through the strange process 
nor reviewed any remains afterward. He 
said, "I can't walk a plank in space. I would 
just drift back to the plane, unhss you 
made a sudden change in velocity. Besides, 
I can last for weeks with the purifier in my 
suit." 

"Who mentioned a spacesuit?" Flim 
sneered. 

"Without it I couldn't walk at all." 

Flim frowned ferociously. "True. Too 
true. Avast, how I wanted to see you walk 
the plank. We could take you to Earth and 
land on a Pacific island." 

"That would take too long," Jak objected. "Let me speak for a minute." Jak 
placed a hand over his heart. "Captain 
Flim, my indoctrination makes your methods repellant, but, in my unconscious, I've a 
certain admiration for you. There may be 
some of the old romance in me. I know a 
way of — uh — of devitalization that you may 
not. I've always wished that when my time 
came to — uh — go, this way would be used. 
It's even more romantic than Walk the 
Plank. It's called the Firing Squad." 

y'The Firing Squad," Flim mused. "Never 
mind, Ger. Return the plank." Ger, carrying 
a one nieter length of red cedar, shrugged 
and drifted back to the passage. Flim 
stroked the mess on his upper lip and said, 
"Interesting. How does the Firing Squad 
operate? Do I soak you in alcohol and 
ignite it?" 

"No!" Jak gasped quickly. "The Firing 
Squad was men with weapons. Rifles, I 
tliink. The person to be treated stood before 
a wall and performed a rite called Smoking 
the Cigarette, whatever that was. Then an 



THE SPACE BETWEEN 



65 



officer gave commands, and the person was 
perforated by the riffles or rifles/' 

'*What a manner to death!" exclaimed 
Flim. 

Exhibiting great self-control, Jak did not 
wince at the word, although Drusilla giggled. Flim inexpertly dragged the 6 mm 
Morgia from the clip holster and smirked 
at it. He said, "We have but the single 
weapon, although I will have Ger and 
Looge stand by to simulate a complete 
group. I have wanted to test this pistol 
ever since Ger pockpicked a Patrolman in 
Mars Base. It is but an advanced model of 
the flintlock used by noble pirates of old." 
"Let me show you,*' Jak said. His fingers 
barely touched the knob of the optical sight 
before Flim slapped them away. 

"I am expert in these matters," the 
pirate affirmed. His gauntieted hands fumbled until he succeeded in pulling back the 
slide and letting it snap forward. *'A wonderful modern improvement!" he exclaimed. 
"Henry Morgan loaded his from the other 
end of the barrel." 

Drusilla made an unseemly noise with 
her mouth. "I never thought you were 
brave, Jak," she jeered. "Why didn't the 
big hero take that away from the Captain?" 
"How did I know he didn't have a shell 
in the chamber? I didn't want you to be 
hurt—" 

"Silence!" commanded the pirate. "Male 
prisoner, prepare to be perforated. Which 
wall shall we use?" 

"Outside. I wouldn't want Drusilla to 
see — " 

"Yes, outside. We shall spare the fair 
lady any unpleasantness. Dqn your armor, 
male prisoner. ' 
"What?" 

Flim said, "Your spacesuit." He bowed 
to Drusilla. "Soon, I shall return to claim 
you, fair lady. Together, we shall approach 
the speed of light." 

Drusilla began to pant. Jak pulled his 
spacesuit from the rack and squirmed into 
it. "Aren't you going to tell me seelata?" 
he asked. 

"Seelata, Jak," Drusilla said absently, her 
eyes on Flim. 

Several words, the mea,ning of which 
Jak did not know, seeped from his un
5— PLANET—Spring 



conscious mind. As they became vocal, Flim 
glanced at him with an expression indicative of faint admiration. The pirate said, 
"Avast, it is the custom. All male prisoners 
must be deathed unless they join the jolly 
crew. You wish to join?" 

Clutching his helmet to his aluminum 
breast, Jak thrust out his wedge of chin 
and cried, "Never! I regret having one vitality to give for my planet!*' 

"I salute you," said Flim, and damped 
on his helmet. Ger and Loogc did likew^ise; 
and Jak, with a despairing glance at the entranced Drusilla, sealed his own. Flim adjusted Jak's tuning dial and said, "Plear 
me?" 

"Yes." 

"Men! Follow the prisoner. Forward!" 

They stepped out on the dark side of the 
Box, a right quadrangular prism of dull 
metal. A tube ran through the long axis 
of the craft with a swivel-mounted Carver 
Atomicket located at the center of gravity 
and steering jets slightly forward. By turning the Atomicket, acceleration or deceleration could result without the necessity for 
rotating the entire plane. 

Their suits glowing with luminous paint, 
the four men stood for a moment beneath 
the starry spectacle. Jupiter, the largest 
celestial object in sight, appeared as a small 
belted moon to left. Flim placed the muzzle 
of the Morgia against the face of Jak's 
helmet. 

"That's not correct!" Jak protested. 

Flim lowered the pistol slightly. He said, 
"Are you certain all this is not a trick? I 
suspected something below." 

Jak's heart shuddered. He wondered what 
would happen to Drusilla. This mental case 
would never take her to Earth, the only 
place she would have a chance. She should 
have realized her own peril instead of ogling 
the pirate. He pleaded, "No. No trick.'* 

Flim stated, "I am prepared to death you 
at any instant. Be careful. How do you 
wish it arranged?" 

"Stand at the tail, side by side, and I'll 
stand at the nose. That's forty meters apart. 
A good distance for the Firing Squad." 

Jak took two jerky steps which brought 
him into position over the control cabin. 

Jak said, *'One last request. Shoot me 
through the faceplate. I'll devitalize in


m 



PLANET STORIES 



stantly whether you hit the brain or not." 

Film's voice crackled through the radio. 
•'Out of respect for the fair lady below, I 
shall avoid brutality and accommodate you. 
However, I am placing Ger and Looge behind me. I still feel this may be a trick." 

I'That^s not right. Ail three—" 

'* Behind me," Flim insisted. ''What were 
the commands.^" 

Jak croaked, "Load, aim, fire." 

"I'm already loaded. Aim!" 

Flim extended his right arm at full 
length. Jak licked the dry inner surfaces of 
his mouth with a drier tongue. 

'Tire!" 

OPARKS spurted from the muzzle of the 
^ Morgia. Flim, his magnetic boots ripped 
from the plates by the recoil, crashed into 
Ger and Looge. A tangle of spacesuited legs 
and arms accelerated back along the course 
of the Box to become a luminous spot in the 
blackness. 

Yanking a pair of snippers from his tool 
kit, Jak trudged along the edge of the Box 
and cut the cables of the grapplers. He 
clutched the low hand rail and shoved tlie 
curvilinear side of the spacecopter. For a 
moment, he watched as the space between 
the weightless vessels widened. He dropped 
into the airlock. 

Drusilla reclined on the astrogator's 
couch. She had exchanged her concealing 
fed robe for a suit of skintight translucent 
cover-alls. "Back so soon, captain?" she 
mewed. "Did he put up a last heroic struggle, or did he devitalize hke the coward he 
was?" 

Jak said, "He didn't have to be iieroic. 
He used his brains." 

Drusilla looked up. Her face blanched 
even under the Deepurple she had sprayed 
on. "Jak!" she squeaked. 

Jak hung his helmet on the rack, swept 
some of the broken tubes and severed wires 
from the control board, placed tliem in a 
jagged ball In midair, and savagely canceled the flight plan. He activated the calculator. In a voice like nothing he had 
heard issue from his own throat, he said, 
"Yaur Captain Flim didn't know any more 



about a pistol than the 2iverage cirizen. At 
sea level on Earth, the 6 mm Morgia bullet 
has a muzzle velocity of 1253 meters per 
second; and, at a range of, say, 300 meters, 
the bullet rises 10.5 centimeters above the 
line of sight at the top of the curve it 
traces. Out here, with no gravity or air pressure, the bullet travels in a perfectly straight 
line. I ran Flim's sight all the way up, and 
when he tried to hit my head as I asked 
him, he missed me a mile — whatever th^ 
means. On Earth, he would have hit regardless of the sights. He had only one 
shot, because the cold of tlie dark side contracted the slide; and the recoil, teriffic 
without gravity, sent him and his crew 
flying." 

Jak left the clicking calculator and stared 
at the motionless Drusilla. "Don't worry 
about your sweetjet," he rasped. '^He'Il 
drift back to his copter. We're changing 
course for the Patrol station on Callisto to 
report and have them picked up. I hope the 
centrifugal force and deceleration is enough 
to smear you!" 

"But, Jak," Drusilla moaned, "you 
know — " 

"Don't start that again!" Jak roared. 
"You told me a— a dis-truth! What an act! 
You ought to be in tridies. At two months, 
Lar BW16177 on Hungaria looked like— 
You wanted to go to Earth because of that 
prize in the Photographic Salon! You 
wanted to taste your fame. What are you 
trying to do, ruin me? You don't need the 
Wollongong Obstetric Hospital any more 
than I do! I'm going back to the Rings, and 
you can sit on Callisto rill you— yes, rill you 
death yourself!" 

"Jak," Drusilla murmured. "I never 
knew you could be so domineering, so," she 
giggled the naughty word, "masculine." 
^ "Silence!" Jak bellowed. He darted down 
the passage to quarters and spurted back 
carrying a gray uniform soaked witli tomato 
juice. He snaried, "I told you to clean 
this! Now do it!" 

The silver crescent and rocket emblem of 
the Space Patrol still glittered tlirougli the 
stain. Beneath that crest appeared Jak's 
serial number, SP34509260. 



the boy and the Star 

H* is eld enough now to know that the ornament 
on the tree is more than a star . . .to understand the deeper meaning of Christmastime, 

Now he knows that it is love that has been 
shining on the tree year after year, the love 
that has wrapped and held him . . . that has 
given him food and warmth and laughter 
and the promise of joy to come. 

Life's great reward is the privilege of giving 
fiecurity to those we love. 

And, think : When you make your home secure 
you are also helping make America secure. 
For the strenglh of America grows as the 
number of its secure homes increases. 





Saving fop s«cifrify h easy — on the Payroll Savings Plan for investing in United States Savings Bonds. 

This is all you do. Go to your company's pay 
©ffice, choose the amount you want to cave — 
a few dollars a payday, or as much as you wish. 
That money will be set aside for you before 
you even draw your pay. And automatically 
invested in United States Series **E" Savings 
Bonds which are turned over to you. 

If you can save only $3.75 a week on the Plan, 
in 9 years and 8 months you will have $2,137.30. 

U.S. Series **E" Savings Bonds earn interest 
at an avera^ of 3% per year, compounded 
semiannually, when held to maturity! They 
can go on earning interest for as long as 19 
years and 8 months if you wish. 

If you want interest as current income a«k your 
bank about 8% Series "H" Bonds which pay interest 
semiannually by Treasury check. 




The U.S. Government doea not pa9 
for thi9 aiveriiaement. It i.t donated 
bp thU publication in cooperoticn 
with th« Advertis^ng Council and 
the Maauxin* J*ubli8hert oj Ameriea^ 



67 




THE BRAIN SINNER 



By ALAN E. NOURSE 

An invisible network of human minds lay across the country, 

delicafely funed, waiting breathlessly for the first spark 

of contact from the unknown . . . from the 

unpredictable telepathic Alien, 



THE ship skimmed down like a shadow 
from the outer atmosphere and settled 
gently and silently in the tangled underbrush of the hill that overlooked the 
bend in the broad river. There was a hiss 
of scorched leaves, and the piping of a 
small, trapped animal. Then tliere was 
silence. 

Higher up, the sunlight was bright over 
the horizon; here the shadows had length


ened and it was quite dark. Far across the 
hills a dog howled moiunfuUy; night birds 
made small rustling sounds through the 
scrub and underbrush. The alien waited, 
tensely, listening, waiting with his mind 
open for any flicker of surprise or wonder, 
waiting for a whisper of fear or recognition 
to slip into his mind from the dark hills 
around the ship. He waited and waited. 
Then he gave a satisfied grunt. Foolisli 

69 



70 

of him to worry. All possible care had been 
taken to avoid any kind of alarm. He had 
landed unseen from lo. 

The alien stretched back against the 
couch, allowing his long, tight muscles to 
relax, as he sent inquiring feelers of tliought 
out from the ship, probing gently and tentatively, for signs of the psi-presence. The 
landing, after all, had been assumed. Already the natives had convinced themselves 
that ships such as his were a delusion. Such 
simple creatures, to disregard the evidence 
of their own senses! There should be no 
problem here when the invasion began,, 
with tlie preliminary studies already completed, the disguising techniques almost perfected. A primitive world, indeed, but a 
world with psi-presence already developing 
— a possible flaw in the forthcoming silent 
conquest. 

For psi-presence could detect other psipresence, always, anywhere, despite any disguise. The alien knew that. It was the one 
universal denominator in all the centuries of 
conquest and enslavement in his people's 
history. Before they could come, tliey must 
know the strength of the psi-presence on 
this world. 

The alien moved, finally, beginning his 
preparations. In the center of the cabin an 
image flickered, swarming flecks of light 
and shadow that filled out a tliree-dimensional form, complete and detailed, l^he 
alien sat back and studied it through hooded 
yellow eyes — carefully, oh so carefully, for 
tlaere must be no mistake, not here, not 
now. The scouts had come and gone, bringing back tlie data and specimens of the manthings necessary for a satisfactory disguise. 
Now the alien stared at the image, regarding the bone structure and muscle contour 
critically. Then, slowly, he began work 
with the plastiflesh, modelling the sharp 
angles of his members into neat curves, 
skillfully laying folds of skin, molding 
muscle bulges and jointed fingers, always 
studying the strange, clumsy image that 
flickered before him. 

It was the image of a man. That was what 
they called themselves. There were many of 
them, and somewhere among them there 
v/as psi-presence, feeble and underdeveloped, but there somewhere. He eyed the 
image again, and pressed a stud on the con


PLANET STORIES 

trol panel, and another image met his eyes, 
an electronic reflection of himself. He 
studied it, and carefully superimposed the 
two, adding contour here and there, yellow 
eyes seeking out imperfections as he worked. 
There must be no mistake. Failure would 
mean disgrace and death, horrible, writhing 
death by dissociation and burning, neuron 
by neuron. He knew. He had ofiiciated at 
executions before; delightful experiences, 
but not to be trifled with. He stared at the 
image again and then at himself. 

rpHE skin tone was wrong. The yellow 
-L came through too clearly in places, and 
in this strange culture that color was reported to carry unpleasant connotations. He 
worked jpale, sickly-pink stuff into his soft, 
wrinkle-free skin, then molded out tlie 
cheeks and forehead. Hair would be a 
problem, of course, but tlien there would 
be many small imperfections. He smiled 
grimly to himself. There were other ways 
of masking imperfections. 

At last he was satisfied. There was no 
way to bring the normal reddish color into 
the pale green lips; there was no way to 
satisfactorily prepare the myriad wrinkles 
and creases that crossed the skin of the manthings, but with a litle skillful application 
of projection techniques it did not matter. 

The alien struggled into tlie tight, restricting clothes that lay in a bundle, carefully folded and pressed, at his feet. The 
hard, board-like shoes cut at his ankles, and 
the hairy stuff of tlie red-and-white checked 
shirt made him writlie in discomfort, but 
once outside the ship he was glad for the 
warmth. He stepped out onto the ground, 
and listened again carefully. Tlien he made 
certain arrangements with wires, and threw 
a switch on a small black case near the air 
lock, and began marching down tlie hill 
away from the ship. 

He would no longer need the ship. Not 
now. 

The underbrush grew thicker, and he 
fought his way through the scrub until he 
reached a roadway. It was not paved. A 
flicker of sour amusement swept through 
the alien's mind. Tliey had been afraid that 
these simple creatures might try to oppose 
them! Yet the scouts had said that far to 
the East were great stone and steel cities — 



I 



BRAIN SINNER 



71 



the places-of'madncs5, the scout had said. 
Perhaps. But here there was no stone and 
steel, only dust, and the ruts of wagon 
wheels, and a howling dog somewhere over 
the hill. 

The alien trudged on for almost an hour, 
trying to acclimate his legs to the fierce 
tug of gravity that pulled at him. And then 
he stopped short and listened. 
'^ He heard them, then, in the depths of 
his mind, somewl>ere on the other side of 
the hill. His eyes narrowed. No psi-presence 
there, but two of the man-things, beyond 
doubt. Other whispers, too dull, stupid, 
vagrant whispers flickering through his 
mind. Lower life forms, no doubt. Possibly 
a farm with work animals. The scouts had 
said there were such. He turned off the road 
and almost cried out when the sharp barbs 
of a fence cut through his tender skin. 

A trickle of green dripped down his 
arm, until he rubbed a poultice across it, 
and it became smooth and sickly-pink again. 
With a vicious jerk he pulled the fence out, 
post and all, and left it on the ground, 
moving through tlie woods toward the 
sounds he had heard. 

Soon the woods ended and he saw the 
dwelling across a broad clearing. Black dirt 
lay open in the moonlight. He started 
across. There was light inside the dwelling, 
and the dull, babbling flow of uncontrolled 
man-thought staick his mind like a vapor. 
Tliere were other buildings, too, dark buildings, and one tall one that had a spoked 
wheel on top, and creaked and rustled in 
tiie darkness. 

He had almost reached the dwelling 
when a small, four-legged creature jumped 
up in the darkness, crjung out at him in a 
horrible discordant barrage. The creature 
came running swiftly, and the alien*s mind 
caught the sharp whine of fear and hate 
emanating from the thing. It stopped before him, baring its fangs and snarling. 

The alien lashed his foot out savagely; 
it crunched into flesh and bone, and the 
creature lay flopping helplessly, spurting 
dark wet stuff, its cry cut off in midyelp. Tlie alien stepped onto the porch as 
the door opened suddenly, framing a 
tall, thin man-thing in a box of yellow 
light. "Brownie?'' he called. ''Come here, 
Brownie! What's the matter — " His words 



trailed off when he saw the alien. "Who 
are you?" 

"A traveller," said the alien, his vokc 
grating harshly in the darkness. *'I need 
lodging and food — " 

The farmer's eyes narrowed suspiciously 
as he peered from the doorway, **Come 
closer, let me gtt a look at you," he said. 

The alien stepped closer, concentrating 
all his psi-faculties on the farmer's mind, 
blurring his perception of the minute imperfections of his disguise. It recjuired all 
his power; he had none left to probe the 
farmer's mind, and he waited, trembling. 
That could come later. 

The farmer blinked, and nodded, finally. 
"All right," he said. "We've got some food 
on the stove. Come on in." 



II 



QENATORIAL Councilman Benjamin 
O Towne slammed his cane down on the 
floor with a snarl, and eased himself back 
down in his seat, staring angrily around the 
small Federal Security Commission anteroom. The American Council attache standing near the door retrieved the cane, handing it to the Councilman with a polite murmur. Instantly he regretted his action when 
Towne began slapping the cane against his 
palm, short stacatto slaps that rang out 
ominously in the small room. 

The Councilman was not in the habit of 
waiting. He did not like it in the least, 
and made no effort to conceal his feelings. 
His little green cat eyes roved around the 
room in sharp disapproval, resting momentarily on the neat autodesk, on the cool 
grey walls, on the vaguely disturbing watercolor on the wall — one of those sickening 
Psi-High experimentals that the snob critics 
all claimed to be so wonderful. The Councilman growled and blinked at the morning 
sunlight streaming through the muted glass 
panels of tlie nordieast wall. Far below, the 
second morning rush hour traffic buzzed 
through the city with frantic nervousness. 

The Councilman tapped his cane on the 
floor, glancing up at his attach^. "That 
Sanders girl," he snapped. "Give me her 
file again." 

The Council attache opened a large briefcase, and produced a thick bundle of papers 



72 



PLANET STORIES 



t. 



^ 



in a manilla folder. Towne took them and 

glanced through the papers, lighting one of 

his long, green-tipped cigarettes from a 

ruby-studded lighter. "How about Dr. 

Abrams? Was he questioned?" 
The^ attache nodded in embarrassment. 

^'Nothing doing. He ran us in circles." 
Towne 's scowl deq>ened. *'Did you give 

him the Treatment.^'* 

"He just wasn't having any, sir. Said 

he'd answer to a Joint Council hearing, and 

nothing less." 

"Stubborn old goat. He knows I've got 

nothing that will stand up in a Council 

hearing." Towne went back to the papers 

again, still tapping the floor with the cane. 

''Damn tliat Roberts!" 

The attaclie glanced down at Benjamin 
Towne widi some curiosity. It was easy to 

see how the man drew such powerful support from his constituents. There was sometiling overwhelming about his appearance — 
the heavy jaw and grim mouth line, the 
shock of sandy hair diat fell over his forehead, the burning green eyes, the stout, 
well muscled body. The attache's eyes 
drifted down to tlie withered left leg and 
the grotesque twisted foot, and he looked 
away in embarrassment. What was so aweinspiring about a crippled man who accumulated great power? Towne certainly had 
done that. Some said that Ben Towne was 
the most powerful man in North America. 
Some also said that he was the greatest man, 
but tliat was something quite different indeed. And some said that he was the most 
dangerous man alive. Tlie attache shivered. 
That was none of his business. If he went 
probing that line too far they'd be calling 
him Psi-High, and he liked his job too much 
to risk tliat. 

The inner door opened and a tall man 
with prematurely gray hair strode in, followed by a girl in her early twenties. 'Sotr/ 
to keep you, Councilman," the man said. 
"No, no, don't get up. We can talk right 
here." 

Towne had made no effort to rise. He 
glared at the man, and then his ty^s drifted 
to the girl and widened angrily. "I said 
a private conference, Roberts. I don't want 
one of these damned brain-picking snakes 
in tlie same room with me." 

Tlie man nodded cooly to the girl. '*Sit 



I 



down, Jean. Councilman, this is Jean Sanders, If you're here about the Alien investigation, I want her to sit in." 

Ben Towne slowly set the papers down 
on the floor. "Record tliis, Roger," he said 
to the attache. His tycs turned to Roberts. 
"I understand he slipped out of your hands 
again yesterday," he said with vicious 
smoothness. "A pity." 

Roberts reddened. "Tliat's right. He slipped out clean." 

"No pictures, no identifications, no nothing, eh?" 

'Tm afraid not." 

Towne's voice was deadly. "Mr. Roberts,^ 
an unidentified Alien creature has been at 
large in this country for three solid weeks, 
and your Federal Security teams haven't 
even gotten near him. I v/ant to know 
why." 

*Td suggest that if you read our reports — " 

"Damn you, man, I didn't come here for 
insolence!" Towne slammed the cane down 
with a clatter. "You're answerable to the 
Joint Senatorial Council of the North American States for every wretdied thing you do, 
and I'm ready to bring charges of criminal 
negligence against you in this Alien investigation — " 

''Cr/mmaJ negligojcer' Roberts jumped 
up. his tyQS blazing, ''My god. Councilman! 
We've thrown everything we have into this 
search. Tliis creature has played us for fools 
every step of the way! We didn't even get a 
look at his ship. It blew up right in our 
faces! Do you realize what v/e're fighting 
here?" 

"I realize quite well," said Towne, frostily. "You're fighdng an Alien who has slipped into our population, somdiow, and just 
vanished. There's no way to tell what he 
wants or what he's doing. The potential 
danger of his presence is staggering. And 
you've fumbled and groaned for three 
weeks without even turning up a hot trail. 
You haven't even a coherent description of 
him—" ^ 

"We're fighting a telepath," Roberts said 
softly. "An Alien with telepathic powers 
like nothing we Ve ever dreamed of. That's 
what we're fighting. And we're losing, too." 
The girl across the room stirred uneasily. 
Ben Towne's green eyes shot over to h^ 



i 



DRAIN SINNER 



73 



viciously. "And you're using freaks like her 
to help him hide, I suppose." 

"Jean Sanders is not a freak.'* Robert's 
voice grated in the still air of the room. 
"She's Psi-High, and she's the most valuable 
asset we've got in this search at the present 
moment. It's a real pity there aren't more 
Psi-Highs that have had her training." 

"And you sit there and tell me you'd dare 
use Psi-Highs in an investigation as critical 
as diis?" 

Roberts sighed in disgust. "Councilman, 
you don't have any idea what you're saying." 

"I beg to diflFer," Towne's eyes flashed. 
"I happen to be aware that there are a group 
of individuals wandering around loose who 
will have this country in chains in a hundred years if they're allowed to develop as 
tliey please. Psi-Highs are a vicious menace, 
nothing more nor less. We can't help it 
that we have them. The fools in the government were blind two hundred years ago 
when they first started appearing, and psifactors are gene-controlled. But they can't 
use their extra-sensory powers without training." 

He picked up the cane and leaned 
forpvard at Roberts. "Thanks to Reuben 
Abram's meddling over at the Hoffman 
Center, some of them are already developing their psi-faculties, learning to use a 
treacherous power that has no place in civilized society. Well, / don'l want them working in Security! Is that clear enough?" 

Roberts sighed tiredly and leaned back in 
his chair. "You're confused a little," he 
said. "This is not the Rotary Club. It's not 
a Federal Isolationist rally, and it's not the 
Senate floor, either. It's just me you're talking to. And to my knowledge, you haven't 
succeeded as yet in removing all Psi-High 
rights. You've gotten laws through Congress to make them take tests and submit to 
registration; you've passed laws to prevent 
them from marrying; you've blocked tlieir 
education and hamstrung their training and 
developement, but you hm^en't, as yet, been 
able to strip them of their citizenship — " 

"Not as yet," said Ben Towne. 

"And you can't, as yet, dictate the activities of the Federal Security Commission." 

"Not as yet." 

Roberts' eyes blazed. "All right. Now you 
can listen to me for a minute, Councilman, 



recording or no recording. We've got an 
enemy in our midst — an Alien we've never 
even seen. We can thank a psi-positive citizen out in Des Moines for spotting him in 
the first place. He had the sense and tlie 
loyalty to report it to us. Normal psi-negative individuals can't see him, can't identify 
him, cant even get near him. We haven't 
tried Psi-High agents against him yet but 
we're going to have to, whether you like it 
or not. Psi-negatives are strapped. Tfie 
Alien can run circles around them. Our only 
hope of catching him is to use psi-positive 
agents, the best-trained we can get our 
hands on. Like Jean, here. And if you want 
to stop me youll have to reorganize Federal 
Security to do it." 

Towne lurched to his feet, his face white. 
"I may do that, Roberts." He reached for 
his cane. "I may just do that." 

"You'll have to throw the Liberal Council 
out of office first. They're supporting me, 
and outvoting your American Council ts\'o 
to one." 

Towne gave him a shrewd look. "Better 
start watching the telecasts, and newstapes," 
he said bluntly. "Already there are rumors 
going around about a mysterious Alien fugitive. Oh, I know it's top secret, but you 
know how news leaks." He gave a nasty 
smile. "People get nervous about rumors 
like that, especially when tlie Administration denies them so sharply. You'd better 
catch him pretty quick." He nodded to his 
attadie, and limped to the door. Then he 
glanced back over his shoulder. "Be sure to 
watch the telecasts," he said, and slammed 
the door behind him. 

Jean Sanders stood up, white-faced and 
trembling. "What a vicious man," she murmured. "What did he mean, Bob?" 

Robert Roberts shook his head, and fished 
a cigar from a desk drawer. "I'm not sure 
that I know," he said slowly. 



Ill 



PAUL FAIRCLOTH finished reading the 
teietape briefing just as the little jet 
plane slipped down toward the hangar slot 
in South Chicago. He slapped the spools 
into tlie erasure can and flipped the control 
switch to activate the distortion field inside 
tlie can. He stretclied his legs, then, won


74 



PLANET STORIES 



dering vaguely whether he was going to 
come out of diis whole mess alive. 

Jean's parting hag was still warm in his 
memory, and he remembered the worrj^ in 
her big grey eyt$ as she had kissed him and 
said, "Be careful, darling. I wish I could 
go, too. I couldn't bear to have anything 
happen — " It was the first time she had 
ever actually spoken that word to him, and 
he was glad she had. Almost defiantly glad. 
She had said it aloud, and she had said so 
much, much more without words. Only 
vague shadows in Faircloth's untrained 
mind, but he knew the meaning of those 
shadows. 

A man was waiting down below on the 
platform for him. The hangar vault was 
dark and deserted. He took the agent's card 
and scanned it briefly. "Marino.^ I'm Paul 
Faircloth. Better give me a late briefing." 

Marino nodded. He was small and wiry, 
with catlike movements and exceedingly 
bright eyes under his jet black eyebrows. 
"We'd be wise to get on over while we 
talk," he said. 

Faircloth nodded and stepped into the 
little tube-car that was waiting at the end 
of the platform. It was a tight fit for two 
men, and Paul ducked by reflex as it gave 
a lurch and dipped down the chute into a 
narrow tunnel, hanging free and speeding 
aliead on its electronic guide beam. "Is the 
Condor Building where he was spotted.^" 

Marino nodded. "In Center City, Qiicago. 
First thirty-six floors are commercial, and 
the twenty above are residendal. He's pinned pretty definitely on the forty-second, in 
a large residential suite. No idea why he 
chose it or how long he's been there — " He 
turned apologetic eyes to Faircloth. "I'm 
Psi-High — I guess you know. We've got 
him located and triangulated, and we can 
keep him pretty well pinned if he doesn't 
try to give us a sho\^^er. We're pretty sure 
he knows we're there." 
"Shower.^" 

Marino nodded, grimly tapping his forehead. "A barrage, the works. This Alien's 
got a powerful psi. And I mean powerful. 
He gave it to one of our Psi-High men 
yesterday. It was savage. Nearly ripped him 
apart." 

Faircloth shivered. "But you can keep 
track of him." 



"Yes." Marino lit a cigarette with nervous fingers. "Roberts put Psi-Highs out to 
spot him, but he doesn't want any Psi-Highs 
in on the kill." His voice was flat with disappointment. "Political pressure, I guess. 
People couldn*t bear to give a Psi-High 
credit for an>thing— " He glanced at Faircloth and reddened. "Sorry. No oflfense. It 
just slipped out" He bit his lip. "Anyway, 
that's what you're here for. Half a dozen 
other psi-negatives will help you. I hope 
God'll be helping you too." 

Faircloth grinned tightly. "Got you 
nervous?" 

"It's got me plenty nervous." 
Faircloth nodded again, rubbing a hand 
across his eyes. "All right. I want your best 
men, every one of them, to go in witli me. 
I don't care whether they're Psi-High or not. 
Neither does Roberts; he's with you folks 
all the way. But we've got to g^ this creature and get him cold. He's slick. Is the 
building sewed up?" 
"Tight as a vacutainer." 
"Good. Keep it under cover, and try to 
keep the Psi-Highs from broadcasting any 
more than necessary." 

Marino gave him a queer look. "They'll 
do their bes^t, of course." 

"Right." Faircloth ran a hand through 
his brown hair and loosened his tie a trifle. 
''As soon as the building is cleared from 
rush hour, I want the power shut off all 
over the building. Elevators, lights, everything. Well be on the 4lst floor, and a 
squad will be on the 43rd. We'll close in 
together." 

Marino shook his head. "I hope it works. 
They had him just as tight in Des Moines 
last week, and he slid right through." The 
man's ^y^s were worried. "We just don't 
know what we're fighting. That's the whole 
trouble. Even the Psi-Highs are up a tree." 

rpHE car gave a lurch and slid to a stop. 
-I They stepped out into a shiny tunnel 
filled with people emptying out of the huge 
building above. Tlie two men waited to 
board an express surface elevator, and stepped off on the main concourse of the Condor Building. The last sunset rays made s 
dazzling golden display on the banks of 
heliomirrors, and Faircloth blinked, shielding his eyes a moment after the softer li^t 



BRAIN SINNER 



75 



below. Then he glanced at hh watch. ''Let's 
coffee up/* he said. "We've got a few 
minutes." 

They slid into an eating booth on the 
concourse and dropped in coins for coffee. 
It was so clumsy, Faircloth thought. Three 
and a half weeks since the ship had been 
spotted down along tlie Mississippi, and 
they were still just learning how clumsy 
the}' were. They had even thought that the 
visitor, whoever he w^as, had been killed 
in landing until tlie first Security Team had 
gotten to the ship. They'd gotten to witliin 
just ten feet of it when it had exploded. 
And even then they hadn't realized what 
tliey'd found, until the report came from 
Des Moines, and they started following up 
leads. They had followed the alien, true, 
from the first farmhouse where he had 
stopped the night he landed, west tlirough 
die farm countiy to Des Moines, tlien northeast to the great Chicago metropolis. But 
when it came to contacting the creature or 
capturing him — Fairclotli shook his head. 
Clumsy just wasn't the right word. 

He glanced at Marino, and then reached 
across the booth and buzzed for a newstape. He glanced over the Washington news 
hurriedly. Another upheaval in the Liberal 
Council, The Northern Democrats were 
trying to drum up Civil Rights Party and 
One World Party support for dieir new 
South American Developement program, 
and they weren't getting to first base. And 
there was another vicious attack by Ben 
Towne on the Hoffman Center's training 
program for Psi-Highs. Towne had even 
named Reuben Abrams as a leader tliere, 
and woriced in some high-grade anti-Semitic 
innuendo into the association. Paul went 
tense, searching for Jean's name. It was not 
mentioned. He took a deep breath. If that 
filthy dog ever dragged her name into public. He finished his coffee, and gave the 
repeat button a vicious jab. 

Then his eye caught a small item with a 
Des Moines dateline, well hidden down 
at the bottom of the backside of the tape. 
He read it, frowning: 

WOM.\N CHARGES PSI-HIGH CONSPIRACY 



D^ Moines, la., 27 June, 2157. A woman whose 
name was withheld today placed charges agaJnst 
M4*i Martha Bi«hop, 23, of Oak Park Secttoa, Chi


cago, whose name is listed in the Federal psi-positive registry. The charge was made at local Federal 
Security offices, and accused Miss Bishop of ineotal 
interference. The victim, who allegedly had information concerning the rumors of an Alien visitor 
which have been persistently appearing lately, 
claimed that Miss Bishop had attempted to prevent 
her from reporting her information. After failing 
in this attempt. Miss Bishop was charged with using 
her psi-powers to erase the iaforuiation froiu the 
woman's mind. Miss Bishop couid not be reached 
for comment. 

Mr, J. B. Dunlap, spokesman for tlie Liberal 
Senatonal Council in Washington, has repeatedly 
denied that the rumor of alien visitors has any basis 
in fact. Nevertheless, the charges against Miss 
Bishop are being investigated fully — 

Faircloth crumpled the taj^e with a snarl 
and returned to his coffee. Finally he nodded to Marino. **Drink up/' he said, "and 
get in toucli with your men. It's time to go." 
Ted Marino left for the elevators to 
corral his men, arranging to meet Faircloth 
in the concourse five minutes later. Paul 
found a visiphone relay booth, and sank his 
long, lean body down in a relaxer facing the 
screen. The last of the rush-hour people 
were still drifting by in the corridor; Paul 
watched them anxiously. Tlien he gave a 
nervous laugh, forcing himself to relax for 
a moment. If only Jean were here! He battled an impulse to call her. Finally he 
dialed the priority code for the Federal Security Commision offices in Washington. 

The relays clicked, and the code carried 
him through the front-line secretaries without any trouble. He gave a sigh of relief. 
He was in no mood to argue with secretaries. A moment later he was blinking at 
Roberts' tri-di image on the screen. 

Roberts' face looked haggard. He nodded 
to Faircloth. "You got there, then. Good. 
How does it look, Paul?" 

"Everything's just real nice," Faircloth 
growled. "They think they've got him pinned. The building here has a central power 
source, and we can bottleneck the v/hole 
place if w^e time it right." 

"Don't miss, Paul." Roberts' voice was 
tense. "Whatever you do, don't miss." 

"What's the matter?" 

"Ben Towne has worked his way into 
this." 

"Oh, god!" 

"Well, I can't help it, there was nothmg 
I could do. He has tlie whole American 
Council behind him, and the Liberals can't 
hold out long on negative results. Towne 



76 



PLANET STORIES 



has the whole picture now, and if we don't 
wrap it up fast, things here in the Capitol 
are going to blow sky high/' 

Faircloth scowled. "Did you see the newstapes tonight?*' 

'*You mean the Bishop girl in Des 
Moines?" Roberts nodded unhappily. '*Got 
the report from Des Moines on it this afternoon. Trumped up from beginning to end. 
I tell you, Towne is not playing around. 
I don't know how he plans to work things, 
but I'm afraid that story was just a starter. 
He'll do everything he can to tie the Alien 
up wutJi the Psi-Highs in the public eye — 
and you know Ben Towne when he gets 
rolling. Hell play this rumor business up 
to the hilt. And the way things are in the 
Senate now, that could mean real trouble.'' 

"Who's controlling Security news releases? " 

Roberts gave a short laugh. "Take a 
guess. Just one guess. Don't miss tonight, 
my friend." 

FAIRCLOTH nodded and signalled off. 
He sat swearing quietly to himself for 
a few moments. Then Marino came by, and 
he swung out into the hall again, glancing 
at his watch. "Ready?" 

Marino nodded. "Got the squads placed 
en the 4 1st and 43rd. Power goes off when 
we step off the elevator on the 4 1st. Okay?" 

Faircloth grunted, and spread out a floor 
plan of the 42nd floor. "Is the building all 
dear?" 

"All the commercial levels, yes. And 
autolocks go on all the doors but the one we 
want when the power goes off." 

"Good. At least we shouldn't have residents underfoot. You've got Psi-Highs 
posted outside the building?" 

"Yes, in 'copters. Circling the building 
fairly close, out of sight range of the 42nd." 

"AH right. We'll move in on him as soon 
as the power goes off. I want cameras going 
everywhere — in the corridors, in the stairwells, even in the 'copters outside. If there's 
a slip-up, I want to see where he goes, and 
especially I want a picture of him. A good 
picture of him. Maybe he can fuzz up human eyesight, but he'll have a hell of a time 
fuzzing up a camera. Let's go." 

They stepped on the elevator, felt it rush 
up to the 41st floor. Tliey stepped off. As 






tiie door closed behind them, the whirring 
motors died, and the lights went out. Faircloth led the way swiftly to the dosed stairwell where they met four other men, one 
with a motion camera. "Cover everything," 
Paul said sharply. "If you see him, stop him 
with a shocker, not with pellets. We want 
him alive." He opened the stairwell and 
started up with the men behind him. Moments later they met part of the group from 
the 43rd; they started swiftly down the dark 
corridor toward the pinpointed residential 
suite. 

And then, like a savage blow, a wall of 
fire exploded in Fairclotli's brain. He gave 
a scream and jerked oat his arms in an 
agonized convulsion. He fell forward on his 
face. 

Wave after wave of searing agony 
burned through his brain; he jerked on the 
floor, trying to scream again, unable to 
force a sound through his twisted lips. He 
heard shouts around him, and a whistle 
shrilled; there were running feet. Somebody 
tripped over him, tumbled to the floor with 
a bone jarring crash. Three shots rang out 
even as he dragged himself to his knees. 

He was blinded; he had never felt such 
horrible, driving pain, and he clawed along 
the wall as more footsteps echoed frantically in the corridor. Suddenly Marino was 
shal-ving his arm, and together they burst 
througii the open door of the suite as a 
roar of derisive laughter tore through his 
mind. 

Faircloth opened his eyes and saw 
the empty room through a burning red haze 
of pain. He collapsed on a chair, exhausted, 
as Marino threw open all the doors. He 
gave a shout down the hall and others came 
running. 

Unbelieving, Faircloth stared around him, 
then looked frantically at Marino. "You — 
you got him on the stairs?" 

Marino shook his head miserably. "Nobody could see him. Not a soul." 

The hoarse laughter grew louder in 
Faircloth's ears. "The cameras!" he gasped. 

"Three of them are smashed. I don't 
know about the rest — " 

"You're certain?" 

Marino didn't answer. The answer was 
obvious. The Alien had slipped away like 
a ghost in tlie night. 



BRAIN SINNER 



77 



IV 



ROBERT ROBERTS was waiting, nervous as a cat, when Faircloth arrived at 
tlie Security office. There were deep circles 
under his pale grey eyes, and a dark stuW>le 
on his chin. He greeted Paul with a siient 
handshake; tlien they went back into the 
rear office, with its modern panelled wall 
looking out across the valley to the tall 
white buildings of the Capitol. Once it had 
been an inspiring sight to Faircloth. Now 
he hardly even noticed. A rocket rose in 
the morning air, leaving its white vapor 
trail like a pillar of cloud behind it, Tlie 
weekly Venus rod<et, probably, or maybe 
one of the dozens of speculator ships off for 
Titan. Faircloth scowled and sank into a 
relaxer with a sigh, *Tm sorry, Bob," he 
said. *'It was a bust. I couldn^t help it." 

Roberts mixed a drink and shoved it 
across the desk to Paul; then he toudied off 
the end of a long black cigar. "What's done 
is done," he said sourly. "You thought he 
was sewed up, and it turned out that he 
wasn't." He turned worried eyes to Faircloth. "What we've got to know is why he 
wasn't sewed up. Something went sour. 
What was it?" 

Faircloth was silent for a long moment. 
Then he said: "I think the whole approadi 
is sour." 

"Very possibly. How do you mean?" 
"I mean wx're outclassed, that's what. 
This Alien is out of our league— way out." 
His eyes caught Roberts'. "He's a telepath, 
Bob, and I don't mean halfway. He's not 
just a feeble, groping, half-baked, halftrained, poorly developed Psi-Hi^ human. 
I mean we're dealing with telepathic power 
no human Psi-High ever even dreamed 

Roberts' lips were tight. "Exactly what 
happened in Chicago?" ,, . , , 

"That's just it, I don't know." Faircloth 
sprang to his feet, his face wliite. "Look, 
Bob, the building was virtually escapeproof. The boys had every exit guarded 
three ways from Sunday. The power was off 
in the entire building, and there was no way 
he could get out short of walking through 
walls. And we had the walls guarded just 
in case he could. We got him sewed up, 
and then we went in to get him, and 



WHAMMO!" Faircloth clenched his fists, 
trembling. "I don't want to go through that 
again. Bob, not for anything. It was murderous. And the horrible part of it was that 
he wasn't using his full power on me. 
What I got was just a gentle rap on the 
knuckles — " 

"And he slid through." 
"Clean. Smashed the cameras; got away 
without leaving a trace." 

Roberts shook his head, and fished a 
folder from his desk. "He didn't smash 
all the cameras." He shoved the pictures 
across to Paul. "See what you make of 
those." 

Faircloth blinked at them. There were 
several frames, obviously printed from 
motion film. Pictures of a man-like figure 
running down a passageway. The face was 
not visible. "Not much help," said Faircloth. "Gives us a clothing description, 
maybe. Nothing else. He certainly looks 
human enough!" 

Roberts nodded sourly, ''At that distance 
anytliing would. Can't even get reliable 
measurements. And you didn't even see 
him?" 

Faircloth shook his head.. 'Xike I said, 
the whole approach is sour. You're never 
going to get him this way." 

"You've got some ideas, I suppose?" 
"I have." 

"Well, thank God somebody has." Some 
of the tiredness left Roberts' face. "Let's 
have them." 

Paul Faircloth lit a cigarette and slowly 
shook his head. "Sorry," he said. "First I 
want some answers. Straight answers about 
a certain individual." 

Roberts' eyes narrowed. "You mean Ben 
Towne." 

"That's right." 

Roberts scowled and threw clown his 
cigar. "All right, Til tell you about Ben 
Towne. It isn't pretty. Frankly, this Chicago 
fiasco was the break Towne has been waiting for. There were Psi-Highs involved in 
that raid. Towne knows it. And he's going 
to build a story of Psi-High alliance with 
the Alien that will carry him to the Wiiitc 
House." 

Faircloth nodded grimly. "Does he have 
any conception of the dangerousness of tliis 
creature?" 



^ PLANET STORIES 

■pOBERTS snorted. "Of course he knows 



-»-v It! But Ben Towne is obsessed wkh a 
single idea, and it twists everything he 
thinks into horrible distortion/' He leaned 
forward, staring at Paul. ^'Benjamin Towne 
wants to wipe psi-positive faculties off the 
face of the Earth. He hates Psi-Highs Oh 
I don't know the motives behind it. Maybe 
the fact of his own imperfect body makes 
him hate what he considers a sort of superperfection appearing in the human race. It's 
a false premise, of course. The predisposition of certain people to high extra-sensory 
powers i^ neither a perfection nor an imperfection. 

'^l^s just another tiny step in the 
evolutionary chain. It happens to be a dommant gene factor, and in our society it happens to put the Psi-High in a slightly advantageous position in comparison to psinegatives." ^ 

Roberts threw up his hands. "But the 
motives don't really matter. Towne was 
smart enough to realize that there were lots 
of people who hated and feared the expansion of Psi-Highs in our society. He started 
fighting against it, and he's ridden that fight 
right into the Chairmanship of the American Senatorial Council. If he can split up 
tlie Liberal Council just a little bit, he can 
throw them out of office, and move his 
American Party right in." 

"And where does the Alien fit inT 
Roberts shrugged. ''It's obvious, isn't \i> 
Towne has taken an issue and split the 
country wide open with it. And now, alotig 
comes a visitor from the stars, an' Alien 
visitor who steps out of his ship and just 
disappears like a spirit into tlie population 
An Alien who is fully telepathic. Towne 
can control the news releases; he has the 
power to decide on the security classification 
of information about the Alien. It's been 
kept top secret up 'til now. But Ben can 
control the news, and he can \:it Psi-High 
humans and a vicious enemy Alien together 
so neatly in the public mind that every PsiHigh in the country will be in danger of 
his life. It's political dynamite, and Towne 
is controlling the fuse." 

Faircloth's face was white. "And if the 
Ahen is caught.^" 

"All the better for Towne. Then the 
'rumored' liason between Psi-High humans 



and invaders from space can be 'proved/ 

Towne i% m the driver's seat." 

Faircloth nodded bitterly, and stood up, 
shaking the creases out of his trousers. His 
lace was grim. As he reached for his hat, 
his hand was trembling. "That's just about 
the way I had it lined up, too," he said. 
Oood-bye, Bob. Have a nice hunt." 

"Sit down, Paul." 

"Sorry. I'm not working on Ben Towne's 
payroll." 

"I thinlc you are," Roberts snapped. His 
eyes flashed, and he sat up straight behind 
th^ desk. "You're going to work with us, 
and you re going to follow through to the 
bitter end. You and Jean both." 

Faircloth's ^y^s darkened. "Jean is not 
involved m this." 

"I am afraid she h. Just as deep as you 
are. And you and Jean are going to do 
what I tell you m this investigation whether 
you happen to like it or not. That is, if you 
ever want to marry Jean—" 

Faircloth whirled on Roberts, his eyes 
bla^mg. "What do you mean by that.>" he 
said softly. "What are you trying to say>" 
Roberts' eyes caught Paul's, and held 
t?^^. I m saying tliat you happen to be a 
Fsi-High, Paul. And I just happen to know 
It. ^ ^ 



pAUL FAIRCLOTH sank down in the 
J- chair again, staring at Robert's face. 
There was silence in the room for a lon^ 
time. Then Paul said, "That's a pretty bad 
joke, Bob." ^ ^ 

Roberts nodded sharply, his eyes twinkling. "Til say it's a joke. It's a collosal 
horse laugh— on Ben Towne. He was so 
sure that that private file of his contained 
the names and histories of every psi-positive 
individual in the country! It's a horse on 
you, too. It's against Federal law to forge 
examination papers, Paul. It's against the 
law for a Psi-High to be unregistered. Both 
state and Federal registration are required. 
And it's against the law for two Psi-Highs 
to be married, regardless of their stage of 
developement. Jean's work with Dr. Abrams 
has developed her powers amazingly in the 
last^ couple of years. Yours must be pretty 
crude, in order to keep them hidden so 
well — ' 



BRAIN SINNER 



"You've gone out of your mind/* said 
Fairdoth flatly. 

"Sorry, my friend. I'm afraid not/* 
"But you have no proof — *' 
"True, its strictly a hunch, and a little 
personal investigation. You were through 
school when tlie registry law went through, 
and you must have found somebody to leak 
the examination to you early. How you did 
it, I neither know nor care. But all I need 
is a good strong suspicion to subpoena you 
over to the Hoffman Center for a test." He 
smiled at Faircloth. "Care to have me call 
Dr. Abrams? He*s got some nice definitive 
tests — " 

Faircloth's eyes fell. "That won t be necessary." He sighed, and sank wearily back 
into the relaxer. "I knew it would be spotted sooner or later. I even thought for a 
while tliat Marino had spotted it." 
"He had." 

Fairdoth nodded listlessly, "All right. 
What do you want, Bob.^" 

Roberts' eyes were excited. *'I want you 
to work with me. I tliink we can get tliis 
Alien and sink Ben Towne's raft at the 
same time. There's no single person in the 
country as dangerous to Towne right now 
as an unregistered and unrecognized PsiHigh. And that's just what you are. And 
with you and Jean working this thing as a 
team, I tliink we can turn tlie capture of the 
Alien to the benefit of all Psi-Highs." 

Fairdoth nodded slowly. "It could be 
done if my ideas are any good. And they 
certainly would require Jean to put tliem 
across." 

"Then you're with me?" 
"Okay. You've got the aces." Faircloth 
gave a defeated grin. "I'll probably hate you 
for this but let's get Jean over here and 
do some planning. The first jd> on the 
docket is to pin this Alien and keep him 
pinned." ; 



79 

"We've been at this for 



JEAN SANDERS tossed her pencil down 
on the desk and flopped down crosslegged on the floor. "I think we re going 
aiound in circles," she said disgustedly. 
"Three separate circles," she added, with 
3Ui owlish glance at Bob Roberts. 

"All right, we're tired," the Security 



chief sighed, 
hours." V 

"It's here," Fairdoth said stubbornly. 
"We've got all tlie information we need, 
if we can only pin down the application. 
Or at least we've got enough information 
to make a start." 

"The more I see of the whole business," 
said the girl, "the more it looks fishy to 
me." She lit a cigarette tlioughtfuUy. Her 
face was slender, with black brows and big 
grey eyes, and her slim figure made her 
look sixteen. "And it gets fishier and fishier 
the more we talk." 

Paul nodded. "Exactly, There's something that we aren't seeing or realizing or 
that we just don't know about this creature." 
"Well, let's try classifying what we do 
know," said Roberts. "We've got a picture 
that isn't worth a plugged nickel. We've 
got a few photos of the outside of the ship 
before it exploded. We know that he's psitriple-high, fully telepatliic, with the ability 
to fu2z up his observer's perception of him." 
"Disguise," said Jean. *Tt isn't perfect. 
He needs that to hide the wrinkles in the 
disguise." 

Faircloth walked across tlie room, staring 
at the walls. "Then there's tlie ship. It was 
found near Gutenberg, Iow% on a bluff 
overlooking the Mississippi, three months 
ago. That's a fact. Farm kids found the 
ship but didn't go near it. Scared stiff. Told 
their father and he called Security. I don't 
suppose there was any way of telling how 
long the ship had been tliere?" 

Roberts shook his head. "Biologists and 
geologists both had a w4iack at it, but the 
explosion destroyed all the flora and ground 
area within t^^enty feet of it." 

"Well, anyway, no occupant of the ship 
was found, and no trace of where the occupant might have gone. Security sent a scout 
squad down to photograph tlie ship and it 
blew into a million pieces." 
"That's right." 

"How many of the million pieces were 
recovered?" 
"About ten. Magnesium alloy, lold us 

nothing." ^, , ^ . 

Fairdoth nodded. "Okay. Then the PsiHigh report came in from Des Moines, and 
you turned up the farmer and his wife who 
saw ^e Alien the first night. What was 



^^ PLANET 

their name? Bcttendorf, I think. Jacob Bettendorf. Rather dull folks. They fed him 

^^A T"^ ^'"^ **" ^'* '^^y- Noticed nothing 
odd, but the farmer said his eyes felt tired 
all the time the creature was there. How 
did their description jive with the others 
you ve gotten?" 

Roberts shrugged. "The same— or I 
should say, uniformly different. Nobody 
seems to agree. It's obvious that they don't 
actually see him in any detail at all. They 
just think they do." 

_^ "'You know," said tlie girl, suddenly, 
that s one of the tilings that bothers me. 
A lot of those people out there are Ben 
Towne's stoutest supporters. They don't like 
Psj-Highs. They keep their eyes open for 
people that act like Psi-Highs— you know 
the way we're likely to nod and start answenng a question before a person gets it 
half asked—or the way we sometimes forget 
our expressions when we've had an accidental peep at some sweet innocent young 
girl's inner thoughts. Those people can spot 
that. But the Alien went right through. Not 
even a suspicion." 

"He got into the city fast, though," said 
Roberts. City folks are likely to be a lot 
less observant than country people." 

"All right," said Paul. "That fits well 
enough. Now, since he destroyed his ship 
we can assume that he is planning to stay 
a while. That probably means that there 
have been others before him. He's too confident for an advance scout. He knew he 
could mingle, and stay, and observe and 
learn, and get away with it. Probably his 
job IS to accumulate information, detailed 
mformation about human beings, and with 
full blown telepathy he must really be 
making hay. And unless I miss my guess, 
the information he wants most of all is information about Psi-Highs." Faircloth faced 
Roberts and the girl. "This is beginning to 
add up now. I don't think we're going to 
catch him in a dragnet. No matter how 
skillfully It's laid. No matter how many 
Psi-Highs we have on it, and no matter 
how well trained they are." 

Roberts looked disgusted. "Then you're 

saying that we aren't going to get him 

period." ' 

"Oh. no. I think we can catcli him. At 

least Ivc got an angle that's worth trying. 



STORIES 

We'll have no way of evaluating it first, because of the nature of the thing, but in the 
end we'll either have the Alien or wc won't 
and I think there's a good chance that we 
will If we keep playing the Chicago game 
we 11 lose every time." 

"But what went wrong in Chicago?" 
Roberts cried. * 

"Nothing, except that wc were licked hetore we started. Look at it this way. He's 
outguessed us every time. And if you 
analyze that a little, it's not really surprising 
that lie has because he's telepathic. He does 
not need a twenty-page report and a road 
map to know v Jiafs going on around him. 
AJl he needs is a hint. Just a bare touch of 
mans mind, a slight flicker of contact, and 
he h^ enough of a head start to sit down 
and figure out everything that's going to 
happen trom tiien on. Just like a chess gine 
You play along and suddenly your opponent 
makes a move that reveals a whole gambit 
which you hadn't been able to see before 
But our Alien friend spots the gambit on the 
basis of the first move instead of the tenth 
We make a move and he has it pinned He 
knows we operate along fairly logical lines. 
He can follow out the logical possibilities 
before they happen, and there's no possible 
way we can trap him. Psi-Highs or no PsiHighs. 

Roberts scowled at him. "Then what do 
you propose?" 

Faircloth grinned. "It should be obvious 
by this time. We feed the computer with 
all the evidence we have, and let it meditate a while and plot out a supremely logical 
approach to trap the creature on the basis 
of what we know of him now. Then we 
take that, supremely logical approach, and 
change it a bit. We change it into a completely illogical approach." 



npHE call they were waiting for came 
J- through at three o'clock one morning, 
after they had almost given it up in despair 
It had been a long, heartbreaking wait. 
Time after time Faircloth had pleaded that 
they must have been very close in Chicago 
closer than they realized, that the Alien was 
just temporarily frightened, because there 
had been no sign, no clue to the Alien's 
whereabouts, no sign that he was even in 
existence since the Chicago raid. Yet Fair


BRAIN SINNER 



dodi felt sure that sooner or later the contact would come. 

It was possible, of course, that the change 
in the search pattern had worried the Alien. 
Logically, a dragnet should have been set up 
in Chicago, and the entranceways to all the 
large cities guarded carefully. That was what 
the computer had said. "Probability is very 
strong that the Alien desires to remain in a 
city, but suggests tliat Chicago may not be 
the optimum location for him. Recommended heavy Security measures be taken 
in Chicago and surrounding cities of size. 
The probability is very high that the Alien 
is seeking some specific information. Advise 
close control of all spaceports, air, and rolling-road escapeways — " 

And so forth. That was what the computer had said. Of course, the computer 
was far from infallible, but its analysis and 
recommendations were utterly logical on 
the basis of the information given it. Tliat 
was exactly why they were carefully ignored. 

It was a gamble, and no one was more 
aware of this than Faircloth. All Security 
personnel were withdrawn from the Chicago area, Psi-High and otlieru'ise, except 
for a small crew headed by Ted Marino, 
who were scattered throughout the city. A 
gamble, but it was not entirely guesswork 
that made Paul so certain that the Alien, if 
left quite alone, would try to make contact 
with a Psi-High mind sooner or later. Of 
course, that conclusion itself was the result 
of logical reasoning. No matter what efforts 
were made to remove logic from the approach, it crept in. It had to creep in. 

It was logical that a telepathically sensitive creature visiting a strange planet would 
seek to learn something about the segment 
of the population that could expose his 
presence. He w^ould seek signs of his own 
kind of thought. Paul knew too well that 
a Psi-High mind that was cut off and alone 
was a sick mind. That was why Psi-Highs 
always settled in the cities, why they sought 
each other with such fierce, desperate clannishness which in itself had bred suspicion 
of tliem in the minds of psi-negatives. It 
was not a matter of choice, with them. It 
was a desperate need. And Paul knew how 
overpowering that need could be. 

No, logically, the Alien would nuke 

6— PLANET— Spring 



81 



contact with a human Psi-High, sooner or 
later. It would not be difficult to keep control of such a contact. The Psi-Highs were 
very few, numbering in the hundreds, scattered in colonies in the larger cities of tlie 
North American States. With painstaking 
care each one was contacted and warned, 
and those in Security Service were spotted 
in the most likely places- for the contact 
they were waiting for. The roads were left 
free, and the airports and spaceports were 
not checked. An invisible network of human minds lay across the country, delicately 
tuned, waiting for the spark of contact. 

Faircloth was asleep when the call finally 
came. He rolled groggily out of bed, his 
heart racing, and groped for the visiphone 
screen. Ted Marino's face materialized on 
the silvery curve; a frightened, shaking Marino whose eyes were wide with horror, 
w4iosc hands jerked nervously as he unsuccessfully tried to control them. His voice 
was on the thin edge of hysteria. "He hit 
me, Paul, Just a little while ago." 

Paul leaned forward, staring at the pale 
form in the screen. "Ted, are you hurt?" 

"No, no. But oh, god!" 

"It couldn't have been just another PsiHigh contacting you? It's deadly important, 
Ted — " 

Marino shook his head vehemently. "No, 
no, no. It cofddn't have been. I've been in 
Psi-High contact enough to know what it's 
like. This was different. It was like he'd 
lifted off my skull and scooped out my 
brains." 

Faircloth lit a smoke, trembling. "Did 
you try to fight it?" 

The man nodded. "I tried. He was clear 
in before I knew what had happened, but 
I tried. I — I think it puzzled him. It didn't 
do any good at all. He ju6t brushed it aside." 

"Ted," said Faircloth. "Now listen. Forget about it. Don't write up a report. Don't 
even think about it. As far as youVe concerned, the job is over. Get dressed, and 
travel south— down to Florida, Rio, any old 
place, it doesn't matter where, just go. Use 
an expense account and have yourself the 
time of your life.'* 

Marino's eyes opened in amazement. 
"Are you crazy? I tliought this was what — " 

*'It is. Do what I say and don't worry 
about it. You're finished on this job. When 



82 



PLANET STORIES 



you*ve gotten a good rest come back to the 
Hoffman Center and take up your training 
with Dr. Abrams where you left off." Paul 
flipped the switch and turned back to the 
room, his heart pounding a stacatto cadence 
ifl his tluoat. He grinned triumphantly and 
began to pack his bag. 

The chase was on, but this time, the 
mouse was chasing the cat 



VI 



AS IF a dam had broken, the reports began streaming in. Three more came 
from Chicago. Then a call came from" 
Cleveland, from a Psi-High technician there 
who was not remotely connected with the 
Federal Security Commission. Then from 
Pittsburgh, then New Philadelphia. Like a 
fearful, ominous flood the reports of the 
Alien's contacts swarmed in. And Paul 
Faircloth and Jean Sanders were ready for 
them. 

Their headquarters was a small suite of 
rooms in a middle class residential hotel in 
the heavily populated metropolitan area betM^een Washington and Baltimore. Few of 
tlie Federal Security agents, Psi-High or 
otherwise, knew this. They knew only a 
visiphone priority code number, and a special word-key for scrambling. This was as 
Faircloth insisted. Of all the agents posted 
and assigned, only Paul, Jean, and Roberts 
knew the true nature of the operation, and 
each of them worked out their own illogical 
details without telling the others. 

The wisdom of such a procedure was 
graphically illustrated a dozen times over 
for the Alien at work was thorough. An 
operative in Pittsburgh had attempted resistance to the Alien's telepathic overtures, 
as instructed, and suffered a burst of wrath 
that had left him blubbering in a corner for 
three days until a crew from Hoffman Center straightened him out with a week's diet 
of amphetamine and glucose. More and 
more, the Alien's puzzlement and frustration and wrath began to seep through, and 
Paul and Jean watched the reports, and 
nodded approvingly. Three times, when 
they were sure that the Alien had left a 
locality, they ordered cleanup squads to 
make raids on his former quarters, quizzing 
the inhabitants and neighbors, asking a mul


titude of idiotic questions, uncovering a 
half a dozen descriptions and leads which 
they assiduously ignored. Then they began 
stabbing erratically at locations where the 
Alien had nol yet been, raids which were 
carried out with a viciousness and singleness 
of mind that left the unfortunates who were 
questioned quaking in their boots. On these 
raids, even the agents themselves were confused as to their purpose. 

And there were oUier tactics, a myriad of 
disjointed, unconnected, abortive, harassing 
procedures, as though the whole search had 
suddenly fallen into the hands of a madman. A rocketship bound for Venus was 
delayed four days beyond an opposition, 
adding a half -million dollars to the cost of 
fuelling it. A whole series of road blocks 
were thrown up between New York and 
New Philadelphia, virtually paralyzing the 
commercial traffic between the cities for two 
days. Quite suddenly, the order went out to 
close down on all passengers in the great 
St. Louis-New York rolling roads, and 
Robert Roberts put in a gruelling week 
soothing the ruffled feelings of the businessmen who had been held up and the 
companies whose products had spoiled when 
the swift-moving strips had ground to a 
halt. 

Tlie news that there u'oj an Alien from 
the stars at large, that Federal Security was 
waging a vast underground battle to capture him, was no longer a deep secret. The 
tension moimted daily. 

And bit by bit, carefully sifted bits of information were dropped into the minds of 
the Psi-Highs who were still in the Alien's 
path. Long hours were spent in tl^e headquarters suite planning the pattern to be 
used. But in the end it was a pattern well 
chosen and worth the effort because it was 
soon e\^ident that the Alien was heading 
for the great metropolitan -area which surrounded the nation's capitoL 

No attempt was made to contact him. It 
had been entirely passive. The Alien's overtures had received no response other than 
futile attempts at shielding; no analyses of 
his contacts were attempt^o, and this knowledge was planted so that the Allen was sure 
to learn it. Warnings of tram were planted 
in his path, "secret" knowledge of closing 
dragnets and carefully devised Psi-High 



BRAIN SINNER 



83 



weapons to be used against him; occasionally such warnings were fdilowcd by abortive raids, either too early or too late to 
meet him, lead by psi-negative Security men 
'v^iio had no mote idea what they were doing than the man in the moon. But one 
by one, key facts were planted, pointing always in one direction, aimed at one man, 
and always the Alien moved toward the 
city. . _ 

PAUL FAIRCLOTH and Jean Sanders 
seldom left tlieir headquarters. Their job 
was to keep the pattern moving, and to plan 
out their individual parts quite separate 
from each other. It was terrifically wearing. 
As the tension mounted, both of them grew 
more haggard. Paul had not found time to 
shave in a week, and there were dark circles 
under the girl's eyes. Much of the time she 
just sat, tense, listening, waiting. Other 
times she helped him work as he fed data 
into the teletype and tape readers which had 
been set up in their quarters. But even amid 
the tension and exhaustion of the work 
neither of them could forget the simple, 
awful fact that Paul Faircloth had been exposed as a Psi-High, and that somehow, they 
would have to rearrange all that the future 
had held for them both. 

Each morning they spread the reports out 
on the table before them. *' Closer," Paul 
said one day. *'And it's on his own volition. He hasn't been pushed. On the contrary, he's been left quite out in the cold. 
And he doesn't like it." 

The girl nodded and glanced at the papers. ''And he's definitely trying to ask 
questions. Karns' call last night showed 
that better than any other. And of course 
Karns didn't know any answers." 

Faircloth nodded, "None of them know 
the answers. That's the beauty of it. Try as 
he will, he doesn't get anywhere." 

''Not yet.'* The girl rose, walking across 
the room. *Taul, I'm afraid. We're shooting in the dark. We don't know what we're 
fighting against." 

**Are you sorry you're in on it?" 

*'Oh, no!" She turned around, her face 
stricken. "I'd never want you to think that, 
never." His mind was suddenly filled with 
shadows, impressions struggling to get 
through, impressions that would make the 



use of words ridiculous. *'Oh, Paul, fm 
afraid! For you, for both of us. If anything 
should happen — " 

*'Nothing*s going to happen, darling — " 

"But what about us? It something goes 
wrong. Roberts knows about you." 

Paul's eyes could not meet hers. "It was 
bound to be found out sometime. I'd rather 
Roberts knew than Ben Towne." 

The girl's eyes were wide with fright. 
"But we shouldn't be together! Oh, Paul, 
how did he find out.^ Why did anyone have 
to find out.^" And then she was sobbing 
in his arms, and he held her close, trying 
to comfort her as her body shook against 
his chest. *'Jeannie," he murmured, "Please, 
darling, don't — " 

*'But it's so unfair! Why shouldn't I be 
allowed to marry you if I want to?" 

"You know why, darling! It's the law. 
We > tried to fight it but the people are 
afraid of us. There's nothing we can do 
about it. They passed the law, and they 
think it's right." 

"Ben Towne think's it's right!" she burst 
out scornfully. Her tears were hot on his 
cheek. 

"Towne backed it to the hilt, I know. 
But people are afraid of a man carrying a 
single psi-positive gene, like you and me. 
What would they do if they doubled? How 
could we tell what our children would be 
like? Look, darling, think! You're just getting a grip on your faculties now. You're 
learning how to use your psi-powers, and 
look what you're doing! You can almost get 
through to me, and I've had no formal 
training at all, I've been underground, just 
training myself as best I could. You're 
nearly top-grade, Dr. Abrams says you'll 
have almost complete control in five years, 
and I could too, with the proper training. 
What would our children be like with the 
factor on both sides?" 

"Well, what would be wrong with it?" 
The girl was fighting back the tears. "Are 
we such monsters? Have we done things so 
terrible that we have to be caged like animals and kept under control like criminals?" 

Paul shook his head. "People only know 
what they hear. Ben Towne has been a terrible, vicious enemy, and enough people 
believe him to give him tremendous power. 
The people are nervous, and fearful, and 



84 



PLANET STORIES 



there's nothing we can do about it." He 
pulled a handkerchief from his pocket and 
dabbed at her face with it. "We ve got a 
job to do, Jeannie. It might be the most important thing that Psi-Highs have ever tried 
to do. We can't flop on this job." 

"But Towne will just turn it against 

**Not if we work it right. And I've got 
a hunch that we're working it right." 



VII 

rpHE visiphone buzzed shrilly that afterJ- noon, and Roberts* worried face appeared in the screen. "Paul," he said 
diarply. "There are some bad rumors 
around. I think something's up. 

Paul cursed. "What kind of rumors?" 
""All kinds," said Roberts sourly. "They're 
saying the hunt for the Alien is a fraud, 
that ncJbody is doing anything at all about it 
There were a couple of out-and-out charges 
that Psi-Highs are teaming up with the 
Alien to make an attack on the government—" ^ 

"My god, can t somebody put the lid on 
that man.?" 

"That wasn't Towne's work. It was some 
other Federal Isolationist Senator on one of 
the propaganda programs the Normal Supremacy party has on TV, There's talk that 
the Civil Rights bloc in the Liberal Council 
is getting ready to switch to the American 
Council side and force a Presidential election. And that could put Towne in the 
White House. Hcs getting ready to move, 
Paul. We haven't got very long. The word 
has been sneaking out all over. Towne is 
behind it, of course, but he's smooth; oh, 
he's smooth. Congress hasn't been joined 
into two solid political parties for two hundred years, but they're doing it now, and 
it'll be a bloody battle. If Towne can gc-t the 
Gyil Rights bloc to switch to his Council 
he's got the Senate in the palm of his 
hand." 

"Who's the leader of the Civil Rights 
men?" Faircloth's voice w^as sharp. 

"That's just the thing. It has been Mike 
Veriday. His brother's a Psi-High. But his 
stock has taken an awful nosedive since this 
rumor campaign started. The polls have got 
hiaa traUing Kingsley from Kentucky by 



three per cent, losing ground fast. Now 
Kingslej^, it seems, is in some mean financial 
trouble that Tow^ne got him into, and 
Towne is ready to dear him of some nasty 
charges if he plays along—" He paused for 
a long moment. "We haven't got much 
time, Paul." 

"Well, I hope we don't need much. But 
I think you can call in as many of our men 
as you need to. If things get too hot for 
you, list Jean and myself as missing, and 
throw out a dragnet for us. Because I think 
we'll be very much outside the law in another day or so." 

Roberts blinked at him. "Better tell me 
what you're planning, Paul." 

"Don't worry what I'm planning. Tlie 
less you know about it the better. Just one 
thmg, though. You remember Eagle Rock? 
The place we built up on Timagami when 
we were in college? Put three men at a 
number where I can reach them, and give 
them the location of Eagle Rock. Then tell 
them to stand by with a fast jet scooter. Got 
that? And don't let ih/i leak, no matter 
what happens." 

"I wish you'd tell me — *' 

"We're fighting for our lives, now, Bob. 
And for every Psi-High in the countr\\ I 
won't tell you." 

Roberts nodded, and doused his cigar 
"Eagle Rock," he said. "You can count 
on it" 

Paul flipped the set off and sank back to 
v/ait for the Alien to make contact. 

TTE STRUCK at ten oMock that evening, 
J- J- with a ferocity beyond their wildest 
expectations. 

They had known that he was near. Tlie 
reports had come in, and they had plotted 
and calculated his pathway, and waited. It 
was only a matter of time, and the carefully 
planted information built a tangled, devious 
circle with a single Psi-High individual in 
the center. 

Jean Sanders. 

It had to be Jean, Paul hated it. He 
wished it could be him, that he could somehow protect her, but Jean Sanders was the 
only possible person to bait the trap. Her 
psi-powers had been developed carefully 
and painstakingly for years under the care 
of Dr. Reuben Abrams and his staff at the 



BRAIN SINNER 



&5 



Hoffman Medical Center. A Psi-High individiui was helpless to use his powers 
without training. Just as a child was trained 
through long, gruelling years to use the 
mental faculties of thought, and perception, 
and logic, a psi-positive mind required training to control its powers of perception and 
physical control, if its powers were ever to 
be used. 

Paul knew that all too well He had the 
psi-positive factor, too. He had not realized, in his teens, when he had plagued and 
baited the two Psi-High boys in his high 
school class, that there might be a time factor in psi-positive developement. Other PsiHighs showed the signs of abnormal sensory 
apparatus at the age of one, or three, or 
seven. The schools caught them, tested 
them, registered them and sent them out 
into a life of fear and suspicion and hatred. 
They were considered freaks, the more dangerous because there was no physical identification that could be used to separate them 
from ordinar}^ human beings. 

And certain men had seen the great 
power that stood waiting for the man who 
took advantage of the people's fears. Ambition is blinding; certain men could see the 
danger to tlie comfortable, careless wielding 
of power if Psi-High minds were to work 
their way into government. But minds, like 
Paul Faircloth's mind, matured at different ages, and at different times. And 
some slipped through the barrage of testing, undetected, only to discover later that 
it was not the backs of the cards they were 
reading, but the mind of their opponent 
that held the cards. 

The faculty was feeble in people like 
Paul. He could not read minds. He could 
not sort and integrate the confused tendrils 
of conscious and unconscious thought t^at 
broke like an endless stream from a human 
mind; he could not separate the reality of 
here-and-now thinking from the strands of 
fantasy, and memory, and supposition, and 
frustration, and desire, and half -understanding, and confusion that lay beneath the 
surface of those minds. He could^ detect 
falsehood and he could feel suspicion; he 
c»uld sense love as he had never felt it before, and he could feel himself gripped in 
the helpless frustration of pity; he could 
savor excitement with a thousand tingling 



nerves, and he could sense the blackest 
depths of despair, but he could not sort 
them out to make a coherent picture of the 
thoughts streaming from a human mind. It 
took a lifetime of training of a Psi-High 
mind to do that. 

But Jean Sanders could. That was why 
she was waiting in the room with him when 
the Alien struck. 

She was walking across the room when 
it happened. She stiffened, screamed, and 
even Paul's untrained mind caught the impact of the wave of fear and revulsion that 
swept from her mind. She sank to the floor, 
and Paul stood by, watching helplessly as 
she twisted and writhed in the blind agony 
of the powerful invasion. "Please," she 
choked, white faced. "Get me a pillow. 
Then — then listen — " 

"Don't fight him," Paul whispered. "Let 
him in. Let him clear in. And then jump 
on him for all you're worth. Dig, dig 
deep — " 

Her eyes became huge, like the eyes of 
an animal, frightened beyond hope, cornered, attacked and helpless to fight back. 
Her neck strained back, and her teeth 
clenched. The blood drained from her face 
as she began moaning. "I can't, Paul — -" she 
cried, "I — I can't get in — " 

** You've got to — " Frantically Paul tried 
to thrust out with his mind, tried to dig 
through the wall of immense power that was 
present in the room. The Alien was close, 
very dose, and the presence of his mind 
was overwhelming. Paul tried to break 
through, and then suddenly he felt a pang 
of white heat sear through his brain, driving him back, a sharp, savage stroke that 
doubled him up, clasping his hands helplessly to his ears as he fell and writhed on 
the floor in pain. And then suddenly it was 
gone as swiftly as it had come. He la/ panting for a moment. Then he managed to 
crawl across the room to Jean. He sank his 
head to her cliest, heard the slow pounding 
of her heart. He shook her, gently; her gjgs 
flickered open, her face filled with horror 
and loathing. "Oh, Paul, I got — I got so 
little—" 

"What did you get, darling?" 
"Nothing. A picture or two, nothing 
more. Oh, he was so strong, I couldn't 
m^e a dent — " 



86 



PLANET STORIES 



"What pictures?" 

She sat up, her breath coming in gasps. 
"Nothing definite. Ben Towne — yes, there 
was something about him — just the flash of 
a mental picture, no rationality connected 
with it. And some papers, some sort of 
file — " She clasped her hands to her head. 
"He — he stripped me clean! I can't — " 

"Jeannie! 'ITbere must have been something else — " 

She looked up at him, a strange light in 
her eyes. "I don't understand it," she 
whispered. "There was a picture of a farm 
— yes, a farm, and a dog, and blood on a 
pair of pants — " 

Paul sat back, staring at her stupidly. 
And then, suddenly, a light flashed on in 
his mind, a flash so incredible that he 
hardly dared think of it. In an instant he 
was on his feet, the blood pounding in his 
throat. He began throwing clothes into a 
bag as the girl sat there, watching him 
dully, in growing alarm. "Stay here," he 
said. "I'll call you—" 

"Paul — wdiere — " 

"It's my show, now, darling. Wait, rest, 
you'll be all right. Rest, and say a prayer 
or t^^o. Because Tve got this Alien nailed 
for sure this time." 

IT WAS incredibly dangerous and utterly 
necessary. Paul found a visiphone booth 
in the rear of a station where there were few 
people, and quickly threw an adapter across 
the camera, and spun a roll of film in. The 
film started when tlie party at the other 
end flipped on the switdi. The conversation was brief. Paul gave the address of a 
roof -garden apartment in Central Washington, and then disconnected. After removing 
the film, he reconnected with a number he 
had given Roberts a few hours before. Ted 
Marino's face appeared, and Paul heaved a 
sigh of relief. "How many men do you 
have, Ted?" 

"Two." 

"All Psi-High?" 

"Certainly." 

Paul nodded. "All right, we're beyond 
the law from now on, Ted. If you or any 
of the rest want out, take off." 

Marino's dark eyes sparkled. "Roberts 
said this is the kill," he said. 

"It's not the kill you think. But it's a 



kill, all right. Take the men to this address." He gave the roof -garden number. 
"Have a jet scooter there, and see that nobody spots it. Use Security insignia. Send 
out a bleeper if anything goes wrong. I'll 
be there," 

He rang off, and moments later v/as rising high above the city in his own scooter. 
In ten minutes he had reached the roofgarden, and settled the little ship down 
gently on its gyros. He walked inside and 
sat down in the darkness, and waited. 

He heard another jet scooter land. Marino walked in with two other men Paul 
remembered vaguely. He nodded to them, 
and they also sat down. Paul fingered the 
shocker in his pocket, his nerves screaming a thousand warnings in his ears. 

The guard robot on the ground floor 
bleeped sharply. Paul reached for the lockrelease switch, and heard the elevator start 
to whine. He unlocked the door and left it 
ajar, then motioned to one of the men. 
"Cover the hallway, and back them up 
when they come. Don't be surprised at 
who it is." 

The man disappeared down the hall. 
Paul sat quietly, and then heard the elevator 
open. There were footsteps, and a tapping 
sound. The footsteps stopped at the door, 

"Come on in," he called sharply. "Bob'll 
be with you in just a minute." 

The door swung open and Senatorial 
Councilman Ben Towne walked into the 
room, followed by two tight-faced men. 
One of the men had a hand in his jacket 
pocket, Towne blinked at Faircloth, and 
his grin began to fade into alarm. "Who 
in the hell are you?" 

"One of Roberts* men/* 

"Roberts said you had the Alien," Towne 
snarled. His green eyes peered around the 
room. 

Marino swung on the man to the right, 
bringing him down with a blow to the 
temple. Paul slapped Towne*s cane to the 
floor, and pounced on the other guard like 
a cat. The Councilman staggered against the 
door jamb, trying desperately to reach his 
cane. Moments later the guards were helpless, and Paul and Marino dragged Towne 
out to the middle of the room. "The files," 
Paul said sharply, "Where do you keep 
them?" 



BRAIN SINNER 



87 



Townc's breath came heaviljr. **You 
damned snakes can't get awajr with this — " 

"The files, Councilman." 

His eyes went around the room fearfully. 
"The boys know where they are," he said 
finally, his voice so low it was hardly 
audible. 

"Any duplicates?" 

"Not of the files you want." 

Paul nodded to the two men. "Take 
them down and get the files. Then turn 
the men and files over to Roberts. Tell him 
to see that the men forget all about this." 
He turned back to Towne. "You're taking 
a little ride." 

"When tliis hits the papers it'll be the 
end of the road for you freaks," Towne 
snarled. "You can't stop it now — " 

"We'll see," said Fairclotli. "Now shut 
up and get moving." 

They left the cane in the room. Paul 
helped Marino load him aboard the jet 
scooter. "Take him up to Eagle Rock. Keep 
him there. Dismantle the engine, if you 
have to, to keep him there. I'll be there in 
a few hours." 

Marino nodded, "Should I report to 
Roberts?" 

"Don't bother. Roberts would have a 
stroke. I brought Towne over here on a 
dummy visiphone film of Roberts, whidi 
will put him in enough hot water as it is." 

"And where are you going?'* 

"I'm taking a plane west. I've got a visit 
to make. I've got to see a man about a 
dog." 

VIII 

THE farmer blinked across the table at 
him, red eyed and fearful. "I don't 
know what you want," he was saying. His 
voice was high and querulous. "I didn't ask 
no trouble of the Federal Men. They asked 
me all them questions, and I told them — " 

"That's all right." said Faircloth. "We're 
just rechecking. You were the first party the 
Alien contacted as far as we can tell. The 
ship landed on your property, didn't it?" 

The farmer nodded. "Over by the river. 
Scrub oak and elms standing over there on 
the bluff. Haven't never cleared it because 
it'd be too rocky to farm." 

"All right, all right," said Faircloth 



sharply. "I want you to tell me what happened that night." 

The farmer's eyes flitted to Faircloth '$ 
face and back down to the table. "I already 
told you twenty times. Why do you pick on 
me?" he whined. "I couldn't help it he hap« 
pened to stop here. Heard him on the porch 
about ten o'clock at night — I was just gettin' ready for bed. And he said he was 
travelin* and wanted something to eat. We 
don't see strangers around here very often, 
Mister — " he looked up at Faircloth fearfully. "I— I looked at him, and he looked 
all right to me. My eyes were tired, like I 
said. I couldn't see him too well, but he 
came in, and ate, and I offered to bed him 
for the night. He said no, he had to make 
on for Des Moines." 

Faircloth watched the man's ey^s. "Details, Mr. Bettendorf . You've left some out 
along the line, haven't you? I have a report 
here that was filed by our field team that 
talked to you." He pulled out a sheaf of 
papers in the dim kitchen light. "Says something about your dog barking." 

The farmer's face went white. "There 
anything wrong with that? I reckon the dog 
did bark. I don't remember." 

"And you went to open the door, and the 
stranger was there, eh?" 

The farmer nodded his head eagerly. "I 
told you everything — " 

"And you brought him in and fed him 
and then sent him on his way?" 

"That's right, that's what I done." 

"You're a liar," said Faircloth. He eyed 
the man coldly. "Try the story over again. 
Once more now." 

The farmer jolted to his feet, his eyes 
feverish. "I done just like I told you. 1 
didn't tell no lie. I heard the dog yelping — " 

"And you opened the door and there was 
a stranger there." Faircloth's voice was 
sharp. "Then what happened? Step by step. 
Minute by minute. I mean it, mister, I want 
the truth." 

"I — I looked at him — ^" 

"What light did you have?" 

"This here same light. Not very much — •** 

"And what did he say?" 

"He said, Tm a traveler and I'd like 
something to eat' " 

"And what did his voice sound like?" 

The farmer faltered. "It was funny — like 



1 



88 



PLANET STORIES 



gravel in a tin can. A funny kind of voice/* 

"And where was the dog all this time?" 

The farmer blanched, "He— he done 
stayed outside. He saw it was all right." 

"Where's the dog now?" 

"I sold him. I mean he ran away. You 
can*t keep a dog forever, Mister." 

Faircloth's face was very near the old 
man's. "The stranger was out on the porch 
and you talked to him and let him come in. 
And then what did you do?" 

"I— he sat down at the table, I think— 
I— I—'' 

"You went over to g<± some food from 
the stove, didn't you?" 

•*Yes, yes, that's right." 

"And then you saw blood on his pants, 
didn^t you? And you remembered hearing 
your dog give a yelp out in the yard, didn't 
you? The stranger had blood all over his 
paiits and boots, didn't he?" 

The farmer's eyes were wide with fear. 
He was shaking his head helplessly. ''Nono — " 

"And so you picked up your gun and you 
shot him, didn't you?" 

And then the old man's face was in his 
hands, bending over the table, crying like 
a baby— huge, fearful sobs racking his 
boney shoulders. "He killed my dog," he 
choked between sobs. "He killed old 
Brownie, gave him a kick that split his head 
open. He didn't have to do that to poor old 
Brownie. I knew he was a bad one when he 
did that. I shot him. Yes, I did." 

rpHE news broke to the nation that night, 
-L and tlie country went into a panic unequalled since the days of the Great Odd 
War. Paul Fairdoth spent an hour on the 
visiphone from Des Moines talking to 
Robert Roberts, going over the whole business from beginning to end. The Security 
chief chain-smoked three cigars for the first 
time in his life. Finally Roberts put a line 
through to the Speaker of the Joint Senatorial Councils. Half an hour later, while 
Faircloth was making his way by jet back to 
Washington, Roberts was in top-secret conference with the Senate Council Leaders, 
and then with the President himself. And 
then the news broke. It was an official 
White House News conference, and it had 
been dismissed barely three minutes when 



the radios and TVs were carrying the casts 
of the announcement. 

Faircloth brought his plane down at 
Eisenhower Field, and saw the crowd 
swarming across the landing strip before he 
got to the ground. A dozen flashbulbs popped, and before he could get into tlie Security limousine waiting for him, he was in 
the middle of a tight circle of reporters. 

"How long has the Alien been at large, 
Mr. Faircloth?" one of them asked. 

"Sorry. The diief will have to answer 
that." 

*Ts there any doubt that he's telepathic?" 
"No doubt whatsoever. I know that from 
personal experience. It's the only way he 
could move freely in the population." 
"How was he first detected?" 
Paul smiled to himself. "The President 
gave you that information, didn't he? A 
Psi-High ckizen spotted him in Des Moines. 
The Psi-Highs have been on his trail ever 
since." 

One of the reporters was tnggmg at his 
arm. "There's been a lot of talk about some 
kind of— well, liason between the Alien invader and the Psi-Highs in this country." 

Paul frowned. "If that were true, would 
we be working twenty-four hours a day to 
trap him? Use your head, man, There've 
been a lot of unfortunate -rumors, I'm 
afraid. But I can speak for the Psi-Highs, 
and I think Commissioner Roberts will back 
me up on tliis — the Alien is menacing our 
very civilization. He's strudc at one of our 
most beloved public servants in an attempt 
to undermine the government and prepare 
our planet for a full scale invasion. There 
isn't a Psi-High citizen in the country who 
will rest until the monster h caught, and 
until Councilman Towne has been returned 
safdy to Washington.** 

"But what about Towne's anti-Psi legislation? He's always hated Psi-Highs." 

"Nonsense. Towne has been a loyal 
servant of the North American people. He's 
fought for what he thought was right, and 
has exposed himself to great dangers and 
personal vilification to do it If he hasn't 
fully understood the Psi-HJghs' side of 
things, that's not a matter for us to be vindictive about." He looked around the circle 
soberly. "The fact remains that he's in the 
hands of a dangerous enemy, and it's our 



BRAIN SINNER 



8a 



job to save him if it can possibly be done." 
He nodded, and stepped into the Security 
limousine. It honked its way through the 
crowd, and then dipped down into the 
government tunnel that led to capitol hill 
and Central Washington. 

He picked up a paper inside the car, and 
peered at it eagerly. The full-color picture 
of the President's grave face stared out at 
him in tri-di, and on either side pictures of 
Roberts and Towne. It was an old picture 
of Towne, a flattering picture. Paul grinned 
as he read the story rapidly: 

COUNOLMAN TOWNE KTONAPPED 

FROM SECRET MEETING 



Presdent Reveals AJien Telepath at Large 



The President of the North American States revealed^ tonight in a special press conference that 
Coundhnan Benjamin Towne (Federal Isolationist, 
American Council) was kidnapped from a secret 
meeting with Federal Security agents last night in 
what was described as the Brst step in a plan for 
large-scale invasion of Earth by an Alien race from 
another planet. The President reported that one 
Alien, believed to be fully telepathic, has been at 
large in the country since his landing near Gutenberg, Iowa, last May 26th. 

The Alien's presence was first detected by a loyal 
Psi-High citizen of Des Moines and was reported 
immediately to the Federal Securing Commission. 
Robert R. Roberts, Chief of the FSC, has been active in directing a nationwide dragnet to capture 
the Alien. 

Councilman Towne left his home last night at 
11:00 P,M. in response to a call ostensibly from 
Commissioner Roberts. It is believed that the call 
was forged by the use of a dummy-film, and the 
Councilman was reported missing when he did not 
return home. The two attaches who accompanied 
him apparently have suffered severely from the 
encounter with the Alien's telepathic powers, and 
were unable to be questioned at the Hoffman Medical Center this morning. 

The President mad« special note of the excellent 
and selfless work of certain Psi-High citizens during 
the past months, in the course of a manhunt that 
has been shrouded in secrecy. The Alien's telepathic powers invariably overcame the efforts of 
psi-negative individuals, but through the efforts of 
the Psi-Highs, Commissioner Roberts has expressed 
every hope of ending the search within days and 
securing Councilman Townc's release. 

Faircloth flipped the page, glancing at 
the smaller headlines. An interview with 
Dr. Abrams reporting the training program 
for Psi-Highs in progress at the Hoffman 
Center; a long article, discussing the value 
of Psi-High powers in combatting a ruthless telepathic alien force; an article by 
Roberts, very carefully worded, explaining 
that if one telepathic Alien had come to 



Earth, others could be expected. Roberts 
expressed the opinion that human psi-positives were the nation's strongest safeguard 
against such an invasion. 

Faircloth carefully folded the paper and 
spoke to the driver of the limousine. The 
huge car rose at the next tunnel exit, and 
sped north along the surface, then rose 
again. Paul waited, impatiently, and then 
stepped out of the car at the given address. 
Five minutes later he was holding Jean 
Sanders in his arms, while Robert Roberts 
sat chewing a cigar at the far side of the 
room, looking vastly pleased with himself. 



IX 



^<TT WAS handled beautifully," Faircloth 

J- was saying, "The timing was perfect, 
and there's no question but that it will go 
across." He looked up at Jean. "You're 
sure you got everything across to him when 
he contacted you again?" 

She nodded. Her face was still pale. "He 
turned me inside out. Cleaned out everything I knew. I didn't resist. And then 
when we'd heard from you he contacted me 
again, and I knew that we were right. He's 
been in touch with me ever since. He'll be 
here soon." 

Faircloth nodded to Roberts. •'And you've 
arranged for the raids to start up through 
New England?" 

Roberts nodded. He looked slightly high. 
"Everything's under control. Marino has a 
ship ready for takeoff, and we have guns up 
near Eagle Rock to blast it down. Ain't 
many people around in northern Ontario. 
Tlie pictures will be rather bad, probably, 
but after all — field conditions, you know. 

It will certainly look like the same sort of 
'ship that landed out in Iowa, and there 
won't be enough left when the blasting is 
over to tell for sure whether tlie mangled 
mess that they drag out of it later is man, 
Alien or oily rags. Those guns do a good 
job." 

Something touched Faircloth's mind, 
lightly, like a quiet knock. He swung 
around, his eyes wide. "He's here," he 
said, and then he saw that Jean already 
knew. "Tell him to come up." 

She nodded, and closed her eyes. Moments later they heard the footsteps on the 



90 



PLANET STORIES 



stairs, hesitant foatsteps. Then the door 
swung open. They stared at him for a moment, and then both men were wringing 
the man's hand, offering him a glass, and he 
sank down on the cot they had prepared for 
him, exhausted. "You must be dead," Paul 
said quietly. 

"1 am, I am," said the man. "Mind if I 
lie down?" 

He was an ordinary looking man. He was 
slender, about thirty, and very pale. A 
single-factor Psi-High had no distinguishing 
physical characteristics; there really was no 
reason to expect a double-factor psi-positive 
to look any different. But somehow they had 
half expected a god-like creature, and he 
just looked like a frightened young man. 

His face was mild and ratlier sad. But his 
eyes were clear and sharp, and the mouth 
was in a grim line, as he sank back on the 
couch. "I was afraid you'd never spot it," 
he said. 'Tor a while it looked as though 
the whole thing would backfire. I mean 
when Towne was planning the shift in the 
Council and trying to force an election. I 
was afraid— and in the midst of that, you 
started your cat-and-mouse game — " 

Faircloth nodded. "We had no choice. 
We didn't know, and you didn't dare reveal 
what you were doing at that point." 

The man shook his head. "It was better 
this way, much better. I planned to kill 
Towne and then let you capture me. Counting on you to work the propaganda right. 
Then nobody would have known that the 
Alien was killed before he even got started.*' 

Faircloth smiled. "The computer even 
listed that as a possibility. Low probability, 
but that was on the basis of what we knew. 
We hadn't even considered it — yet every 
living Psi-High has known for a long time 
that someday two Psi-Highs would have a 
child. We could only guess what the child 
might be like." 

The man looked up at them sadly. *The 
child would be lonely beyond words," he 
said. "He would be able to hide, yes. He 
would be able to slow down his psi-powers 
in order to appear like an ordinary PsiHigh. He could never have revealed it. Not 
even to his closest friends. " 

"And you knew that the real Alien had 
been killed?" 



"Almost as soon as it happened. He died 
in agony. He had a powerful mind. He 
broadcast so wildly that every Psi-High 
within a hundred miles must have gotten a 
shower. I was in Des Moines, and got the 
whole picture clear as a bell. Went down 
and picked the details out of the farmer's 
brain. He was too frightened to tell what 
he had done, and nobody paid too much 
attention to him anyway." He shifted wearily on the cot. "The Alien must have been 
working so hard to maintain his disguise 
that the farmer caught him short. I knew it, 
and I knew what I had to do. I went ahead 
and did it." 

"Of course Towne will fight," said 
Roberts later, when the man had drifted off 
into a deep sleep. "He's clever, and resourceful. When we 'rescue' him from 
Eagle Rock, he's going to know exactly what 
has happened." 

Jean Sanders laughed happily. "I'd like 
to see him," she said. 'Td like to see him 
helpless just once." 

Paul grinned. "You will. Things will be 
too far ahead of him by then. And of course, 
there will be a physical and mental examination. It will be a pity that the Alien left his 
mind in such a state of shock and delusion 
but maybe after a few months of psychiatric treatment we can find out the real 
reason why he hates Psi-Highs so much. 
And then, perhaps, we'll have a powerful 
fighter on our side instead of against 
us." 

He looked around at the others, his face 
grave. "We can't afford to have the world 
against us again, not ever. That part of the 
news broadcast was perfectly true. There 
was an Alien. He u^as telepathic. And there 
will be others coming — ^maybe in a year, 
maybe in five, or tea, or a hundred — " He 
leaned bade wearily in the relaxer. "We 
cashed in on it, this time, but we mustn't 
forget the parts that are true." 

Jean smiled and put her arm around him. 
"They'll come, sometime — yes. But when 
they come they'll find the Earth well 
guarded." Her eyes drifted to the sleeping 
figure on the cot, and then came back to 
Paul's and held them. "When they do 
come, there'll be others — like him — ^to stop 
them." 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



91 



THE VIZIGRAPH 

{Conunued from page 3) 

tion-understanding writers, I believe you might 
enjoy T, S. Eliot, since you're both asses. 
Cordially, 

Bill Tuning 

COURTOIS CONFESSES 

318 E. Commercial St. 
Appleton, Wisconsin 
Dear Jack, 

Some time ago I sent you a letter for which I 
would like to apologize. It was, I believe, in regard 
to the Fall issue of PLANET STORIES. I made 
some remarks in that letter which I had no right 
to make. I believe I made a comparison between 
Christians and dogs that was quite unfavorable to 
the Christians. 

I hope that you threw it away when you finished 
reading it. If you arc planning to print it in THE 
VIZIGRAPH, please don't. If it is too late and the 
letter is already at the printer's, let this be a public 
apology. . 

At the time I wrote that letter I was feelmg very 
bitter for some trivial reason I can't even now 
remember. While we all have the right to be bitter 
if we wish to be that foolish, I certainly had no 
right to vent my spleen all over your new trousers. 
How very presumptuous of me to decide I was 
qualified to judge the faith of millions of people 
by the way I happened to feel that evening! Nothing could be more immature. While I recognize 
my own immaturity and am doing my best to supplement the experience that comes only with time 
by reading and much thought, I occasionally break 
down and have a tantrum. 

This is a rather hard letter for me to write. Looking at one's self without benefit of that mirror in 
the mind that shows us what we want to see is hard 
enough when you know you are alone. Admitting 
one's immaturity to strangers is a far different and 
less pleasant sensation. 

However, the penalty for opening one*s big mouth 
without thinking stam to be six little demons called 
conscience who keep turning spotlights on you 
when all you want to do is crawl under a rock. 

All right, I apologize for saying what I never 
believed. I apologize for hurting feelings and bruising intellects. And even as I write this I realize 
how hypocritical I am, I don't give^ damn about 
anyone. But I do! I care very much for humanity. 
I never want to do or say anything that will hurt 
or embarrass anyone. So why do I write such horrid 
letters? 

Jack, why don't you make a rule: no letters permitted from crazy, mixed up kids. It would save a 
lot of people a lot of misery. 

But how are you to know who is mixed up? 
It's a problem. .,!.'*• 

Don't worry about me. I'll outgrow it. I feel 
better already having written this. 

Life is always wonderful, no matter how you 
look at it. Some times Im just too damn stubborn 
to open my eyes. 

Sincerely, 

John Courtois 

Ed's Notct Takes more than a small bit of courage 
to apologize, John, particularly in print. Glad you 
made it, for your letter does appear in the Winter 
issue and, of course, stirred up no small storm. I'm 
aurc we all enjoy letters of a controversial nature, 



but hardly siingingly vindictive letters. Let the 

brickbats continue to soar through these columns, 

but keep our poisonous switchblades tccurely 
sheathed. 

PLEASED 

1725 N. Seminary Ave. 
Oakland 21, Calif. 
De.ir Editor, 

The Winter issue of PLANET STORIES was 
supreme ... as far as I know, the best. 

TELEPORTRESS OF ALPHA C was beyond 
words, and THE VANISHER too. 

Wouldn't THE VANISHER make a swell sciencefiction movie; really have the audience gasping when 
the human form dissolves in the space suit. 

The other five star-flung shorts were marvelous, 
and so was the VIZIGRAPH. PLANET STORIES 
is my leader of sci -fiction. 

Happy blast-offs, 

W. C. Brandt 

DEFEMSE RESTS 

6438 E. 4th PL 
Tulsa, Oklahoma 
Dear Jack, 

No one can compare with Leigh Brackctt in the 
space-opera field! There is a sterling example of an 
unqualified and dogrciatic statement which I will not 
back down an inch on. I will even go as far as to 
say Brackett compares favorably with Merritt in the 
creation of vivid mental images and equally vivid 
emotional feelings. And I will go even further, 
Brackett is to PLANET STORIES what Campbell 
is to ASTOUNDING. Brackett is to PLANET what 
Palmer was to OTHER WORLDS. 

My opinion of Brackett may be somewhat prejudiced because the first s-f story I read was her 
STARMEN OF LLYRDIS. The defense for Brackett 
rests. 
Letters: 

Link: I do agree with you on the point concerning the circulation of PLANET. 

White: I don't feel I have turned on fandom. 
Right now I'm on the FAPA waiting list and the 
operating committee for OKLACON 3. But I don't 
believe It's worth the fuss a lot of people make 
over it. I am forced to have a certain respect for 
fans that can put out 40 or 50 page 'aines month 
after month, but that doesn^t mean 1 have to dote 
on them or envy them. If a ^ wants to do tliat 
sort of thing, well good for him. All I'm saying is 
that I wouldn't like to. All dear? 
Wegars: Noted. 

Harmon: A very enjoyable letter. And I w^ould 
Jike to hear Jim, if I may, say fomething about 
-Jesus' "love of men" references, 

Schenck: A good idea about 2 CS-AB. If that 
works why not try the same deal for Tops In S-f, 
only bring it back to pulp format. 

Keogh; So you will not tolerate the invasion of 
our own virgin field" (whatever that is) hj sciencefantasy. Just where do you draw the line? Just 
where does something stop being plausible and start 
being fantastic. Without the atomic theory the atom 
bomb would be fantastic. 

Stamper: You are not a fan if you do not enjoy 
fan activities or some part of them. If you do not 
feel capable of aiticizing the stories, and you are 
probably not, then why do you have words for other 
letter writers? Indeed why write at all? Why should 
you lower your lily white person by engaging in 
written conversation with low-minded people? Just 



92 



PLANET STORIES 



I 



t 

r 

t 
f 



igaott as, imybc we'll go twajr. I for ooe wmiida*t 
feel hwrt if you weot away. 

Deppe: Item 4. Let us clarify our terms. Do you 
mean PLANET shouldn't publish stones dealing 
with current religious and political problems? If 50, 
you are right. I doubt if people read PLANET to 
gather that sort of toformation. But just what special 
place do you have in mtnd for them? 

Item 5 and 6, I agree with vou 100%. 

Dennis: If you want to read stories with ideas 
why don't you read some of the magazines and 
books I mentioned ia the Fall issue. You don't, or 
shouldn't, expect to find great ideas ia a joke book. 
Why PLANET? 

Fletcher: I am not trying to censor sex. I am 
only tired of seeing the same damned rehash over 
and over again. 

A good cover by Budrys, the same one who 
writes, I presume. 

Val Walker 

PAT ME GENTLY 

1565 Sacramento St. 
San Francisco, Calif. 
Dear Jack, 

So Courtois is going out in a blaze of glory, eh? 
Want to bet he won't make it? Nah, not when old 
ty pewriteritis has got him in its clutches. I'd hate 
to see him go myself. I've heard tell that he's one 
of the select few whose spelling is worser than 
mine. 

Besides the fact, peeves and disagreements notwithstanding, that the boy writes a mean letter. I'd 
vote him first most any old time. Fact while I'm 
on the subject, I do this time. 'Course I hardly ever 
agree with him but then that doesn't deter me any 
from enjoying his fine free style. I always admire a 
person who can ramble on and on about any given 
subject, whether they know beans about it or not 
Takes a special kind of talent to be so wittily 
positive in your ignorance. And then, of course, he's 
occasionally right. 

In my considered opinion, Eberle stinks. I can 
take the fact that all his figures look like they've 
been frozen in the same position for several millenia, but when he can't even bother to make the 
characters look like the individuals represented, I 
revolt. The story distinctly stated that the Martians 
were "of t shy, gentle nature, with huge, dark, 
melting eyes ..." Now these kids in the picture 
look about as shy and gentle as an extremely hungry 
cannibal. And what's with these beady little orbs set 
about in their gruesome pans? I'll admit that a 
gentle alien might not exactly look that way according to our preconceived notions of that emotion, but 
there's just no two ways about it with those eyts. 
They are definitely not as per specifications. 

Why is everyone so kindly volunteering their 
opinion about whether you should change your 
format or not? I haven't noticed you asking them 
for it, or for that matter, doing anything about it. 

Only story I really enjoyed in thish was THE 
VANISHER. Oh-ho . . . take it all back, BOTTOM 
IS UP was the most (to say the least, as tire old 
sayine goes). And that IHio-nice, very nice. Emsh 
gets better al the lime. The rest? Oh, well . . . 

Oh, goody, Stamper again. Stuffed shirts I've 
seen before but this gal is the original stuffed skirt. 
Hiss (pronounced as when villain comes on stage), 
dear, fans write these letters because it's FUN. Ever 
heard of that before? And also, incidentally, because 
they like to see their name in print; just like you 
do. Of course we can afford to be forgiving and as 
each person is a product of their environment and 



you've had ail those "long did! evenings" ia the 
past to warp your outlook, we can overlook it. 
Me-ow. 

So what's wrong with comics, already; Mr. Hodgens? Sounds like Johnny stepped on a com somewhere. John doesn't like &cx> Oh, son you haven't 
been listening. You should pay more attention to 
what you read. Besides you stomped smack on one 
of my corns, to wit, I can think oi severaJ comics 
that I am very fond of. I don't take kindly to a 
condescending attitude towards them any more than 
I do with sL 

At last ... Mr. Johnson you can tell your facts 
without boring the audience to death. I cajoyed your 
letter no end, and tliat from me, who has always 
been allergic to facts, you may take as one large 
compliment. 

Where's McKinney? 

Am ill from the cover. 

Trusting you are the same, 

Pat Scott 

NEVER SATISFIED 

3971 Boone Park Avenue 
Jacksonville, Florida 
Dear Sir, 

I liad just recently returned from a cruise, and 
while catching up with the latest Sdence-Fiction, I 
ran across in tlie letter column of the summer issue 
a letter by two readers here in Jacksonville. I never 
thought tliere were any fen hereabouts who had 
enough interest to write in, with the possible exception of service men at the N.A.S. 

They mu&t be Neofen though, or thev would liave 
realized that after you get into the world of ScienceFiction you become choosy about whether or not a 
story is good. What I am getting at is. their thinking Joe Keogh is a gripe artist. Although I don't 
ag:ree with all Joe says, I must say he puts forth 
fairly constructive criticism. True, he never seems 
satisfied, but if all the readers were satisfied, the 
quality of the stories and magazine would definitely 
drop. 

Fandom needs readers like these to keep the 
editors on the ball. I don't mean especially you, 
Jack, but I think you know what I do mean. 
Yours truly, 
G. Nicholas db Grunswalo 

REYELATI0N1 

Lyons Falls, N. Y. 
Dear Ed, 

I picked up the Fall VS the other day — the first 
copy in over t^vo years, I was quite surprised at 
the general hieh level of quality of the stories. Of 
course I would have been shocked if I had not 
found spaceopera within . . . but I was totally 
v;nprepared to find them good. 

^he only item I really disliked was THE TIMETECHS OF KRA. The story was just plain putrid; 
not at all what a lead story should be. 

Among the shorts, my favorite was Sheckley's 
HEX ON HAX. I've developed a great admiration 
for said gent in the last few years; he shows every 
sign of being one of the top finds of the decade. 
Was also pleased with Otto Binder's bit. His rate 
of current production appears to be about one-fourth 
of tlie level achieved in his more prolific years of 
a decade and more ago, but tlie overall quality far 
outshines anytliiag he did previously. 

La Viz sounds the same as it used to ... a lot 
of people taking a lot of space to say absolutely 
nothing. Much of their scribblings fnerely mimic 



: 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



93 



what has been printed in letter columns ever since 
some high muck-a-muck in the publishing world 
decided that SEX is no longer a nasty word; now 
it has merely degenerated into a dull word. 

Rather than to give anyone the wrong idea of 
my virility, let me hasten to add that it is a dull 
WORD only. The act is to all people as the individual makes it. But it can get pretty boring reading month after month that some dewey-cyed young 
fan has just passed the age of puberty. So long live 
SEX . . . but not in the columns of La Viz. 

You seem to have found a completely new slate 
of artists since the last time I was around. Vestal 
is the only name I recognize, and he by name 
only. 

His style appears to have completely changed, 
and I, as a minority of one, do not like it. 

Glad to see Freas and Ebcrle present in the ranks. 
Both are quite capable artists, although it seemed 
to me that Freas used entirely too much red on 
the cover. 

Adieu, 

Bob Hoskins 

AM ARTISrS WORLD? 

629 E. 5th St. 
N, Y, 9, N. Y. 
Dear Sir, 

Just finished reading the Winter issue of PLANET 
STORIES. I enjoyed the letters. The cover was lousy, 
A dame with pearly teeth and a brain that's set at 
ten after seven. 

If PLANET STORIES is to survive it'll have to 
go digest. You can't turn your back on the times. 
You have to go along with the crowd or get shoved 
out of the way. The pulps are dead. From monthly 
to bi-monthly to quarterly. Too many have suspended, too many have been dropped. There's nothing to surmise. You either take the plunge soon or 
join the dead. 
. It seems that the same people keep getting letters 
printed in THE VIZIGRAPH. You should encourage 
more fans to write in. It gets boring to keep reading 
the same drivel every issue. Let's have new drivel. 
So far I've enjoyed all the nonsense, but I'm afraid 
of getting bored if new blood isn't poured into 
THE VIZIGRAPH. 

Sometimes I wonder if any of the readers read 
the stories. They call themselves readers, but are 
they? They seems to enjoy the illos better than the 
stories, whenever they happen to mention the stories. 
It's usually Vestal, Finlay, Freas or Eberle. What 
aazy names! Nobody seems to give a damn for the 
poor writer who knocks himself out trying to get a 
workable story out of a sketchy plotgerm. 

I'll bet your readers think plots come easy to 
writers. They're dead wrong. They have to sw<>f* 
for it. And what happens when a story gets printec,. 
Some fan writes in: 

*'Gee! That illo by Freas for Hogglemeyer*s story 
was really somethin . What artistryl What detail! 
Freas sure knows his stuff. He should do more 
covers for you. That boy's sure got it on the ball. 
I liked the stories. TTrc ones that I read. I read 
one of them. That short-short by — I forgot his 
name, but it was okay. The iJlo for it was damn 
good. Let's have more by Vestal, He's damn good. 
He should do more covers for you." 

And so on. If the fans had their way you'd have 
all illos and no text. You could then call tlie mag 
PLANET COMICS and never have to worry about 
going digest. 

I started out praising the letters and ended up 
taking them apart* I oo enjoy then. It's just that 



I feel the artists get too much credit for doing 
nothing. 

Sincerely, 

Arnold Marmor 

Ed's Note: Who Finlay? 

MISHMASH 

550 Congress Street 
Troy, New York 
Dear Sir, 

Just finished reading the Summer issue of PLANET, and while I've been aware of your existence for 
some time, this has marked my first experience as 
a PLANET reader. And conversely my maiden attempt to gisi these tingling^ golden phrases reprinted 
in VIZIGRAPH. First off, and my tarnished plate 
will bear me out, I am not a consistent letter writer 
to any magazine. But now I'm onstage for good 
or evil. Those who do not care for excessive verbiage may duck or walk out. You probably wonder 
what I'm writing about. Don't worry — something is 
being written, isn't it? 

I've read them all since *29 and hope these remarks will stand for some time (at least until the 
next quarter moon) as the authoritative raspberry 
on this subject Degeneracy has afflicted stf magazines to such a degree lately that one has to be a 
miraculous mutant— t hybrid somewhere betR^een a 
Dragnet fan and a graduate engineer — to assimilate, 
not to mention enjoy, the mountainous and neverending assembly of mishmash that passes for sciencefiction. 

One of your letter writers has stated in effect: less 
straight adventure and more science. In preference 
to the confused and cabalistic nonsense that some 
magazines (manv magazines) publish I will take 
the reverse stand: more action and let's leave theorems as such in dusty textbooks, I'm sure tliat a 
lot of readers are bored by verbal diagrams that 
underscore and obliterate story interest. 

Some magazines specialize in these types — those 
responsible seem quadrant-happy — while another 
editor expresses a confidence that readers find stories 
of the very near future and the technological developments and problems of such eras of vastly greater 
interest. I say nonsense to this. This type of fiction 
degenerates merely to serai-Marxian-type piffle. The 
evils of technocracy can't fit into an entertainment 
pattern. I'm afraid some of these practioneers, entertaining otherwise, have become pragmatic to the 
point where dramatic interest has become extinct. 
Too much leeward — and terms and their convolutions 
have usurped dramatic license. 

Maybe I sound space-warped, but that's it. In 
.preference to tales of the quite-near future I'll take 
'Van Vogt. Now he may be advance-guard, and hard 
.5 to follow, but his ideas are veftturesome — and none 
of this dry rot socialism. It has been a dopey contention of mine that without melodrama much of 
science-fiction reads like imitation Henry James. 
And melodrama comes under various guises, refinements and flavors. Place one of Shakespeare's dramas 
in a stf setting — it may not become great sciencefiction — but still remains better than some. 

These remarks might be the caterwaul of a possibly non-scientific mind. I would like to leisurely 
add that without a logical framework a good story 
does not stand up so well — ^it will never ne a good 
story. DAWN OF THE DEMI-GODS, in its more 
clinical outline, gives this story (as an example) 
a necessarily authentic air. But theory and evaluation is not overdone. Gallun is content with speculation on functional grounds — recognising that scico


94 



PLANET STORIES 



tific ▼aliditr serves on!jr as the Iwckdrop for a spccuIttUv adventure. Sff of the past was artisticaiiy 
awkward — but almost all writers larded their stories 
witk crumbs of scientific information. It was done 
on t different scale — with less passionate interest 
in fociological issues. And that's the trouble — 
sociology and technocracy have gone on a hinge, with 
litde passion. 

Getting down to earth, let's look at some of your 
stories. It is hard sometimes to distinguish between 
the best and second-best, like in this Summer issue. 
Okay, I liked this number. Even liked Poui Anderson's tale. This is second time I've read this author; 
the guy has that important knack of establishing 
sympathy for the hero — as they say in textbooks: 
reader identification. His present story was rather 
pointless, but it was entertaining. After all, there 
cair be no story v/ithout story movement. 

Technocratic die-hards won't agree maybe. But 
then they probably never enjoyed THE PRINCESS 
AND THE GOBLIN, either. 

Gallun was your lead-off author, and it was high 
time that somebody recalled the subatomic worlds 
of GIRL IN THE GOLDEN ATOM and INTO 
THE GREEN PRISM. Ray Gaiiuns adventure surpasses these "classics" on grounds already mentioned 
above. Bi-yce Walton's novelette was long-drawn out 
but treated pretty nicely in theme of long-range 
sabotage. 

Sheckley was the most disappointing — perhaps the 
first story I've read of his that didn't pass the test. 
Stearns and McKimmey were more original — or at 
least their stories were first-class entertainment. Not 
sure if tliey wrote first-class science-fiction (Stearns 
particularly) — but their stories didn't bog down. 

My last word: stick to the adventure type, and 
to hell with the punsts. And stick to your present 
large size. Or Fll quit reading your maganrte, also. 

MicHEAL W. Elm 

ELUE AND THE PRE<PROS 

3744 Brooklyn, Apt. 101, 
Seattle 5, Washington 
Dear Editor, 

I have been reading PLANET for two whole 
issues now and I really like it. I think it's a real 
jolly magazine, and I am particularly taken with 
THE VIZIGRAPH. The letter section in ASTOUNDING was never like this! 

Fall issue stories: 

THE GEISHA MEMORY was a plea.sant little 
story, but badly titled. Why do authors try so hard 
to get striking titles? THE GEISHA MEMORY is 
a clumsy awkward title, very ill-fitting. THOSE 
LOVING HANDS would have been tlie obvious 
title for the story, and it is my belief that the most 
obvious title is usually the best. 

PHONE ME IN CENTRAL PARK was another 
phony-sounding title but in this case the story was 
crummy too. Unmitigated doom is in its very nature 
boring and there have already been too many stories 
about it. So far as I could tell the only point to 
this story was tliat the hero used a naughty word. 
I'm over twenty-one. Naughty words don't thxill me 
hardly at all. 

HEX ON HAX by Robert Sheckley was like all 
Sheckley stories: well -written, interesting, and completely unconvincing. I don't really believe that 
anybody is as stupid as the people in Sheckley stories. 
Perhaps you'll say I'm just a simple-hearted 
dreamer ? 

Two giant-insect stories in one issue are too 
maiw, and my husband wants me to ask you whether 
THE TIME-raCHS OF KRA in one diat you had 



lying around in your desk for fifteen years or so? 

I was very much interested in Mrs. Richard Leek's 
letter because I thought she summed up what most 
new fans must feel: that almost all science-fiction 
is wonderful and that the people who complaifl 
about it are just neurotically hard to please. Well, 
Mrs. Leek, here's the way it goes. When you first 
start reading science-fiction it's wonderful. Some 
people are immune, but those who aren't find something just subtly lacking in the universe until one 
day they pick up a science-fiction magazine and 
read it, and there it is! What they've been needing 
without even knowing it! The ex:tra flavor, the added 
savor— I could get pretty sentimental without half 
trying. 

But when you have been reading science-fiction 
for months and months in large quantities you begin 
to notice that some stories are quite a bit better 
than others. Some ideas are trite, some inherently 
improbable, some inconsistent. You begin to get a 
little impatient with the crummier stories, especially 
when you feel that the author could have done a 
better job if he had worked a little harder, or 
thought a little more clearly. This doesn't mean that 
you enjoy science-fiction less. You haven't really 
reached a point of diminishing returns. Actually you 
enjoy science-fiction more if possible, because you 
not only appreciate more fully the good stories, but 
also, you enjoy not enjoying the bad stories. 

Mrs. Leek, practically all the really impassioned 
fans would like to be professional science-fiction 
writers, so naturally they analyze the stories they 
read to the best of their ability. Naturally they write 
letters to the magazines that might publish them. If 
they are ever to be writers they certainly must get 
used to seeing their words in print! These fans 
have the Pre-Pro Approach. They are not being captiously carping critics. They are being Pre-Pros. 
Many of them will actually succeed in becoming 
Pros one day. Bless the kids! They'll contribute to 
our favorite literature! 

I suppose Norman J. Clarke should be commended 
for his courage in coming right out in public and 
saying that he doesn't think very highly of Sex. 
Nowadays Sex is so generally regarded as such a 
peculiarly joyous arrangement it takes real guts to 
say "Phoo" to it. However, "Phoo" to you, Norman 
J. Clarke. I say hooray for Sex. I got reasons. 

1. A sexual relationship is the most intimate 
possible relationship between two adult humans. 

2. If it weren't for Sex, and women having 
babies, women wouldn't be women, and if women 
weren't women, what would they be? A fearsome 
point. 

3. At its best. Sex is fun, and a kind of fun 
conducive to exuberance, expansiveness and tender
*ness, all very purgative emotions. 

vrray for Sex and Science-Fiction! Hooray for 
^-TANET and the Pre-Pro Approach! 
Sincerely yours, 

Elinor Busby 

P.S. Forgot to mention, I thought DOWN WENT 
McGlNTY by Fox B. Holden was quite a good 
story, and very suitably titled. 

Ed's Note: Please Elinor, do not blame Winstoti 
Marks (if you must blame an>none) for his story 
title. The poor fellow is totally innocent since his 
original tide was 1 HOSE LOVING HANDS, Mr, 
Rciss and myself consumed some few hours, not to 
mentiofii cand>' and cigareta, before we joyously 
realized we had hit upon a brilliant title to THB 
GEISHA MEMORY. Ah well, such is the Uie ol 
an editor. 



THE VIZIGRAPE 



95 



WHAT PRSCE <^LORY7 



4839 Shelby Ave. 
Jacksonville, i-ia. 
Dear Editor, 

This letter is dedicated to the memory of John 
Courtois. 

So you like your name In print, eh, John? Well, 
PLANET is certainly obliging: twelve, count 'cm, 
times. Not to mention 2 or 3 paragraphs submitted 
by Richard Hodgens, as well as your own letter, 
which took up at least a quarter of the page. 

It seems to us, and naturally this will merit 
criticism from various FANS (no fen aloud), that 
Courtois is not as stupid as his contemporaries may 
think. With this violent hate-campaign of his, he 
is rapidly becoming the talk of fandom. What price 
glory, eh? 

Considering your latest attack in the Winter ish, 
John, especially tliat piperoo about Christianity, 
you'll be infamous for many issues to come. We 
realize this lets us in for it from Courtois as well 
AS the rest of fandom, but we are prepared to repel 
all attacks (for the sake of pride, of course): 

And now to the rest of the mag: 

The stories were good, naturally. 

The editorial was good, naturally. 

The reader's column was good. Double Naturally. 

Ail this praise will help us to get our letter 
printed, naturally. 

But those rupture ads — too much fantasy in them, 
we say. General Comments: 

To Ted White: Heck, Ted, what does it matter 
what the mag looks like, beauty is only skin deep, 
or so the saying goes. And the reason for a book 
not selling can't be just for the way it looks 'cause 
there are about three detective, western, and love 
books to every sf mag and most of tliem aren't 
printed as good as PLANET. 

To John Schenck: (Ho boy, he knows the authors' 
full names.) According to Don Tuck's Handbook 
of Science Fiction and Fantasy, John Campbell and 
Ray Cummings are two different authors. 

To John Fletcher: Arc you the same John Fletcher 
who wrote TERROR FROM THE ABYSS; September '52, FANTAS'nC ADVENTURES? If so, 
have you stopped writing? If you haven't stopped 
writing, who do you write for? 

To the Readers of PLANET: Don't mess around 
with Sam Johnson. No matter what you tliink, he 
can quote you twenty diiterent reasons why you 
are wrong. 

A passing thought before we leave, a couple of 
more letter columns like thish and you'll probably 
double your circulation. 

Yours, 
John Mussells and Ralph Butcher 

ISLAM ET AL. ^ 

65 Glenridge Ave. 
St. Catharines, Ont. 
Dear Editor, 

Perusing through VIZI and her hallowed enclosure, 
I see three criticisms of a statement I emoted in PS' 
Summer number. I must confess they are perfectly 
justified, and only go to show that great and small 
und microscopic (the latter referring to the most vociferous of the above) fall alike. Beware, mortals ! This 
it what comes of striving for a somewhat majestic 
ending. In context, the statement "... as long as man 
is Christian, he will remain essentially the same; and 
and when he isn't, he will no longer be man," was 
more or less majestic, I hope, and even justifiable. 

But before proceeding^ let us examine the criticisms, 



their manner, and their merits. Jim Hannon lcK)ked at 
things the most sanely and the least violently. Personally, I admire Jim for one of his statements; while I 
am still totally unabashed in coming to the fore for 
Christianity, I think he deserves a fair amount of 
credit thus affirming his agnosticism. I do not sympathize with the latter system's "belief-in-no- true-belief," 
for purely human reasons only because it would nauseate me to be in such a world of uncertainty and 
ignorance re things spiritual as theirs. It is not the 
main reason, but the most readily asserted. 

As to my statement being '^carelessly stupid," I 
would rather prefer just plain "careless." "Jean"' 
Courtois would rather prefer just plain "stupid" but 
that's a matter of opinion. Certainly humanity docs 
not have to be Christian to be human. I would say it 
helps, if only for the main reason that humanity if 
predominantly social, and Christian philosophy £ti 
into social life in the best possible way, itressing 
duties instead of rights. Duties come before rights, 
and it is through the practice of the former that we 
are entitled to the latter. Man in his relation to othei 
men has an inherent right to iife; man in relation to 
the universe and to God, or at least to God, has oo 
such "right." It is through the Christian tradition of 
charity (which is just as binding as justice) that a 
social system has evolved, at times so perfect tliat man 
truly would not be man without it. 

Looking at my statement in context, ve can very 
flimsily maintain that the preceding paragraphs have 
all referred to future effects on political Democracy; 
that Christianity holds within it the spirit of Dennocracy, but even more, that the majority of governments 
not now satellites in Europe, and elsewhere in the 
world, which are at present democracies (with the 
exception of those, India pre-eminently, which are 
democracies now through Western Christian influence) are Christian. Thus, talkiijtg about the future of 
Democracy was in a sense talking about the future of 
Christianity. My fault was In generalizing for the 
sake of epigrammatical effect. I in no way intended 
to slight Islam or Confucianism, And especially not 
Judaism, for which I have, outside of Christianity, the 
greatest respect. 

Jim made one other interesting point in reference 
to Christianity not remaining the same. For one thing, 
it is hardly fair criticizing something for its abstract 
because of its practice. Sin exists in every age, and the 
"kept woman" of the middle ages is hardly worse 
than the "divorcee" of the present era. You might 
gather I am against both; but it seems to me the Jews 
had a few ideas of their own about adultery, too. 
Amorality seems less worse to me than immorality, 
and anarchy without the marriage bond seems less 
detestable to me than direct violatloa of it (legalized 
or not). I never yet saw where it said that tlie 
-, Supreme Court miglit rule on the Tea Command•^-ments. 

Mrs. Dennis, read above. — M to John Courtois, I 
had a half-inclination to let him fight it out with Richard Hodgens or Mike May. Courtois sounds like he's 
about to turn into a latter day Seibel, Boy, you know 
how that works? The Snarly One sits at his end of 
the typewriter, disbelieving everybody and their statements including his own, sitting hack laughing at the 
"stupid people ' all riled up ovcf the Great Himself 
when he doesn't mean a word he says, etc. That's 
what King Arthur hired jesters for.— -While the rest 
(except counter-fanatics) sit back and laugh over him 
sitting back and laughing over his iwiagined -public's 
standing-up and growling. Vicious circle. 

Besides, Mr. Courtois, in condemning Christianity 
after its futile "two thousand years^V raises the old 
Puritanical chestnuts for his "i.e.*«." Ergo, Christian


STTi-rTfrrTna-tf^ti 



96 



PLANET STORIES 



ity trying desperateJy to "deny the existence of sex." 
Vou negiected the one about chaining the Bibles, or 
forbidding playing cards and the like. Burt G>uftois 
compares us to the domesticated dog; at least that 
leaves us no doubts in which category to place him. 
Bracket^ handled her theme quite well. Letters in 
order of (1) Sam Johnson, (2) Warren Link. (3) 
lim Harmon. Nicely going poliq', lack, refusing to 
infringe upon the sacred domain of VIZI as one of 
your cumnttitors feels fit. I don't know what is hitting 
s-f or m;igazines as a whole lately, but tliere has 
definitely been an oversurplus of waste paper on the 
market recently. And no haven is as secure as a wellcstablisiied, well- weathered, well-traditioned war-horse 
like PLANET. Keep up the astute selection, formalized policy and editorial glee (on dignified occasions, 
mind) and my heaxt will be wi' ye. 

Job Keogh 

ART SN ASHTABULA 

1148 West 8lh Street 
Ashtabula, Ohio 
. Dear Vizigraph: 

I'd like to delve into this matter of art work, but 
first permit ne to make a brief listing on how the 
yarns m Winter PLANET looked to me: 

1. TKLEPORTRESS OF ALPHA C 

2. THE ULTIMATE EVE 

3. THE VANISHER 

4. THE GRAVE OF SOLON REGH 

5. IHE RECLUSE 

6. BOITOM IS UP 

7. LIFE OF A SALESMAN 

Now that that is out of the way. . . . Finlay is the 
greatest magazine illustrator of all time {in or out of 
STF). His art pieces are in a class by themselves. His 
tiny lines and circles show what infinite care go into 
txtti illusUation . . . and so k makes me sick to fmd 
tliat Freas h hailed as the successor to Finlay. 

Which brings me to Freas . . . his stuff belongs 
in' comic mags. No style. No art. Just mass-produced 
mediocrity. His toneless, amateurish pictures fill up 
every ma£;azine, and detracts considerably from the 
value of the magazine. Pity the poor author whose 
stuff is cursed with a Freas drawing. 

Emsh? Now he has it. . . now he doesn't. His 
tones change. When full of shadow.?, darn good. 
When jost lines, no thanks. 



Illustrations should create an other-world affect. 
Space men and ray gun do not acctmiplish this. Regular line sketches leave one right smack on Earth. Finlay's pictures are so distinctly other-worldish that one 
almost believes a non-Terran rendered them. 

PLANET isn't half as bad as I thought it would 
be . . . but It certainly isn't as good as the inmates 
of VIZI claim. It is the lowest in quality and quantity, 
but every Md must have its bottom and if the bottom 
is not too inferior to the remainder, why cry about it? 
Fen read vou . . . what do you care whether it is for 
laughs or out oi pity. VIZi is the one bright spot. 
The letters (unhke this one) are far more intelligent 
than those in MADGE, TWS, SS and FSM. 
Disrespectfully, 

Victor Paananen 

AN OPTI-UP 

4105 So. 35th Street, 
Omaha, Neb. 
Dear Editor: 

I've been reading stf for about two years (I stumbled across k accidentally) and have come to think 
pretty highly of it. 

On the whole it is the best type of fiction being 
published today. Very educational and entertaining, 
mamiy because it deals with all the sciences, philosophy, human reactions, etc., etc. It gives one either 
an optimistic or a pessimistic view of the future 
according to your personality. In my case it is op'tiniism. It is a pity so few people read it, but I'm sure 
it would become more popular if more persons were 
introduced to it. 

While T like stf a lot, I do not like s-fantsy. It is 
purely escape fiction based on superstitions and the 
supernatural. Also, most of the stories have a sad 
ending 

Stf may have its ups and downs, but it is here to 
stay. As for your mag, it is pretty good. Freas' covers 
are great (his buxomy dames on covers probably sell 
the mag) but the Winter cover stank. ... I like to 
sec more than just a face. 

Leigh Brackett's TELEPORTRESS OF ALPHA C 
was the top story, followed bv BOTTOM IS UP. Rest 
of the yarns were mediocre. The VIZIGRAPH reads 
like a jokebook ... it is the one feature I keenly 
enjoy. Keep up tlie good work. 
Sincerely, 

Anthony J. Pletekosky 



I 



%; 



m 
m 



SEW LEATHER 

LIKE AN EXPERT 

Here's handiest tool you'll 
ever own! Saves many times 
its small cost. The SPEEDY 
STITCHER, automatic awl, 
sews a lock-stitch like a machine. Even the most unskilled can quickly and expertly repair harness, saddles, tents, awningrs, lusrgragre, 
carpets, auto- tops, sports 
goods, boots, or anything else 
made of leather or heavy 
materials. Also used for livestock cuts. A must for leathercrafters. Get your SPEEDY 
STITCHER now for hea^^duty sewing jobs in home, 
shop, on farm. Comes ready 
for instant use, with reel of 
strong, waxed thread and 
set of diamond-pointed, 
grooved needles in handle, 
including special needle for 
shoe tapping. Easy to follow instructions will make 
you an expert on any tough 
sewing job. Save money by 
sending $1.98 casht^<rheck, 
money order for postpaid 
delivery. C.O.D. $1.93 
plus postal charges. Money 
back guarantee. 

SPORTSMAN'S POST 




Oept.FH? 

26 East 46th St. 
New York 17, N.Y. 




« Bombshell . 
Tough Spot/; 

MOW .%.f< Rugged Fighting-Man Shows You How To 
Explode Your Hidden-Powers In Self-Defense 



service or goiog in. you've got to be ready to tight rough and 
foighioryoii very life may deper^d on it in hand-to-hand combat. 
Here's where a rugged, two-fisted lighting-man tells you . . and 
"hows you . the^ecrets ol using ^-^^^ P°-",P°;»^J^MERfcAN 

the bag You get it straight from -'BaTney ^^osneck. in AMERICAN 
COMBAT JUDO . . . training-manual lor Troopers. Police Boxers 
WrrsTlers. Commandos. Rangers and Armed r°^"|. ^J^^.^^'Srn", 
He's dynamite from head to toes! Twice he was Big 10 Wrest lino 
Champ and during World War II was Personal Combat Instruct c. 
to the U. S. Coast Guard. "Barney" has devoted nios of his Inito developing, perfecting, teaching '°"<'^/ , ^^i^'l, j'f ''^^^^e, v J 
He aives YOU all the angles m easy to-follow steps Mastery l 
his ?ims and tactics will give even a little guy the blasting-power 
of a bombshell . . to knock the steam out of a bruiser twice his size 
"Barney" keeps no secrets in AMERICAN COMBAT lUDO ! He tells 
all shows all! He gives you the real lowdown on when and 

how io use%ach power^packe^d Blow. Hold. Lock Jab. Throw and 
Trip, that will make YOU the "Boss m any tough spot You W be 
thrUied and amazed when you see what YOU cc^ do with you 
bare hands . . . even if you a^e light and small. For the real secret 
of "Barney's" super-tactics is in using the other fellows muscle 
and brawn against him . . . as if it were your own ... to make 
him helpless and defenseless. 

200 Dynamic-Action. Start To-Finish photos show f^^.^'^'^^.^J'J'^how to do . . . the skillful fighting tactics that will make you 
slippery as an eel . . . fast' as lightning • -^with s<J,>^")?P°;^" 
like a panther . . . whth a K.O. punch in both hands. What s more, 
you'll learn the secrets of using every ounce of your weight 
every inch of your size ... to give you giOTt-power . . crushmg 
power . . . that will keep you on your feet when the other guy s 
down. Best of all, you'll be surpnsed how easy it >s. Your friends. 
too, will be surprised when they see your speed, skill and power. 
Send for your copy of AMERICAN COMBAT JUDO right now ! Keep 
it for 7 days, and if you don't think it's the best buck you ever 
spent, return it and get your money back But, don't wait — you 
don't know when you may have to do your stuff. 



,jg!0 BmsiNl 



^aMic


u>Mm 



FREE TfifAC COUPON ,..Mu£Tffxlau [ 



SPORTSMAN'S POST, Dept. FM "Z 
2G East 46th St.. 
New York 17. N. Y. 
Gentlemen: 

You've got something! Rush me my copy ol AMERICAN COMBAT JUDO on 7 Days' Free Trial. I have checked how I am 
ordering: 

□ Here's my $1.00 in cash money order check. 

Send postpaid. 




I 



WAKNINO! If you are a Merchant, Guard. TaxiDriver, Trucker, Former, Cashier, Gas Station Operator, 
Serviceman,. Nightworker, or in some other occupation 
where, due to location or circumstances, you are often 
alone, or go through dark, lonely places, AMERICAN 
COMBAT JUDO is a must for you. Women and girls, too, 
should know how to defend and protect themselves wh^n 
alone or unescorted. MAIL THIS COUPON NOW! 



Name . 



