TRANGE ADVENTURES ON OTHER WORLDS— 



SEPT. 



stones 



t. ym ft 






^ , BE A SUCCESS AS A 

i RADIO-TELEVISION 




TECHNICIAN 



'"«?& 



Americas Fast Growing Industry Ofi 'ersYou If |)s*^ 

1. EXTRA MONEY 
IN SPARE TIME 



EXTRA PAY IN 
ARMY, NAVY, 
I AIR FORCE 



coupon NOW Know.n 9 Rodio TV. EUctronici 
con holp you get • utro rank. • ■tro prtttigt. moro 
interfiling duty ol pay up »o Mv«f«l »im»» a 
pnvote't bot* pay You art olto pfoparod lor 
good Radio-TV |obt upon l.ov.ng ».rvic» IT'S 
SMART TO TRAIN WITH N R I NOW Moil 
Coupon TOOAY. 



I TRAINED THESE MEN 



«&/ 



PShop Specialises In Television. 
mv own shop. Am aur r > large 
manufacturers, do servicing for 
I enabled me to 
build enviable reputation." P. 
MaumeC Ohio. 

NRI Grodooto Double* Solory 
"Am with Stat.on VVK1 
transmitter operator. More 
>!ary since starting in Kadio full time. N. R.I. 
en helpful to me." A. 
HERH. New Cumberland, Pa. 

$10 Week in Spore Time. "Before 
finishing course. I earned as 
much as $10 a week in Radio 
: g in spare lime. I recommend N. R. I. to everyone who 
shows interest I 

belt Fir»l Job Through N.R I 
first job was operator with 
KDLR. obtained for me by your 
Graduate Service I>pt., I a 



St. 



g of Police Radio 
S. NOR


Many students make $5, $10 a week extra fixing neighbors' Radios 
in spare time while learning. The day you enroll I start sending 
you SPECIAL BOOKLETS to show you how to do this. Tester i 
you build with parts I send helps you service sets. All equipment J|| 
is yours to keep. 

2. GOOD PAY JOB 

Your next step is a good job installing and servicing Radio-Television sets or becoming boss of your own Radio-Television sales 
and service shop or getting a good job in a Broadcasting Station. 
Today there are over 90,000,000 home and auto Radios. 3100 
Broadcasting Stations are on the air. Aviation and Police Radio, 
Micro-Wave Relay, Two-Way Radio are all expanding, making 
more and better opportunities for servicing and communication 
technicians and FCC licensed operators. 

3. BRIGHT FUTURE 

And think of the opportunities in Television! In 1950 over 
5,000.000 Television sets were sold. By 1954 authorities estimate 
25,000,000 Television sets will be in use. Over 100 Television Stations are now operating, with experts predicting 1,000. Now is the 
time to get in line for success and a bright future in America's 
fast-growing industry. Be a Radio-Television Technician. Mail 
coupon for Lesson and Book — FREE. 





I send you many valuable 
of parts for PRACTICAL 
PERIENCE. They "bring to life" 
theory you learn in my illustrated • 
texts. As part of my Servicing: 
Course, you build a complete, 
powerful Radio Receiver, a Multitester useful in earning extra spare 
time money, AM and FM Sig 
Generator, etc. In my Communications Course, you assemble a low-power Broadcasting 
Transmitter that shows you 
how to put a station "on the 
air," a Wavemeter, etc. This and! 
other equipment I send you, isj 
yours to keep. 



I Will Train You at Home 

Read How You Practice Servicing or Communications 

RJ^ with Many Kits of Parts You Get! 



Mail Coupon For 2 Books FREE 



H!wN 



Keep your job while training at home. Hundreds I've trained are successful RADIO
TELEVISION TECHNICIANS. Most had Act Now! Send for my FREE DOLBLE 

no previous experience; many no-more than OFFER. Coupon entitles you to actual let
grammar school education. Learn Radio- son on Servicing; shows how you learn Ra
Television principles from illustrated les- dio-Television at home. You'll also rece.v» 

sons. Get PRACTICAL EXPERIENCE- my 64-page book. "How to Be a Success in 

build valuable Electronic Multitester for Radio-Television." You'll read what my 

conducting tests; also practice sen-icing Ra- graduates are doing, earning; see photos of 

dios or operating Transmitters— experiment equipment you practice with at home. Sendfc 

with circuits common to Radio and Televis- coupon in envelope or paste i 

ion. At left is just part of the equipment my J- E. SMITH 

students build with many lots of parts I fur- Dept. 1JR, National j 

nish. All equipment is yours to keep. Many Radio Institute, Wash- j 

students make $5. $10 a week extra fixing ington 9, D. C. 

neighbors' Radios in spare time. Our 38th year. 





VOL 5. NO. 2 



A FICTION HOUSE MAGAZINE • SEPTEMBER. 1951 



k>- ftaael o£ 9*Ue*locJii*up Space 

THE INCUBI OF PARALLEL X Theodore Sturgeon 4 

Gone were Earth's womankind. The Ffanx-blasted planet had been wrung of the 
young, the beautiful. Only Garth, son of Gesell the Great, knew the gateway to 
the prison-world — a world of 70-foot, man-stealing Giantesses. 

£► A StatUluuf, Alooelet 

LORD OF A THOUSAND SUNS Poul Anderson 84 

A man without a planet, this 1,000,000-year-old Daryesh. Once Lord of a Thousand 
Suns, now condemned to rove the spaceways In alien form, searching for love, 
for life, for the great lost Vwyrdda. 

&► SUoxi Storied, fro** alt tUe Qalaxtel 

SANCTUARY, OH ULLA! J. T. Macintosh 33 

Shrewd Alganet paid off the war-bemused UMans with back-firing images. His one 
wise mistake was to purchase a Ullan Woman. 

THE INHABITED MEN Margaret St. Clair 44 

Why was it. Gongo wondered, that the Earthman lying asleep In his space-freighter 
bunk whispered in so many alien voices? 

THE STAR FOOL Gordon Dickson 50 

The fate of star-colonies hung on blacked-out Tarn II and the only man within 
jet distance was ineffectual little Whaley. 

LAST NIGHT OUT Lee Gregor 57 

Tomorrow Ensign Grey and his hated, blue-furred space-mate, Canopus 43C, 
would go off to war — if tomorrow ever came. 

TYDORE'S GIFT Alfred Coppel 67 

Why should Tydore place such an inestimably valuable gift in the greed-hands of 
the Earthling whom he hated? 

THE WATCHERS Roger Dee 71 

It had taken him ten years to find them — to even convince himself that they existed. 
Now Manson was ready to kill. 

VENGEANCE ON MARS D. B. Lewis 75 

Should Hale give an ex-comrade to the torture-thirsty Lhrai, or chance the massacre of Terrestrial thousands? 

HOSPITALITY J. W. Groves 80 

E'den could not have been half so good as this green jungle planet. Yet every 
Eden has its secret Serpent . . . 
THE VIZIGRAPH Compliments and complaints from Planet's hardy readers 2 & 102 



T. T. SCOTT, Provident 



MALCOLM REISS, Genera/ Manager 



PLANET STORIE8 Published bi-monthly by Love Romances Pub. Co.. Inc. 130 W. 42 8t.. New Tort 18. N. Y. The entire contents 
of this magazine are copyrighted, 1951, by Low Romance* Publishing Co.. Inc. Reentered as second class matter August 16, 1960, at 
the Post Office at New York. N. Y.. under the act of March 3. 1879. All right* reserved. While due care la always exercised, the 
publishers will not be responsible for the return of unsolicited manuscripts. Price 26* per copy. For advertising rates address. Adrer 
ing Director. Fiction House, Inc., 130 W. 42 St., New York 18, N. Y. Printed In U. 8. A. 






Wi 



\ 



A 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



fz^msyegsgsmKP « 



We wish to announce that our friend Jerome Bixby has moved 
into lusher fields so we have arranged for Planet to be edited 
by a robot. It was with some trepidation that the managment took 
this step but finally it was decided that this would be a most interesting experiment all around. Think of the advantages! Someone on the job every moment. No coffee drinking at ten. No manuscripts late to the printer unless Mister R blows a fuse. A tremendous idea ! We were lucky that they had a robot for sale in one of 
these neighboring Army Surplus stores where they sell everything. 

So for an experimental period at least Planet will be under 
the steel-jointed wing of Mr. R. Project Robot P. S. 1 we call 
him. 

Mr. R's first job will be to pick the pic winners, July issue. 
Take over Mr. R! 

... sump . . . sump . . . sump . . . best fellow letter (i) Chad 
Ohver, (2) Ed Cox (3) Dick Ryan, 
You all likee Mister Robot, please— heh, heh, heh . . . 

BRADBURY NEEDS GROWING 

55 Taylor Ave. 
^ _, East Keansburg, N. J. 

Dear Ed, 

In your May issue William F. Nolan takes a few pot-shots at 
Ray Bradbury's critics. As one of those whose criticism of Bradbury has appeared in print may I be permitted to answer him? 

To begin with I also have no patience with those who criticize 
• Bradbury's science or lack of it. No one has visited any of the 
planets, no one can say with any exactitude what they are like, so 
we are all free to imagine what we please concerning them. It 
wouldn't make Bradbury's stories any better or worse if their 
locale were any other planet besides Mars. This type of criticism 
is mere shadow-boxing. 

I concede further that Bradbury is a conscientious craftsman. 
He has a skill with words that any other writer might well envy. 
He can use them to evoke the exact mood he wants in his 
readers. But I repeat— technical skill is not enough. Surely there i3 
no one left who believes in art for art's sake! The artist creates 
because he has something to say, but if what he says is bad, all the 
skill in the world does not make it good art. In my opinion what 
Bradbury says over and over in all his stories is bad. 

I think I make a valid criticism of Bradbury's obsession with 
death. Certainly, as William Nolan says, we are born, we live, we 
eat, we sleep and die, but birth is the capital that begins the sentence and death is the period that ends it. It is morbid to 
concentrate on death to the exclusion of all the nuances of living. 
The death-motif that is in everything Bradbury writes, no matter 
what the title, is a symbol of his belief in the basic rottenness of 
mankind. 

It is curious how the same fans who deplore the crude racist 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



prejudices of a Sigler accept those same prejudices carried to their logical conclusion. There 
is no real difference between the belief that all, 
or most, of one particular nationality, or religion, 
or race is inherently venal and the belief that all, 
or most, of mankind is. 

The greatest fallacy of all time is the supposed changelessness of human nature. Human 
nature constantly has been, is being, and will 
be changed time after time. Science-fiction 
writers, especially one with^ the technique of 
Bradbury, need to grow with the times and 
with their readers. William Nolan may revere 
Bradbury, but there are others who expect 
better from him. 

Yours truly, 

Mary Wallace Corby 



BEST SHORT-SHORT IN THE MAG 

N. 5028 Walnut 
Spokane 12, Wash. 
Dear Mud Turtle: 

While my empire falls to pieces around my 
reverberating ears, I find time to aspire from 
my waning military duties as Field Marshal of 
the Austrashien Empire Field Forces, to type. 
Type what, I don't know. I am going to give 
an account of the long seige of my fortress, 
which is fast drawing to a close. 

As I sit here in the "last ditch defense of 
my once mighty military empire, in the massive steel reinforced concrete and stone building 
that is my headquarters, I hear the terrible 
screams of my last troopers. The faithful that 
chose to die with their commander instead of 
deserting and dying one by one on the fiery, 
waterless desert to the east of here, or the 
Garth Swamps to the north and south. There is 
no retreat. 

One of the cornices containing a battery of 
rocket tubes and a dozen tubemen is hit and 
falls many rods into the rocky valley below. # 

My last five staff officers are flinging important papers into the blazing incinerator in the 
center of the floor. Six troopers, my best, are 
rigging hasty fortifications in my huge office. 
Small, powerful rocket tubes point their ugly 
muzzles down the stone steps leading to the 
courtyard, the only entrance to this place. 

I hear the enemy charging up the steps, now. 
The roaring, hissing, terrible rockets are not 
making an impression. 

The troopers suddenly stand erect, clawing at 
their throats. They fall to the platinum flagsstones, faces grey, gasping and writhing in their 
death throes. They grab their guts and retch. 
There are no visible signs of bodily injury. 
Could it be my best troops have gone off their 
rockers ? 

No. The staff officers throw in the last shred 
of document and seize the hot tube grips. They 
loose perhaps one or two salvoes of rockets, 
then fall over weapons, vomiting. 

What manner of war is this? Not a sound 
of battle, except the few rocket emplacements 
still intact. The enemy has no apparent explosives, yet in five days, my invincible armies 
of twelve millions of men have been slaughtered. 

I drop my heavy black gaberdine uniform 
coat, weighty with brass braid (we got so poor 



buying platinum flagstones we could only afford 
brass braid . . . ) and medals. I flex my arms 
and my gray silk shirt splits down the back. 
Tight shirt. 

I seize the single remaining rocket tube and 
aim it as best I can at the leader of the 
screaming rabble charging up the steps. 

But a horrible thing meets my pulsating, 
bloodshot eyeblets. I scream, fall back, and as 
I lay there, kicking my legs and cutting loose with 
the death rattle, I am haopy. 

The identity of Phil Harris' THING is no 
longer a mystery. Nossir. It is no longer a 
secret 1 I know the answer! I KNOW. IT IS NO 
DUM-DE-DUM! 

IT IS— PLANET STORIES! II! 

No wonder the guy couldn't get rid of it. No 
wonder the broken down panhandle said nix 
when it was offered to him. Is any wonder the 
guy couldn't get in the house — that his wife 
kicked him out? No. 

In time I feel a cool liquid bathing my fevered 
forehead. I open my eyes. There it is. It. The 
copy of P.S. is bending over me with its cover 
mercifully folded so I can't see it. It knows I 
would die of shock if directly exposed to it. 

It is offering itself to me. I take it, hesitantly. 
I ask it why it ruined my empire and smashed 
my dreams of conquest. 

It says there is a letter of mine inside it. I say 
it is full of tripe the Mag blushes and opens to 
page 99. It says I made Bicksbees' blue pencil 
ache, and therefore I forfeit my rights as 
Galactic Empire Chief. I agree. Why, anybody 
that would harm a molecule on that little blue 
warclub deserves the Alky treatment in the 
Snake House. 

I put a sheet of lead ten feet thick between IT 
and myself and bid it to let me see the cover. 
It does. 

I feel the harmful radiations shake my body 
even through the thick lead sheeting . . . What 
a cover! Yeah, it's an Anderson atrocity. They 
put Jap and Nazi commiters of atrocities in 
prison. Why not Anderson. His tortures have 
even a greater magnitude. 

Those facial expressions. Facial? The guy 
looks like somebody has him on the rack, burning certain tender parts of the body with cigar 
butts. The guy with the broad in hi- arms, 
that is! Of course. 

The fellow down on the bottom of the page . . . 
The all blue guy. Yeah. He looks like an editor, 
don't he. Yeah. That's what P.S. does to its editors in a number of years, take heed. 

That dame. What a frame!! Whay oh whay 
can't / go rocketing around with a babe like 
that for a collar! It can't feel any worse than a 
back pack parachute — the rocket, I mean. Of 
course. The rocket assembly. Of course. 

What! Sacrilege 1 Anderson is losing his aggies! No swords with nicked edges lousing 
up the cover. Swords not even a ro-magnon man 
would be seen with. Cro magnard, that is! 

Who . . . writes those blurbs for the stories? 
They're lousy. So lousy they're good. Just like 
a bulldog. So ugly ... - .» 

Comes voting time. I can take it. With head 
held high, I remember all my old infantry drill. 
I do perfect facings up to the post. I smoke my 
last cigaret right down to the last quarter inch 
and light another on it. I wave the subaltern 
(Continued on page 102) 




THE 

INCUBI of PARALLEL X 

by THEODORE STURGEON 

Gone were Earth's womankind. The Ffanx-blasted planet 

had been wrung of the young and beautiful. Only Garth, 

son of Gesell the Great, knew the guarded Gateway to 

the prison-world — a world of berserk, 70-foot Giantesses. 



IT'S SMALLER, Garth thought as he 
lay on his belly on top of the hill and 
looked down, through carefully parted 
branches, at Gesell Hall. The Hall had 
towered over him when he was a child, 



last year, last week, last night, in his 
dreams. And now, at the moment he had 
schooled himself for, waited for since the 
day his world had ended, he could feel no 
thrill, no triumph— only it's smaller. 



PLANET STORIES 






The great building, with its rambling 
wings, its twisted, broken power receptor 
antennae, its yellow weed-grown courts, 
lay as if in the hollow of some mighty 
neck, with a cliff and a mountain shoulder 
shrugging it into its crowded, cluttered, 
sheltered state. 

I should have known, he thought. I was 
only a kid when I left — when the Ffanx — 
He lost himself in the restimulated 
dream, the clear mental picture of his toy 
spaceship, hovering in midair on a pillar 
of koolflame fire, and his child's dream of 
other worlds, and then the shrill thunder 
of jets — real jets, Ffanx jets — which had 
brought an end to his dream and his childhood and his world. 

Garth Gesell slipped a long-fingered hand 
under his abodomen and hauled out a 
knobby root which rowelled him. It was 
there, he thought, right there by the main 
building. The Ffanx came, and I ran 
around to the front and through the double 
doors, and right in to Dad and Mooley. 
And the roof came down, and Mooley the 
cat, ran through fire and was naked and 
agonized, and then there was Dad's head 
with a splinter through the bridge of his 
nose and the end of it in a ruined eye, 
talking to me . . . talking out of a mountain of rubble, out of torture, out of gentleness and greatness, asking me to save a 
race and a world and a system , . . 

Well, he was back. Not back home, for 
this was enemy territory now. All the backslid, savage world was enemy territory for 
anyone who ventured out of his settlement, 
and Garth's adopted village was many a 
long day's march behind him. Behind him, 
too, were years of growth and training and 
of living with the nagging, driving force 
of his childhood promise to his father: I 
shall open the Gateway. 

"I shall open the Gateway." He said it 
aloud, intensely, in a deep re-dedication to 
his father's wish. And then he threw himself violently to one side. 

His watchful subsconscious, his trained 
hearing, were a shade too slow to avoid the 
blow completely. The short, stubby spear 
whacked him painfully between the shoulder-blades instead of burying itself in his 
back. He rolled back over it, snatching it 
up as he rolled, and bounced to his feet in 



a single fluid motion, striking upward with 
the spear. He got a quick impression of a 
tall, wide, golden figure which, without 
moving its feet, bent gracefully aside to 
avoid the spear's hungry point. Then there 
was a sharp blow on Garth's wrist and the 
spear went flying end over end into the 
undergrowth. 

GARTH STOOD, shaken and helpless, 
grasping his wrist, and looked up into 
the easy smile of the stranger. 

"Move fast, don't you?" said the man. 
He had a broad, clean-cut face and the 
rasping, rapid speech of a Northerner. He 
stood with his thick legs apart, the knees 
slightly flexed. Garth had the impression 
that from that stance the man could move 
instantly in any direction, including 
straight up. "But not fast enough for 
Bronze," the man added. 

Garth understood the name and the reason for it — the golden skin and yellow hair, 
the rivet-studded belt and boots were obviously a personal trade-mark. In his hand 
Bronze held a polished th rowing-stick, 
the source of the stubby, bullet-like spear. 
He slowly whacked the end of it into a 
wide, horny palm as he studied Garth. 
"What are you after?" 

Garth thumbed over his shoulder at the 
crumbling building down in the green hollow. "What do you call that place?" 
"Gesell." 

"I am Gesell too." 

Bronze's face turned into a mask. He 
stepped past Garth, dropping his throwingstick into the quiver of spears which hung 
behind his right shoulder. He stooped and 
picked up Garth's weapon and handed it 
back to him. 
Garth carefully avoided saying "Thanks." 
"I heard you say you'd open the Gateway." 

Garth nodded. 

Bronze said, "Could I help you?" and 
in that moment Garth knew he'd won. He 
suppressed a smile. "I don't need help," he 
said. 

"You might," said Bronze. 
Garth shrugged as if he didn't care. In 
reality, he cared a great deal. He had 
known for a long time that he'd have to recruit .some help, and he liked the looks of 



INCVBI OF 

those big shoulders, and of the obvious 
skill that had gone into the man's trappings 
and weapons. "What's it to you if I open 
the Gateway?" 

Bronze licked his lips. Then, with no 
attempt to conceal his motives, he said, 
"There's women in there. Thousands of 
'em. The best, the smartest on this world 
or off it." He paused. "I come here all 
the time. I sit up here and look down at 
the Hall and try to figure a way in." He 
spread his big hands. "If you were trying 
to stop me from getting to those women, I 
wanted to kill you. If you can help me get 
to them, I'm on your side. All the way. 
See?" 

"Fair enough," said Garth, and let the 
grin come through this time. "Not enough 
women around here for you?" 

"Not enough women in the whole damn 
world. Seven in Prell ton— that's my village — and a hundred men. Over the hill 
there, in Haddon Town, there's twice as 
many women and three times as many 
men." 

"So you want the Gateway open so you 
can cut lose with the whole lot of 'em ?" 
Me?" cried Bronze. "No,, man, I 
just want one. Just one woman, all for 
me. 

"I see you're a reasonable man," said 
Garth smiling. "You can go with me." 

Bronze looked as if Garth had given 
him a kingdom, and a pair of wings to 
boot. "I heard of you Gessells." 

"You heard of my father," said Garth. 

"They still tell stories about him." 

If there has to be a shrine, there's 
bound to be a legend, thought Garth. 
"Why didn't you try breaking into the 

Hall? " u » m 

"Some tried, one time or another, said 

Bronze. He cast a quick, fearful glance 

down into the hollow. "They're all dead." 

"That's what I heard." Garth studied 
Bronze thoughtfully. "Ever see it happen ?" 

"Once." Bronze swung his spear quiver off his shoulder and squatted on the 
bank, running the spears nervously through 
his thick fingers as he spoke, testing their 
points, their grooved hafts. 



PARALLEL X 7. 

the larger settlement. We were to storm 
down and back them once they'd breached 
the Hall." He paused and wet his lips. His 
amber eyes were haunted. "Two Guardians 
the Hall had, then as now — two only, 
just two against the two hundred of us. 
Flan's boys raised a yell you could hear 
over the mountain, and charged. Not a 
sign of life from the Hall until they were 
half across the court there — " he pointed 
— "and then the Guardians stepped out, 
one from the north corner, one from the 
south, by the little door. There was a 
blast of green fire the like of which words 
won't handle." Bronze covered his eyes as 
he spoke. "I saw it stretch between the 
two Guardians for a half second, and then 
I was dazzle-blinded. 

"When I could see again my brave boys 
were gone, leaving me writhing my burned 
eyes into the grass here. And down there in 
the court lay Flan and thirty-eight of his 
boys, smoking and black." 



H 



E PAUSED while the terrifying picture died behind his eyes. "Afterward," he said, "a party of us went over to 
Haddon's Town to see if so many dead 
hadn't left a widow for us, but they had the 
place well stockaded.'' 

Garth made no comment. "Tell me what 
you know of the Guardians." 

"I'll tell you little enough," said Bronze. 
"But if I said what I'd heard I'd be talking a month or more. All you ever see of 
them is that pointed cowl and the long 
habit that goes to the ground. Some say 
they're men and women — or were. Some 
say they're monsters from the other side 
of the Gateway." 

"We'll soon see," said Garth. 

"You're a Gesell," said Bronze, his voice 
hoarse with suppressed excitement. "You 
can just walk in like a guest" 

"I can not," said Garth shortly. "I hate 
to disappoint you, Bronze, but a lot of 
water has gone over the dam since the 
Ffanx conquered us. My father built the 
Gateway twenty years ago, thinking that 
it would guard those women for the 
month or so it took to smash the Ffanx. 



me and Rob O'Bennet and his fight- They killed my father and closed the GateW boy? Flan of Haddon's Town and his way. And by then the world was a ruin, 
men got the main assault because they have 



with the women gone and the men fighting 



8 



PLANET STORIES 






over the handful who were left, and the 
secret of the Gateway locked up in the 
brain of an eight-year-old child. And now 
the Hall is a shrine, and the guards are 
Guardians, science is magic and each part 
of the world fights every other part." 

"What are you saying? You can't just 
walk in, and you a Gesell ?" 

"Everything's changed/' said Garth patiently. "I've listened to every traveler's 
tale, read every record — there are damned 
few enough — and it all comes to the one 
stupidity : I am the only man alive who can 
open the Gateway, and those dedicated 
fools down there will kill me on sight if I 
go near it" 

"How do I know you're a Gesell ?" said 
Bronze, in re-awakened suspicion. 

"You don't," said Garth. Without looking up or turning, he made one sudden, 
brief movement. The tube seemed to leap 
from his right holster into his hand. 
"Look, Bronze." 

Bronze's face went stony. "What is it?" 
What is that thing?" 

Garth pressed the stud on the side of 
the tube. A beam of white light leaped from 
the tube to bathe Bronze's terrified face. 
The big man cried out, and then sat frozen, eyes shut in terror. Garth turned it off 
and dropped it back into the holster. "My 
name is Gesell," he said conversationally, 
"but I don't give a hub-forted damn if you 
believe it or not." 

"What was it? What did it do? That 
light, that white light—" 

"Just light," said Garth, and laughed. 
He slapped the big man on his meaty 
shoulder. "Stop your chattering." 

"You shouldn't 'a done that," said 
Bronze hoarsely. "You didn't have to scare 
me like that, Gesell. I said I'd help. I wasn't 
backing out. I believe you." 

"Good. Now shut up and let me figure 
this out" 

THEY STOOD at the crest of a wooded slope that fell away almost vertically to the clearing below. The Hall stood 
in the center of the clearing, and beyond 
it was another rise — the mountain shoulder itself, not quite as high as the elevation 
on which they hid. The weed-grown court 
offered no shelter except a couple of giant 



trees, one of which towered over the central building. One thick branch held a 
niighty, protective arm over the low roof. 
Garth stared at it and at the opposite slope. 

"Bronze!" 

Bronze was by him, almost crowding 
him in his eagerness to serve. "What, Gesell?" 

"Just how good are you with that womera of yours?" 

"Good enough, Gesell. I once killed a 
deer at ninety yards." 

"How many?" 

"Seventy," said Bronze, finding himself 
fixed by Garth's deep eyes. He gulped and 
grinned. 

"It's damn near a hundred and fifty over 
to the top of the bluff — see it there, the 
sheer rock straight over the Hall?" 

"Uh-huh. I could peg a spear over there. 
Wouldn't hit too hard, though. " 

"Could you put it exactly there?" 

Confidently Bronze made a ring of his 
thumb and forefinger. "I could put it 
through that." 

"Show me." 

Bronze selected a spear and fitted the 
butt of it to the cup-shaped hook in the 
end of his throwing* stick. He tested the 
ground under his feet, glanced overhead 
to check for overhanging brush, and moved 
a little to the left. For a moment he stood 
poised, fixing the opposite cliff with a 
hypnotic eye. Then he moved. His arm 
was a blur, and the stick itself was invisible. It all but crackled as it cleft the 
air. 

For a brief moment Garth lost sight of 
the spear altogether. Then his quick eye 
caught its flicker just before it stopped, 
deep-buried in a tree-trunk at the lip of 
the rock cliff. He held his breath, and in 
a second or so he heard, through the warm 
afternoon air, the soft, solid thunk of its 
impact. 

Incredible ! He thought He said, boredly, "Not too bad. J'd hate to depend on 
that thing if there was any wind, though." 

Garth threw off his belt. He stood up 
in a single garment, a skin-tight shortsand-tunic combination of midnight blue, 
with a narrow white stripe all the way 
around under his armpits and another just 
below his waistline. Raising his arms, he 



INCVB1 OF PARALLEL X 



felt along this line and drew out a small 
ring, which he slid along the stripe. It 
was, judging by the wide eye« and slack 
mouth, Bronze's first view of a slide fastener. 

Garth repeated the movement with a 
second ring on the lower stripe, and drew 
off the center portion of his tunic over 
hi9 head — a single, resilient tube of soft, 
thin fabric. He ran its edge through his 
fingers, stopped, and carefully picked out 
a thread, which he worked free. Ignoring 
the astounded Bronze, he began to unravel the material. 

"What you doing ?" 

Garth said, "Make yourself useful. I 
want you to sweep the ground cleanreally clean — some place where it's solid. 
I want an area six by six feet without so 
much as a straw on it, with clear air above 
it. Get to it." 

Willing and mystified, Bronze did as he 
was told. By the time Garth had thirty 
feet of thread cleared, the area was ready 
and Bronze, panting, was back at Garth's 
side. Garth took pity on him — he was 
obviously about to burst with curiosity. 
He held up the thread. "Break off a piece 
for me, Bronze boy." 

Bronze took the end of the thread, wrapped it around his fists, and— "Wait!" 
laughed Garth. 

He picked up two heavy pieces of treebranch, unwound the thread from the big 
unresisting fists, and took a couple of turns 
of the thread around each piece of wood, 
leaving about six inches of thread between 
them. "Now try it," he said. "Grip the 
wood, not the thread." 

Puzzled, Bronze grasped the two pieces 
of wood and pulled. The thread went taut 
with a musical twang which rose in pitch 
as Bronze pulled. A look of utter amazement crossed his broad face. He relaxed, 
turned the two pieces of wood so that 
he wound up more thread and had only 
two inches between them. He set his back 
against a tree, knotted his jaw, and, with 
his great hands close to his chest, began 
to pull. His triceps swelled until the 
stretched skin shone. His body moved 
visibly away from the tree that he leaned 
against as his scapular muscles bunched 
and crawled. 



There was a muffled crackling from his 
shoulders, and Garth stepped forward in 
alarm. Then one of the pieces of wood 
gave. The thread sliced through it like a 
scythe through a stand of wheat, and 
Bronze stood gasping, staring foolishly at 
the cleancut stub of branch in his hand. 
The thread fell away, unstretched, unbroken. 

"I gave you the wood," Garth grinned, 
"because it would've sliced through your 
paws." 

"What Ffanx stuff is that?" gasped 
Bronze. 

"That isn't Ffanx stuff; it's strictly human, molecularly condensed fibre spun under massive ion bombardment, if that 
makes any never mind to you. It has linear 
cohesion in the order of six tons test and 
eight and a half tons breaking strain. And 
it has no rotary cohesion at all." 

"Yeah," said Bronze, "but what is it?" 

"It's what you're going to tie to a 
spear and fire over the gulch for me. Now 
let's get busy and flake it out here. There's 
four hundred yards of it in this shirt. Half 
that should be enough. We'll give it a little 
more." 

FOR TWO HOURS, as the afternoon 
shadows grew long, they worked, laying the thread meticulously in a series of 
^mall coils. Each turn of each coil lay flat 
and obedient. Slowly the coils began to carpet the cleared area. They talked little, 
except toward the end of the laborious job. 
Finally— "That should do it," Garth said. 

Bronze straightened up and punched himself in his aching kidneys. "I'm hungry." 

"Feed us," said Garth. 

Bronze took up his quiver and throwingstick without a word, and glided away 
through the underbrush. Within a quarter 
of an hour he was back, carrying two large 
rabbits. One had a ragged hole through 
the head just behind the eyes, and the 
other was still impaled through the ribcage and heart by one of the stubby spears. 
Bronze squatted down, pulled out a worn 
knife, and with the swift casualness of 
long practice, gutted and skinned one of 
the animals and handed the warm and 
dripping quarters to Garth. 

"Now listen to me," Garth said with his 



10 



PLANET 






mouth full. "I don't know for sure who 
those Guardians are. But this I do know 
for sure — that green fire you saw doesn't 
come from them. It comes from under the 
ground — an energy field activated by 
something they carry under those long 
robes . . . Why do I bother to explain anything to you?" 

"I'm listening," grunted Bronze, spitting 
out a piece of gristle. 

"All right. Now get this, it takes two 
Guardians, both on the line of those underground cables, to set off that fire. But 
it takes two of them to do it. Do you 
understand? If I can get one of them out 
of the way, you can jump the other one 
without any danger." 

"Uh ?" Bronze wiped rabbit blood off his 
chin. 

"Are you following this? I'm going to 
leave you in a minute, and I want to know 
I can depend on you. Are you going to 
take my word for it — that you can tackle 
a Guardian without danger of getting 
burned?" 

Bronze looked at him. "You said I 
could, didn't you?" he asked simply. 

Garth let the grin come through again. 
"I think we're going to make it, Bronze 
boy," he said. "Now here's the plan." 

THE NIGHT was cool and still, but 
Garth, naked except for his belt, his 
boots, and the briefest of shorts — which 
were all that was left of his tunic — was 
warm and slick with sweat as he completed 
the long, silent climb to the top of the bluff. 
He filled and emptied his lungs in deep, 
open- throated gasps as he felt his way 
along the lip of the sheer rock wall of the 
cliff. He found the bald spot and the tree 
into which Bronze had sunk his test spear 
that afternoon. 

He stepped behind the tree in which 
Bronze's spear still stuck, and, reaching 
around it with his flashlight in his hand, 
sent a quick, white beam up the trunk. 

Then he waited. 

There was a crescent moon in the sky, 
a chunky moon that urgently wanted to be 
gibbous. Somewhere a katydid cried 
for the grease like the proverbial squeaky 
wheel, and a tree-toad plucked away at its 
piano-wire heartstrings. Over the brink 



STORIES 

was blackness — eighty feet or better, 
straight down — and then, away from the 
cliff's shadow, a hundred yards from the 
base of the bluff, stood the arched shadow 
of the great tree with its limb stretched 
out over the main building like a giant 
frozen in a gesture of benison. 

Where was Bronze? The opposite hill 
was a featureless mass of shadow and shifting moonlight. Was he there, sighting carefully on the place where he had seen 
Garth's gleam of light? Or was he gone, 
freed from the spell of wonderment and 
awe that Garth had put on him, strolling 
back toward his village to spend tonight 
and the rest of his muscle-bound life with 
idle speculation about the time he almost 
helped to open the Gateway? 

The katydid and the treefrog suddenly 
were more than Garth could bear. With a 
snort of impatience he stepped from behind the tree. Immediately there was a 
whining whisper that crescendoed closer — 
air fanned his nose and eyes, and something slammed into the tree trunk. He went 
to his knees, staring up into blackness and 
then, in spite of himself, laughed. "I hope 
I've used up all my dumbness for tonight," 
he thought ruefully. He had known the 
impossibility of Bronze's hitting the tree 
again, especially in the dark — and had almost stepped out of the shelter of the 
tree-trunk in time to catch the spear with 
his silly head. 

The spear hadn't stuck in the tree, for 
he had cautioned Bronze to bury the point 
in a piece of heartwood; he'd never have 
been able to pull it out of the tree, and, 
to do what he had to do, the thread-end 
must be free. 

He fumbled about for the spear and 
found it. From his belt-pouch he drew a 
pair of molded gloves, thin, light, impenetrable, made of the same condensed matter as his tunic. Slipping them on, he picked up the spear and purely by touch found 
the thread. He brought it in hand over 
hand, yards of it, until suddenly it jerked 
sharply, twice, in his grip. He grinned. 
That was Bronze's "Good luck!" 

Taking a bight of the thread, he walked 
once around the tree, thrust the loop of 
the bight under the main part where it 
would be pinched between that part and the 



INCUBI OF PARALLEL X 



tree-trunk. A slight tug on the free end 
would cast the line adrift. 

He took a deep breath and walked to 
the cliff-edge. Everything depended on his 
estimates of the distances involved. 

This is it, he thought. Carefully he took 
the thread at the point his measurements 
had brought him to, and tied it to the back 
of his belt. He knelt and swept a space on 
the ground, and carefully recoiled the line 
so it would flake away freely. Then lie 
went to the edge of the cliff, reached up 
over his head, and got his gloved hands 
on the anchored part of the line, where it 
passed tautly from tree to tree across the 
hollow. He watched then, and tried not 
to think. 

The buildings were dark, except for 
a dim orange light in the main Hall. He 
could see a flickering, an occasional movement as if restless figures inside passed 
and re-passed the light. 

Wlvxt the hell ivas Bronze doing over 
there? Had he forgotten what he was supposed to do next ? The big, stupid, slow . . . 

From the other side of the canyon came 
a titanic crashing as a boulder went bounding down the slope, and with it a bloodchilling yell that echoed and re-echoed and 
faded repetitively off into the distance. It 
sounded like a score of lost souls calling 
and answering from strategic points up 
and down both sides of the valley. 

What a set of pipes! Garth thought, and 
stepped off the cliff. 

HE COULD FEEL the rod-hard, 
stretched thread humming in his 
hands as the gentle night wind stroked it. 
He hung for a moment, then put one hand 
before the other. And again. And again. 
His body began to swing forward and back 
as he went along the line. He swore under 
his breath and checked the movement by 
a swift, synchronized run-and-stop, runand-stop with his hands. 

His shoulders began to ache and he tried 
to forget it. He hung by one hand for a 
moment and allowed himself the luxury of 
bringing the other arm down, flexing the 
fingers. Hand over hand over hand over 
hand . . . 

He put his hands together and crossed 
the wrists, so that his body turned to look 



11 



back the way he had come. The shadowed 
cliff he had left was already distant, one 
with the hill-blackness that surrounded 
the buildings. He went on. Before and below him, the great tree came closer and 
closer and closer as he inched along. Too 
close ? 

He swung along, arms all but numb, 
shoulders an agony, hands reduced to two 
stiffly disobedient hooks that grasped, released, grasped, released, with greater and 
greater reluctance. 

There was some sort of commotion by 
the building. Someone called out. A Guardian? At that moment he couldn't have 
defined a Guardian, and wouldn't have 
cared. The universe was one hand after 
another. 

It came! He had watched for it each 
second, and when it came it took him 
totally by surprise. There was the faintest 
of tugs at his belt as the free end of the 
line drew tight, and then, far behind him, 
the thread whipped away from the tree he 
had left. 

He dropped like a nighthawk. 

The ground struck his knee a single, 
stunning blow and then he was hurtling 
upward toward the eaves of the Hall. He 
reached the top of his swing and all the 
strain was suddenly gone from his armsFor a single, terrifying split-second he was 
afraid his cramped hands would not let 
go. Then he was free of the line. He concentrated his whole being into keeping his 
balance, flexing his knees. 

The dark roof came up and took him. 
He gathered the shock in his thigh-muscles, turned one shoulder down and rolled. 

Then for a long, luxurious minute he 
lay still and rested. 

AFTER BRONZE shoved the boulder 
over the edge and roared his terrible 
challenge into the night, he scuttled like a 
frightened rabbit through the dark tunnel 
of a trail that angled down the slope. "Crazy, crazy," he muttered. It couldn't work, 
that crazy plan of Gesell's. It was marvelous, heroic, brilliant, but — crazy. And 
he, Bronze, was crazy too, to think of helping. He'd go home. He'd had enough — 
enough to tell all Prellton about for the 
rest of his life. 



12 



PLANET STORIES 



But in spite of^is thoughts, his legs 
carried him cautiously down the slope to 
the deadly courtyard of Gesell Hall. 

"Line/' said a low voice. 

It was the cowled figure of a Guardian, 
waiting quietly in the moonlight to unleash 
hot green death. 

"Now I'm going home/' thought 
Bronze, quite coldly and rationally. 

He stayed where he was. 

Then he saw the other Guardian, moving as if on a track — slowly, steadily, with 
no hint of a leg-motion — just an inhuman 
glide. Snails move like that. Centipedes. 
The stories of monsters from the other 
side of the Gateway suddenly flooded into 
his mind. 

Bronze saw something else. If the second Guardian moved farther out, away 
from the Hall, he, Bronze, would be in a 
straight line between the two of them — 

There was an abrupt, intense feeling in 
his stomach, as if his dinner rabbit had 
come to life again and had hopped. He 
rose to his feet. His mouth was dry. 

The second Guardian was now out of 
sight, still moving toward that point which 
would bracket Bronze in verdant flame. 

"Line," said the second voice, and then 
came the first of the two greatest shocks 
of Bronze's life. 

With a glare of bright white light, a 
face appeared in midair — twenty feet off 
the ground — in front of the blank wall of 
the building. 

"Guardian !" sang a deep, organlike 
voice. 

The face was Garth Gesell's. 

"Gesell !" gasped a Guardian. Sobbing, 
he ran toward the light. The other followed 
slowly. Bronze could begin to see, in the 
nimbus of light from the radiant face, GeselFs whole body. It hung in the air, perhaps a third of the way down the wall, 
with one arm thrust forward. The other 
hand seemed to be behind his back. 

"Stop!" intoned the voice. "Remove 
your habits, Guardians, for I have returned !" 

The Guardian from the left faltered, 
stopped. He stripped off his robe and cast 
it aside. The other followed suit. The two 
naked figures moved toward the building, 
like sleepwalkers, And as they did so, the 



shining face slid slowly and majestically to 
the ground. The Guardians fell to their 
knees and bowed to the earth at his feet. 
The light disappeared. 

"Bronze?" Garth spoke quietly, but the 
syllable snapped Bronze out of his awed 
revery. He leapt to his feet and sprinted 
across the wide court, to receive his second 
mighty shock. 

Garth stood erect against the wall, and 
Bronze realized the stiffness of utter exhaustion in his stance. "Watch 'em," Garth 
whispered, and turned his flashlight on the 
two reverent figures. 

One of them was a girl. 

The long tethered wild horses reared up 
in Bronze's brain. There was an explosion 
of desire that jolted him to the marrow. 
He bent quickly and took her arm. "Stand 
up, you." 

She did. 

She looked at him from wide, untroubled 
eyes. She made no attempt to cover herself or to cower. She met his gaze, and 
simply waited. 

There were two kinds of women on 
earth — the Escaped, and the Returned. 
The Escaped had been passed over by the 
hunting Ffanx — by chance, by luck, by 
sheer animal cunning on the part of the 
women or the men who hid them. They 
had been fair game for the Ffanx while 
the Ffanx ruled Earth, and they were fair 
game for any of the hundred-odd men who 
were left to compete for each of them. 

And of the earth's few women, perhaps 
one in a thousand was Returned. Almost 
invariably the Ffanx had slaughtered the 
women. But once in a long, long while 
they let the woman go. Why, no human 
ever understood. Perhaps it was capaciousness, perhaps it was done for experimentation. But in the rough ethic of a 
heterogeneous, dark-age society — all that 
was left of Earth culture after the Ffanx 
had conquered and then were destroyed in 
their turn — these women were sacrosanct. 
They had paid. Their very existence on 
the planet was a narrative and a dirge ; 
they were the walking sorrow of earth. 
And they were not to be touched. It was 
all that could be done for their loss and 
their loneliness. They knew it, and they 



INCVBI OF 

walked without fear. 

The wild horses within Bronze settled 
They gentled, quieted, as if some firm, 
known hand had touched their flaring nostrils. 

"Sister," he said, "I'm sorry/' 

She barely inclined her head. She turned 
then to Garth and said in a low voice, 
"What can we do for the master?" 

Garth sighed. "I have come a long way. 
My friend and I need rest. Guard as you 
always have, and in the morning there will 
be a new day, and nothing will ever be 
the same again for any of us." 

The girl touched the shoulder of the 
other Guardian. "Come." 

He rose. He was a slender, dark-browed 
youth with the wild frightened eyes of a 
chipmunk. He had white flesh and sticklike arms, and a very great dignity. "Master," he said to Garth. In his tone was 
subservience, but an infinitely proud sense 
of service rather than a humble one. He 
and the girl went into the building. 

"Sexless," said Bronze. It was an identification only, there was no scorn. 
Garth said, "I'm tired." 
"You sleep. I'll watch," said Bronze. 
"You can sleep too," said Garth. "We're 
in, Bronze. Really in." 



, RONZE . . ." 
The big man was on his feet, weap


"B 

ons in hand, before Gesell's voice had ceased. He cast about the room, saw no immediate menace, and crossed to the bed. 
"You all right?" 

Garth stretched luxuriously. "Never better, though I feel as if my shoulder- joints 
needed oiling . . . what's for breakfast?" 

Bronze went to the door and flung it 
open, filling his mightly lungs to shout. 
He didn't. The girl was standing there, 
waiting. 

Garth saw her. "Come in — Good Lord, 
girl, you must be freezing!" 

"I haven't had your permission . . ." 9he 
said gravely. 

"Go diess. And tell the other Guardian 
to put on some clothes. What's your 
name ?" 

"Viki." 

"What's his name — that other Guardian?" 



PARALLEL X 13 

"Daw, Master. 

"Good. My name's not Master. It's 
Garth, or Gesell, whichever suits you. This 
is Bronze. Is there anything to eat?" 
"Yes, Garth Gesell." 
Garth pursed his lips. Her intonation 
of his name was infinitely more adoring, 
even, than her "Master." He said, "We'll 
be out in a minute. I want you to eat with 
us, do you understand ? You and the other, 
both." 

"A great honor, Garth Gesell." She 
smiled, and it did wonders for the finedrawn austerity of her face. 

She waited a moment, and when Garth 
apparently had nothing more to say, she 
left. She backed to the door. 

Breakfast was an acutely uncomfortable 
affair. They ate at a small square table in 
the hall under the portrait of the first 
Gesell. It might have been a picture of 
Garth five or ten years older. They had 
always looked alike. 

Viki, now dressed in the conventional 
short flowing tunic fastened only by a 
wide belt, sat demure and quiet, speaking 
only when spoken to, and screening her 
constant gaze at Garth with her long 
lashes. Daw stared straight ahead out of 
round, permanently astonished eyes, and 
tried hard, apparently, to avoid looking directly at Gesell. Bronze grinned broadly 
at Garth's discomfiture and ignored the 
prim looks of the two Guardians. 

Garth waited until the meal was finished, 
and then put his palms down on the table. 
"We have work to do." 

They turned to him so raptly and obediently that for a moment he lost his train 
of thought. Bronze looked as if he was 
about to laugh. Garth shot him a venomous look and said to the Guardians, "But 
I want you to talk first. I've been away a 
long time. I want the history of this place 
as you know it, especially where it concerns the Gateway." 

Viki and Daw looked at one another. 
Garth said, "Come on, come on — " 

Daw composed himself, folded his hands 
on the edge of the table, and cast his eyes 
down. "In the year of the Ffanx,*' he intoned, "on the meadows of Hack and Sack, 
there appeared a blue light shaped like a 
great arched doorway, filled with a flicker


14 



PLACET STORIES 






ing mist." 

"We trust in Gesell," muttered Viki. 
"And there came from this archway a 
creature as long as a hand and as heavy 
as four times its mass in lead castings. 
It sniffed at the air, and it took up some 
soil, and it lifted a box which it held to 
its head, and it smelled out our women. 
It called, then; and out of the archway 
came more of its kind in the hundreds of 
thousands, wearing strange trappings and 
bringing machines to work evil. And these 
were the Ffanx." 

"We trust in Gesell," murmured the 
girl. 

Garth opened his mouth to speak, and 
closed it abruptly. He had a quick ear, 
and he had rapidly caught the cadences of 
Daw's voice. No one speaks like that naturally. This wasn't a report, it was a 
singsong ritual. 

"At first the world wondered, at first 
the world laughed at the Ffanx. For the 
Ffanx were so tiny, and their ships were 
like toys, and they spread over Earth without harming a soul, and submitted to capture and acted like comical dolls. They 
covered the planet and when they were 
ready — they struck." 

He put his head down on his folded 
hands as he spoke the last two words. Viki 
droned, "We trust in Gesell." 

Daw straightened up and now his voice 
deepened. His eyes were wide, and fixed 
on nothing in the room. As he spoke, Garth 
found himself fascinated by the almost imperceptible motion of Bronze's shaggy 
head as it nodded in time to the dactylic 
beat of Daw's speech. 

"They struck at our women. They found 
them in homes and in caves and in 
churches: killed them by millions. Their 
weapons were hammers of force from the 
sky, inaudible sounds that drove strong 
men to kill their own daughters and 
slaughter themselves. And then the foul 
Ffanx would sweep in their bodies. 

"And sometimes they herded them, 
flashing about in their sleek little airships 
smashing the men and propelling the footweary women along to great pens in the 
open. They walled them about with their 
fences of force and destroyed all attacks 
from outside, and then at their leisure they 



killed all our females, this one today and 
then that one, and two or two thousand 
tomorrow. And Earth saw its blackest, its 
sorriest day . . . 

"Earth was united in madness." 
"We trust in Gesell." 
"Gesell was a giant who lived on a hill, 
a worker of wonders who turned from his 
works to the solving of problems for 
Earth. Of all men on Earth, he alone learn- ' 
ed the nature of Ffanx and the land whence 
they came and the spell he could cast to 
destroy them. It was he who devised a 
retreat for the women that not even Ffanx 
could detect. He set up a Gateway and 
passed women through it — women with 
beauty and women with mind, and any and 
all of the women with child who could come 
to the Gateway. 

"And the Earth had turned savage, and 
men lost their reason and stormed up the 
hill of Gesell, and they tried to pass into 
the gateway and get to the women. With 
some it was hunger, with some it was 
cowardice. So Gesell, all unwilling, constructed defenses, appointed the Guardians, 
gave instructions to kill all who came in 
attack, be they human or Ffanx." 
"We trust in Gesell." 
"And this is the Word of Gesell : 
" 'Guard the Gateway with your lives. 
Make no attempt to open it, or the Ffanx 
will find it and take the treasure it hides. 
When the time is right, the women will 
open the Gateway themselves — or I or 
another Gesell will open it from this side. 
But guard it well.' 

"That is the Word of Gesell, and tfie 
end of his Word ; and he alone knows if 
there was to be more ; for that was the end 
of Gesell. The Ffanx came and killed him, 
but dying, he cast a great spell and they 
died. They died on two worlds and the 
menace is done with. And Earth is in darkness and waits for Gesell to return, and 
the Gateway to open. And meanwhile the 
Word of Gesell is the hope of the world : 
"Guard the Gateway." 
Daw's voice died away. Bronze sat as 
if mesmerized. Viki's lips moved silently 
in the response. 

Garth slapped his hand down suddenly, 
shockingly. "This is going to hurt," he 
gritted. "Daw, where did that— that red


INCVBI OF PARALLEL X 



tation come from? Where did it start ?" 

"It's the Word of Gesell," said Daw, 
wonderingly. "Everybody — " 

"We repeat it morning and night," Viki 
interposed, "to strengthen us in our duty." 

"But whose phrases are they? Who 
made it up?" 

"Garth Gesell, you must know ... or 
perhaps you are testing us." 

"Will you answer the question?" 

"I learned it from Daw," said Viki. 

"I learned it from Soames, who had it 
from Elbert and Vesta, who were taught 
by Gesell himself." 

Garth closed his eyes. "Elbert . . . Holy 
smoke ! He was the . . ." He stopped himself in time. He remembered Elbert — a 
dreamy scholar with whom his father used 
to have long and delightful philosophical 
discussions, and who, at other times, 
pushed a broom around the laboratories. 
Garth began to see the growth of this 
myth, born in the poetic mind of a misfit. 

He looked into their rapt faces. "Pm going to tell you the same story that you 
told me," he said flatly, "but without the 
mumbo- jumbo. 

"Gesell was my father. He was a great 
man and a good one. He was not nine feet 
tall, Bronze. And — " he turned to the 
Guardians — "he was not a 'worker' of 
spells. 

"Now to your legend. 'The meadows of 
Hack and Sack* are swampland just south 
of what used to be, before the Ffanx 
came, the greatest city on Earth. The real 
name is Hackensack. The blue arch wasn't 
magic, it was science — it was the same 
thing as the Gateway itself, though of a 
slightly different kind. 

"The Ffanx were small and heavy because they came from an area where molecular structure is far more compressed than 
it is here. And they struck at our women 
for a good reason. It wasn't viciousness 
and it wasn't for sport. It was, to them, a 
vital necessity. And that necessity made it 
useless to think of driving them off, defeating them. They had to be destroyed, 
not defeated. I won't go into the deeper 
details of inter-dimensional chemistry. But 
I want you to know exactly what the 
Ffanx were after — you'll understand 
them a lot better. 



15 



"There is no great difference, physically, 
between men and women. I mean, bone 
structure, metabolism, heart and lung and 
muscular function are different in quality 
but not in kind. But there is one thing 
that women produce that men do not. It's 
a complex protein substance called extradiol. One of its parts is called extradiol 
beta-prime, and is the only way in which 
human extradiol differs from that of other 
female animals. With it, they're women. 
Without it, they're nothing . . . cold, sexless . . . ruined. 

"So it was this substance that the Ffanx 
were after. You've heard the tales of what 
they wanted. Women. But they didn't want 
them as women. They were after extradiol 
best reason on Earth or off it : 

"It made them immortal!" 

BRONZE'S JAW dropped. Viki continued to gaze raptly at Garth. Daw's 
heavy brows were drawn together in an 
expression that looked more like fear and 
worry than perplexity. 

"Think about that for a minute. Think 
of what would happen if we of Earth 
found a species of animal which carried a 
substance which would do that for us . . . 
we'd hunt it ruthlessly and mercilessly." 

"Wait a minute," Bronze said. "You 
mean that these Ffanx couldn't die from 
a spear-wound?" 

"Lord, no — they weren't immortal in 
that sense. Just from old age which, in any 
species, is a progressive condition caused 
by disfunction of various parts — particularly connective tissue. A complicated extract containing human extradiol beta 
would restore the connective tissues of the 
Ffanx and keep them healthy for thirty 
of our years or more. Then another shot 
would keep 'em that way, and so on." 

"Just where is the Ffanx world?" asked 
Daw, and then colored violently as if embarrassed by the sound of his own voice. 

"That's a little difficult to explain,'' said 
Garth carefully. "Look, suppose that door 
— " he pointed to an interior doorway — 
"opened into more than one room. You can 
almost imagine it; say you'd have to go 
through the door from an acute angle to 
get into the first room, go straight through 
to get into a second. You might call the 



16 



PLANET STORIES 



second world Parallel X. 

'The Gateway and the blue arch at 
Hackensack were doorways between 
worlds — between universes. These universes exist at the same time in the same 
space — but at different vibratory rates . . . 
I don't expect you to understand it, no one 
really does. The theory's an old one. No 
one gave it much consideration until the 
Ffanx got here. ,, 

Bronze asked, "If it's a doorway, like 
you say, why didn't the Ffanx find the way 
in to the world where the women went?" 

Garth smiled. "Remember the doorway 
there? Suppose you were quite familiar 
with the way that door opened to one of 
two rooms- Then supposing I came along 
and pointed out that instead of going 
straight in or turning left, you could go 
up and find yourself in still a third room. 
It's like that. The Ffanx just never 
thought of going into their inter-dimensional arch in the particular direction that 
would wind them up in the Gateway world. 

"There was always the possibility that 
the Ffanx might think of it, though, and 
you can bet that the women were warned 
and were ready to fight. But to get back 
to the story — I have to tell it all to you so 
you can undersand what we're going to 
do next ; and I will have you understand 
it, because I don't want help from people 
who just take orders, I want help from 
people who think. 

"All right, let's go on. I'm trying to 
give you an idea of what my father was 
— a man who worked and worried and 
made mistakes and was happy and frightened and brave and all the other things 
you are. 

"He was a scientist, a specialist in molecular structure. In the early days of the 
invasion he got hold of a couple of Ffanx. 
You'll remember that they weren't attacking then. My Dad was the only man who 
was ever able to communicate with them, 
and he did it without their realizing what 
he was doing. A specialist in condensed 
matter can produce a lot of weird effects. 
One of the things he found out was that 
thought itself is a vibration very similar 
to the brainwaves of a Ffanx-type mind; 
that is, the currents that produced thought 
in their brains could be changed directly 



into waves his instruments could detect 
and translate. He got no details, but toe 
did get some broad concepts. One of them 
was that the blue arch was the only exit 
that they had ever made from their world ; 
they had never traveled to other planets 
in their universe. Another was the nature 
of their quest on Earth. When he found 
that out, he killed his specimens, but by 
then it was too late. 

"He took those little bodies apart literally atom by atom. And he found out how 
to destroy them. It was simple in itself, 
but hard to get to, an isotope of nitrogen 
which, if released in their world, would set 
up a chain reaction in their atmosphere. 
Due to the differences between the molecules of the two universes — they have a table of elements just like ours, but denser — ■ 
their atmospheric hydrogen could be transmuted to free hydrogen and arsenic trihydride, with a by-product of nitrogen ions 
that would kick off the reaction again and 
again ... I see I'm talking gobbledegook. 
Sorry. 

"Suffice it so say that my father knew 
what would destroy the Ffanx, but he had 
to make it himself. By that time the Ffanx 
had destroyed communications and the 
world was in chaos. It took time, as he 
knew it would. So he built the Gateway. 

"He got the idea from the Ffanx' own 
blue arch, which he had seen from a distance. He took careful reading on that 
strange blue light and guessed what it was. 
He came back here and proved what it 
was. And in trying to build another like 
it— I think he planned to invade them 
where they didn't expect it— he stumbled 
on the Gateway. 

"It gave a weird red-orange light instead of a blue one, and the atmosphere 
on the other side was breathable, which 
the Ffanx world's was not — they had to 
wear helmets and carry an air-supply while 
they were on Earth. He went through and 
looked the place over There was timber 
and water and, as far as he could find out, 
no civilization or dangerous animals — just 
insects and some little rabbit-like creatures 
so tame they could be caught by hand. And 
he got the idea of using it as a sanctuary 
for the world's women while he worked 
on the weapon that would destroy the 






1NCVBI OF PARALLEL X 



17 



Ffanx. 

"You know the rest of that story — how 
the women came, all he could send word 
to — and then how he had to build defenses 
against the panic-struck, woman-hungry 
mobs that stormed this place. 

"I was just a boy of eight when Dad 
finished the weapon. It was an innocentlooking eight-inch capsule filled with compressed gas. He planned to go up to Hacken sack, traveling at night and hiding in 
the daytime, and set up a projector to peg 
it into the blue arch. 

"The day after he showed it to me the 
Ffanx came . . . I'm convinced they didn't 
know how near they were to the thing 
that would wipe them out. I'll never know 
why they came just then . . . maybe there 
was a party of women on the way up the 
canyon. Anyway, a flight of their little 
ships appeared, and they let go one of their 
force-beams on the lab-building — I guess 
because it was the nearest to the canyon 
trail — and stove the roof in. Dad was 
crushed and the building burned." 

Garth took a deep breath. His eyes 
burned. "I spoke to him while he died. 
Then I left, with the capsule" 

"So it was you who put the poison 
through the blue arch," said Bronze. "I'd' 
always heard it was Gesell." 

"It was Gesell," said Viki devoutly. 
"I did, yes. Anyway, when that capsule 
burst in their world, they had a fine arseniated atmosphere. The hydrogen they 
breathed was arsenic tri-hydride within 
minutes after it got to their bloodstreams. 
I don't know how long it took to kill off 
every last one of them on their planet, but 
it couldn't have been long. And it got all 
the Ffanx here, too. They all had to go 
back to renew their air supplies. I don't 
think we'll ever hear of a living Ffanx again." 

"And where have you been all these 
years?" 

"Growing up. Studying. Dad's orders. 
He was the most foresighted man who ever 
lived. He couldn't be sure of just what 
would happen in the near future, but he 
knew what the possibilities were, and acted 
on all of them. One of the things he did 
was to prepare a hypnopede — it's a gadget that teaches you while you sleep — no 

2— Planet Stories — Sept. 



bigger than your two fists. It was designed 
for me, in case anything happened, and it 
covered the basic principles of the Gateway, and a long list of reference books. 
I lived with that thing, month after month, 
and when I was old enough to move around safely under my own power I began 
to travel. I went to city after city and 
pawed through the ruins of their libraries 
and boned up on all of it — atomic theory, 
strength of materials, higher math, electronics — until I could begin to get experimental results." 

He looked around the table. "Are you 
people ready to give me a hand with the 
Gateway ?" 

"We took a vow—" said Viki. Garth 
interrupted her. "Let's have none of that!*' 

Viki continued with perfect composure. 
"We took a vow to serve Gesell through 
life and past death, and I see no reason 
to change it. Do you, Daw?" 
"I agree." Daw's face was strained. 
Garth thought for a second that Daw was 
going to argue the point. But perhaps he 
was wrong . . . 

"Good," said Garth. "Now— when the 
Ffanx destroyed the laboratory, they 
smashed the Gateway generators, as you 
know. I think I can restore them. With 
your help I know I can." 

"Hey wait," said Bronze. "What about 
that prediction that the women would open 
it from the other side?" 

"They're supposed to have the facilities," said Garth. "There's just one piece 
of evidence we have that proves we've got 
to do it — they haven't opened the Gateway." 

"Why not, d'you suppose?" 

Garth shrugged. "Afraid to, maybe. 
Maybe something's happened to them. 
Who knows ? Let's find out." 

Viki spoke up, timidly. "Garth Gesell 
— it's been years since they went through. 
Will they be . . . I mean, do you suppose 
there are . . ." She floundered to a halt. 

"Even women in their late thirties and 
forties can do some good to the world 
now," Garth answered. "And don't forget 
— many of them were with child. There'll 
be new blood for Earth. However, one 
of the most important considerations is 
the women themselves. Among them were 



18 



PLACET STORIES 



some of the best brains on Earth. Architects and doctors, and even a machine-tool 
designer. But the biggest treasure of all 
is Glory Rehman. She was my Dad's 
friendly enemy — almost as good as he was 
in his specialty, and a lot better in several 
more. If she's still alive, she'll do more 
to get the world back on its feet than any 
thousand people alive today. You'll see . . . 
you'll see. Come on, let's get to work!" 

THE DAYS that followed were a haze 
of activity. Garth traced the old power-supply, and to his delight found it in 
prime condition. It had been used for little 
but the Guardian's flame, all other equipment having been pretty well smashed or 
gone into disuse. The super-batteries which 
fed it were neo-tourmaline, a complex 
crystal that had the power of storing enormous quantities in its facets. Garth's first 
task was to restore the great sundishes 
which charged the crystals. His father had 
designed them to replace the broadcast 
power that he had used before he developed the condensed-matter crystal. 

The Guardians — Garth had abandoned 
that term, but Bronze still insisted on using 
it— worked like beavers — Viki worshipfully and silently, Daw in a feverish way 
which puzzled Garth and angered Bronze. 
Bronze himself had to be watched to keep 
him from bossing the others. Garth kept 
him under control by doubting aloud 
whether he could do this or that, or by 
wondering if he was strong enough to 
move this over to there. "You think I 
can't" Bronze would mutter, and attack 
the task as if it were a deadly enemy. 

Twice Garth called them all into the 
new laboratory and announced that the 
Gateway was ready. The first time nothing 
happened when he threw the switch, a^d 
it took him eight days to trace out the 
circuits and to test the vibratory conrols. 
The second time a sheet of cool orange 
flame leaped into being, quivered and flickered for a moment, and then collapsed. 

At each of these occasions Bronze berated Garth for letting the Guardians see 
it. "Here you got them thinking you're a 
superman," he said disgustedly, "and then 
you let them watch you pull a blooper." 
Garth was alone in the makeshift lab


oratory when he succeeded. He had bent 
to replace a crystal which was a few thousandths of a cycle out of phase, and he 
turned back to the Gateway apparatus — ■ 
and there it was. 

Quietly, noiselessly, it hung there, so 
beautiful it made him gasp, so welcome 
he could hardly believe his eyes. It was 
red-orange at the bottom, shading to gold 
at the top. 

He spun to the switch. It was still open. 
Then he realized that his sychronization 
of the quartz frequency-crystals and the 
tourmaline power-crystals was so perfect 
that the Gateway had come of its own accord. He had know that the phenomenon 
was self sustaining, he hadn't known that 
it was self -starting. 

He closed the switch as a safety-measure, 
and stood looking at the Gateway. "Got 
it," he muttered. And he could all but feel 
his father's presence with him, dark eyes 
glowing, his hand ready with the reward 
the boy used to prize so highly — the warm 
clasp of a shoulder. 

Garth glanced at the door, thinking 
of Bronze and the others. Then he shrugged. "Let 'em sleep. They'll need it." 

He stepped through the Gateway. 

IN HER SMALL, cell Viki slept lightly. 
She was dreaming about Gesell, as she 
often did. Her early training with old 
Soames had been partly hypnopedic, and 
like most sleep-training, it tended to be 
restimulated by sleep itself. Part of it pictorialized itself in a dream of the main 
foyer in Gesell Hall, where the great portrait of Gesell hung. She seemed to be 
watching the picture, which refused to be 
a picture of the elder Gesell, but of Garth. 
And as she watched, the long, white browed face began to turn pale. The face was 
composed, but the eyes conveyed a worriment that grew into terror and the into 
agony. As she stared at it, frozen, the 
dream picture suddenly ripped down the 
middle with a sound she was never to forget as long as she lived. 

She bounded out of bed and stood gasping in the middle of the floor. Her sense of 
presence returned to her. She glanced around her and then bolted for .the door. 

In a silent panic she raced for the lab





MKCVBI OF PARALLEL X 



oratory, threw the door open. 

Between the tall grid-electrodes over 
which Garth had slaved for so many weeks 
there was a sheet of fiame. Viki stared at 
it, awed, and then realized what was so 
very strange about it; it radiated no heat. 
She approached it cautiously. 

On the floor by the lower frame of the 
apparatus lay a human hand. 

She knew that hand. Heaven knows 
she had spent enough mealtimes watching 
its deft movement from under her lowered 
lashes. She had seen it probing the complexities of the apparatus often enough, 
and had marveled at its skilled strength. 
"Garth Gesell . . ." she moaned. 
She stooped over the hand and only 
then did she realize that it was thrust 
through the flame as if through a curtain. 
She seized it and pulled. She saw the 
forearm, the elbow . . . "Bronze !" she 
screamed. She set her small bare feet against the lower frame and lifted and 
pulled. 

Garth Gesell's body slid out. It was 
flecked with blood. Blood flowed slowly 
from his nostrils and ears. His lifeless 
face held just the expression of terror 
and agony she had seen in her dream. His 
flesh was mottled and his lips were blue. 

She screamed again, a wordless cry of 
fury at the fates rather than one of fear. 
She flipped the body over on its face, 
turned the head to one side, put her fingers in the unresisting mouth and drew 
the ngue forward. Then she knelt with 
her left knee between his thighs and began 
to apply artificial respiration. "Bronze !'' 
She called again and again, with each 
measured pressure of her sure hands. 

Bronze appeared at the door, looking like 
a war-horse, his nostrils dilated, his muscular chest gleaming with sweat. "What 
is — w hat are you doing to him? ,, He 
strode forward, his big hand out to pluck 
her away from Gesell. 

She put her head back and said "Stop." 
It was said quietly but with such intensity 
that he halted as if he had run onto a wagon-tongue in the dark. Daw came in, rubbing his eyes. 

She ignored the men. She lay down on 
the floor beside Garth and put her face 
next to his. 



19 

"Your 



"Viki!" said Daw in horror, 
vows . . ." 

"Shut up," she hissed, and put her 
mouth against Garth's. 

Bronze said "What the hell's she . . . n 
"Leave her," said Daw in a new voice. 
Bronze's startled expression matched 
Daw's natural one. 

Bronze followed his gaze. Exactly in 
sychronization, Viki's cheeks and Garth's 
expanded and relaxed. In the sudden silence, they could hear the breath whistle 
in Viki's arched nostrils. 

"Gesell . . ." whispered Viki hoarsely. 
She put her mouth against Garth's again. 
Suddenly his head jerked back. Feebly, 
he coughed. 

"She did it," muttered Bronze. "Viki 
— you did it." 

Viki rolled like a cat and bounded to 
her feet. She dipped her hand in a waterbucket and sloshed the freezing mass into 
the middle of Garth's back. He gasped, a 
great gulping inhalation, and began to 
cough again. "Get alcohol," said Viki tightly. 

They rolled Garth over and Daw lifted 
his head. They forced a few drops of ethyl 
alcohol into Garth's mouth. He shuddered 
"Somebody kissed me," he said. He lay 
back, breathing deeply. "The . . . Gateway 
. . . women are dead. It's no use." 

"What was it?" asked Daw. "Was the 
air poisonous?" 

"No . . .it was all right — what there was 
of it. There just wasn't enough. I don't 
know what caused it, but something has 
used up most of the air in that world. 
I passed out before I'd gone any real distance. And the women . . ." 

"Didn't you see any signs of them?'* 
"Not a thing. The world seemed empty. 
Parallel X . . ." 

There was a silence. Then Garth asked, 
"Well — where do we go from here?" 

Daw suddenly leaped to his feet. "Gesell !" he cried. "Great Gesell, forgive me ! n 
Garth looked up at him curiously. "Daw 
I've told you a thousand times not to call 
me — 

"You!" spat Daw. " You— imposter ! 
You apostate ! You're the devil ! You came 
here in the guise of the great Gesell in 
order to invade the sanctuary of Gesefls 



20 



PLANET STORIES 



women. No Gesell would tire, no Gesell 
would fail. No Gesell would respond to 
the clutches of a female." 

Bronze was on his feet. "Now, listen, 
you — " 

Daw threw out his skinny arms dramatically. "Go on — kill me : I deserve a hundred deaths for my failure as a Guardian. 
But I die in defense of Gesell and his 
works. It's the least I can do.'' He suddenly 
flew at Bronze. "Kill me now — kill me I" 

Bronze put out one mighty arm and 
caught the front of Daw's tunic. Daw 
flailed away helplessly. His arms were far 
shorter than Bronze's, and all he could do 
was to rain blows on the iron biceps and 
kick feebly at the man's boots. 

"What shall I do?" said the amazed 
Bronze. "Shall I squash him?" 

"Don't harm him," said Garth. "But I 
guess you better put him to sleep." 

Bronze brought his free hand up and 
over and put a hammerlike blow on the 
very top of Daw's head. The little Guardian went limp. Bronze draped him across 
the crook of his elbow like a spare blanket. 
"What about you?" he said to the girl. 
Viki stared up at him out of wide eyes 
and turned to Garth. "I serve Gesell." 

Garth said tiredly. "There seem to be 
three Gesells around here. My Dad, who's 
dead. Me. And some sort of King Arthurtype myth. Which one are you serving?" 

"Only you," she breathed. She rose 
gracefully, cast a look of utmost scorn at 
the feebly twitching Daw. excused herself 
and left the room. 

"Let her go," said Garth to Bronze. 
"She's liable to blow up the joint," protested Bronze. 
"I think not." 

"You can be wrong, Garth Gesell." 
Garth grinned wrylv. "You know that, 
and still you stick around. I wish these 
dedicated characters fell the same way. I 
just can't live up to what they want me 
to be." 

"Maybe you can't," growled Bronze. 
"But you should. I told you and told you 
you should." He hefted Daw. "What'U we 
do with this?" 

"Try to talk some sense into him." 
"Let me twist his head off first. Then 
you can put the sense in with a trowel." 



Grath chuckled. "That won't be necessary. I know what's wrong with him. 
Bronze, many people who take readily to 
dedicated service do it only because it's 
a substitute for ordinary living, which 
they don't want to face. That isn't by any 
means true of all of 'em, but it is of our 
boy here. Life these days isn't easy, I 
don't have to tell you that. As a Guardian, 
Daw had an even, dependable existence 
where he knew what he had to do and 
knew exactly how to do it. He saw no 
reason why that should ever change. And 
then I came along and reduced him to the 
level of a guy who is changing his environment a lot now so that it can be changed 
still more later, and he didn't like it." 

"That sounds good. Now can you 
pound that all into his head with one wallop? Or shall I stand guard over him for 
a year or so while you lead him by the 
hand out of a swamp he made himself to 
wallow in?'' 

"Easy, easy," said Grath ruefully. 

"Damnit, you need it," growled Bronze. 
"Something's wrong with the Gateway 
world. Something was wrong with your 
idea of walking into Gesell Hall that day 
I met you, but that didn't stop you." 
Bronze wet his lips. "I guess I'm a little 
like that Daw, after all. You got to be 
what I think you should be before I'll 
play along with you." 

THEY FOUND VIKI in the laboratory, staring at the Gateway, which 
flamed and flickered coldly in its frames. 
Garth and Bronze ranged up beside her. 

"If we could only move around in there," 
said Garth. "If we could only know what 
happened to the air-pressure." 

'|The Ffanx did it," said Viki. 

"Let him do the thinking, sister," said 
Bronze with the odd combination of bluntness and courtesy he affected with her. 

"There are no more Ffanx, Viki," said 
Garth. "If I'm sure of anything, I am 
sure of that." 

"I know that," said Viki. "I mean that 
the Ffanx moved from dense air into rarefied air — you said so." 

Garth struck himself a resounding wallop on the forehead. "Bronze," he said in 
an awed tone of voice, "she has the 






IJVCl/Bf OF PARALLEL X 



21 



brains/' 
"Huh?" 

"Air helmets! Here I was so defeated 
that I couldn't see the one thing- that was 
staring me in the face. Come on. The machine shop !'* 

The helmets they turned out in the next 
few days were makeshift but serviceable. 
Using the domed tops of aluminum pressure tanks and a series of welded bands, 
and a tightly-gasketed piece of plexiglas, 
they had the basic design. Soft, thick edging of foam rubber sealed the shoulder, 
chest and back. The air supply was liquid 
air passed through a tiny but highly efficient chemical heater. "We want no oxygen 
drunks on this trip," Garth explained. 

They locked Daw up in the north store* room. Garth tried to talk to him but found 
him completely intractable. He was like 
a man in a trance. He would speak only to 
to the original Gesell, using his name to call 
down maledictions on the heads of the imposters. 

"What shall we take with us?" 
They stood before the Gateway — Bronze 
impatient and excited, Garth thoughtful, 
Viki her reserved, willing self. Green 
floodlights and a smoke generator had been 
strategically placed on the defense line in 
the canyon, keyed to the detectors so that 
any intruder would be badly frightened if 
he came onto the Court. It was defense 
enough for the short time they planned 
to be away. 

"My spears," said Bronze. 
"No," Garth said. "Take this instead." 
He tossed over his old blaster. "It's more 
compact. I mean no insult to that throwing 
arm of yours, little man, but the blaster 
has a little more range." 

"Thanks." Bronze turned it over admiringly. "Did I ever tell you that if you 
hadn't been carrying this when I first met 
you I'd have knocked you off? I never 
met a man with one before.'' 

Garth laughed. "I hadn't had charges 
for it for more than four years. It was 
good protective coloration. But there are 
plenty of charges now. Viki — " 

"I have my dagger. And an extra oxygen 
tank." 

"Good. Ill take two extra tanks. That 
ought to hold us. 



"Now here's the plan. We have no radio. I was able to weld in some thin plates 
to my helmet — I should be able to hear in 
there. I don't think you two will be able to 
unless you touch helmets. I won't be able 
to hear you but I can hear outside sounds. 
So once we get in there, we're pretty much 
on our own. All I can say is — keep together and don't go too far. Mind you, 
this is just a preliminary recon patrol. 
Later we can go back in with more and 
better equipment. Ready?" 

Bronze raised a thumb and forefinger 
in the ancient sign. 

"Right!" Viki nodded tensely. 

Garth wheeled, settled his helmet down 
on its shoulder-pieces. The others followed 
suit. 

Then Garth plunged through the Gateway. 

THE THREE HUDDLED together as 
they emerged from the Gateway. 

They found themselves on a stony plain 
that stretched out and away as far as 
the eye could reach. There were the looming shadows of distant, tremendous mountains. The rocks were soft and coarse, and 
of the same orange-to-gold shading that 
characterized the Gateway. 

Garth glanced around at the Gateway, 
and understood how in his previous visit 
he had missed it. It flickered and flamed 
as dimly as a candle in the sunlight. He 
touched his two companions and pointed 
back at it. They nodded, and he knew they 
understood the need for caution. In that 
wilderness of boulders it would be easy 
to lose it completely. 

He recalled the first Gateway, his father's, which had debouched on a flat plain, 
smaller than this. There had been rocks 
here and there, but nothing like the monstrous, crumbling boulders which surrounded them now. He wondered, as he 
had many times in the past few days, if 
the elder Gesell's specifications had been 
wrong in some subtle way, and if this was, 
as Bronze had suggested, a different dimensional world from that to which the 
women had been sent. In the maze of advanced mathematics involved in the construction of a Gateway, any small slip 
might have far-reaching results. 



22 



PLANET STORIES 






His thought broke off abruptly. 
Through the two thin discs welded into 
the sides of his helmet he could hear a 
highpitched, shattering roar. He looked 
up— 

It was a helicopter — but such a machine 
as a mad aeronautical engineer might 
dream of in a nightmare ! 

It was huge and it was slow. It was altogether too slow. Its great blades had a 
radius of nearly two hundred feet. It settled downward much faster than it seemed 
to, for its size was so deceptive ; the vanes 
rotated no faster than the wings of an ancient Dutch windmill. 

It came to rest a hundred yards away. 
Its size was incredible. As it rested on the 
ground, the roof of the fuselage was all 
of eighty feet from the ground. The door 
opened 

Garth swept the helmets of the other 
two against his with one motion. They 
contacted with a deafening clang. 

"Hide!" he barked. "In the rocks . . . 
get out of sight !" 

He turned and dove for shelter. Just to 
his right a huge flat rock, which had apparently once stood on edge, leaned over 
at about eighty degrees. Under it was just 
enough space for him to slide into with 
his helmet protruding. 

He looked first for his companions. 
Bronze was huddled behind a round boulder. Viki was running back toward the 
Gateway, zigzagging in a panic-struck 
search for adequate shelter. He saw her 
trip and fall, and an airtank went bounding 
away from her shoulder. She rose groggily 
to her feet and tried to run again. 

Garth looked back toward the helicopter. 
What he saw confirmed the surge of fear 
he had experienced as its door had opened. 
Four women approached with great 
leaping strides. They were dressed in odds 
and ends— a ragged halter, a smooth tunic, 
a slashed skirt. Each was dressed differently and casually. One carried a monstrous knobbed club. All were belted and 
had long daggers. Around the neck of the 
leader was a black chain from which swung 
a mighty jewel, which glowed and sparked 
in the universally orange-gold light. The 
jewel was brilliantly, shockingly green — the 
characteristic glittering green of neo-tour


maline. But Grath had never seen a crystal 
of that size. It was gem-cut, and must have 
been all of forty inches from crown to 
apex. And the woman carried it comfortably at the end of its ten-foot stick-like 
mounting, on its chain with links the size 
of anchor-cable, because she herself was 
seventy-five feet tall. 

GARTH WAS CONSCIOUS of a 
pounding in his ears. At first he 
thought it was the earth-shaking tread of 
the four giantesses — for the other three 
were almost as tall as the first. Then he 
realized that the pounding was caused by 
the simple fact that in his shock he had 
forgotten to breathe. 

He turned and looked for his companions. Bronze was slack and awed, gaping skyward at the leader's tremendous 
head. Viki was nowhere to be seen — 

And neither was the Gateway. It was 
gone. 

The leader stopped not twenty yards away, and bent, scanning the ground, fingering her jewelled pendant. Her face was 
distant, composed and cool. She was very 
beautiful, with long-lashed eyes and higharched brows and a complexion like unveined marble. 

"Bronze I" Garth screamed, for the second woman, a blonde with masses of flowing golden hair, had circled, and was behind Bronze as he stared up at the leader. 
The blonde raised her club, a thirty-foot 
mass that must have weighted all of a ton. 
She spoke— a deep, unintelligible strumming. Bronze, of course, could not hear 
Garth's cry of warning. 

The leader straightened up and glanced 
at the blonde. She said something equally 
incomprehensible— the frequency of their 
voice-tones was down in the subsonic — and 
the blonde reluctantly put down the club. 

And then, to Garth's horror, the leader 
bent and shot out a mighty hand. Bronze 
tried to scuttle aside, but the hand closed 
on him, lifted him high in the air. 

Then it was that Garth recognized the 
giantess. He knew he had seen that cool, 
beautiful face before— long, long before, 
when he was a child. 

Bronze squirmed and fought that gigantic grip. Garth saw him twist free, ball 



INCZJBI OF PARALLEL X 



23 



up and kick with both feet at the huge 
thumb. He slipped out of the grasp when 
the hand had carried him forty feet in 
the air. The giantess fell to one knee and 
reached out, catching him deftly. She held 
him up before her great calm face and 
watched him squirm. 

Bronze suddenly struck out with both 
hands, twisted to one side, and got his 
hand on the blaster. 

"Don't Don't" screamed Garth. He knew 
what that blaster could do at short range. 
But his raging was useless, he could not 
be heard. 

The giantess fumbled for a second and 
then, with her left hand, brought up the 
pendant by its stick-like handle. She held 
the jewel close to Bronze as if it were a 
strange magnifying glass. 

Bronze whipped the blaster out and 
up, and just as it bore on the huge, calm 
face, the great thumb moved on a stud 
on the handle of the jewel-mounting. 

A blaze of green fire reached out from 
the jewel and enveloped Bronze's chest, 
turning to dazzling white where it struck 
him. The jewel deepened in color and 
seemed to thicken, to grow more solid. 

The magnetic buckles of Bronze's helmet harness suddenly parted, and the internal pressure did the rest. The helmet 
popped off his head and flew up and around, swinging by the one back strap that 
was caught between his waist and the imprisoning hand. 

Then the blaster spoke. 
"Don't!" screamed Garth uselessly. 
That's Glory Gehman!" 

But instead of the shattering roar he 
expected, his ear-plates detected only a 
muffled f-f-f t ! A weak tongue of fire, perhaps ten or twelve inches long, flickered 
wanly from the bore of the blaster, and 
then faded. Bronze writhed once, then 
went limp. 

The great figure that looked like Glory 
Gehman held Bronze up like a tiny limp 
doll and called to the other women. They 
crowded around. The blond reached with 
long, delicate fingers and lifted up the 
dangling helmet, pointed at Glory Gehman's ears. Garth noticed for the first time 
that her ear-pendants were made of Ffanx 
helmets, or rather a tremendously over


size version of them. The leader shook her 
head and laughed, and gently forced 
Bronze's helmet back on his head. Holding 
her face very close, as if she were threading a needle in bad light, she set the buckle-magnets back in their grooves and 
gently tested the airlines. Then the leader 
walked off toward the helicopter, while the 
other three resumed their search of the 
ground. 

Garth's eye caught a glint of metal a 
few yards away — the spare airtank Viki 
had dropped. But of Viki there was no 
sign, and gone, too, was the Gateway. 

Garth Gesell was alone on this earth, a 
pygmy hiding under a rock like a beetle, 
while he was being hunted by colossi obviously bent on destroying his kind. 

A great bare foot pressed the earth close 
to him. He could hear the stones crackle. 
He crept farther back in the narrow fissure which held him. He knew that the 
next step the giantess took might be on 
top of that flat rock, and that would be 
the end of Gesell on any world save for a 
revered memory. 

And a fat lot of good the reverence 
would do him as he lay crushed under a 
rock. 

t*T?OR GESELL," sang Daw as he 

1/ hooked the cable around the frame 
of the Gateway. Then something struck his 
back and side and sent him sprawling. He 
kept his hold on the cable as he fell, and 
part of him was gratified to feel it catch 
on the frame. He knew it had contacted, 
and he knew it without looking at the 
Gateway for the flickering gold light was 
abruptly gone. 

He rolled and came up on one knee. 

Lying on the floor, doubled up in pain 
as she nursed a bleeding foot, was Viki. 
She squeezed her eyes as tight as they 
would shut, even through the thick transparent plastic of her helmet Daw could 
see the silent tears she forced out. 

She sat up and looked around her, then 
sprang to her feet and leaped to the framework. That brought her up against the rear 
wall of the laboratory. She stood for a 
moment feeling it with incredulous fingers, 
then turned and stepped out again. 

Apparently it was only then that she saw 



24 



PLANET STORIES 



Daw. 

She slid the magnetic buckles apart and 
wrenched off her helmet. Her hair and 
eyes were wild. 

"Daw. The Gateway !" 

"A false Gateway for a false Gesell," 
intoned Daw. 

She looked around at the dead framework again, and then at Daw. "What are 
you doing here?" 

"The hand of Gesell freed me for his 
good works," said Daw. "I found a weak 
spot in the ceiling of the storeroom. Now, 
more than ever, I know the truth and reason behind my act. For you were spared, 
sister, spared from your own infamies, and 
saved, as a sworn Guardian, for the true 
Gesell." 

She looked at him, bewildered. 

He explained to her, patiently, exultantly. "You were led to return from the 
company of evil, just as I obeyed Gesell's 
command to do away with the false Gateway." 

"Return? I didn't return !" she said 
frantically. "I fell. I was running, looking 
back and up at — at — " She closed her eyes 
and shuddered. "And then I hurt my foot, 
and fell . . . Daw what has happened to 
the Gateway?" 

"Gone," he said, and smiled. "And good 
riddance. Come, sister. Let us go to the 
great portrait and receive more messages." 

"Daw, we've got to fix it! He's in 
trouble. They'll kill him, they'll kill him/' 

"You confirm it. Death to the imposter ! 
It is Gesell's will!" 

Understanding dawned on Viki. "You 
closed it?" 

He bowed his head. "It was the wish of 
Gesell. I am but a poor instrument . . ." 

She was on him like a tiger-cat, "You 
fool ! You crazy, blind fool ! Show me what 
you did. We've got to fix it. We've got 
to, Daw. Garth Gesell is the true Gesell, 
don't you understand? And he'll die in 
there if we don't help him !" 

"That Gateway," said Daw in stentorian tones, "is a falsehood, a devil's trick. 
When Gesell wants it to open he will open 
it, without wires and crystals and steel. As 
a Guardian I shall see the end of this contraption, and never again will I be duped." 
He turned, his cy^s blazing, and caught 



up a sledge hammer. "Never again will 
there be a Gateway in Gesell Hall until 
Gesell himself opens it!" 
"Daw you're mad! StopP 

HE STALKED past her. She took one 
step after him and stopped. She saw 
the hooked piece of cable Daw had dropped. She leapt forward, caught up the free 
end, and as Daw raised the hammer high 
over his head, his right foot placed itself 
near the hook. 

Viki stepped to one side, to be sure of 
a good contact, and pulled the cable violently. The hooked end caught Daw's ankle, whipped it out from under him. He 
staggered, lost control of the hammer. The 
twelve-pound head fell toward him. He 
lurched aside and it caught him on the 
shoulder. He fell heavily, trying to turn. 
His jaw cracked against the stone floor. 

He lay still, uttering a series of tortured 
sounds as he tried to pull himself together. 

Viki stood over him like an avenging 
angle, waiting. 

Daw rolled over, sat up. His hand went 
quiveringly to his shoulder. He looked up 
at her out of round, bloodshot eyes. 

"Guardian . . ." he said. 

"Help me fix the Gateway, Daw," she 
said. 

"You're misled, sister." 

"I won't discuss it with you. And don't 
start that cant about my sacred duty. Get 
up !" 

Daw rose and fixed her with his mad 
eyes. "I am counselled by Gesell," he 
said painfully, "and now I counsel you." 

She closed her eyes in a visible effort at 
self-control. "Are you going to help me?" 

"Why do you pursue this folly? What 
is the compulsion of this — this Garth?" 
The last word came out with contempt. 

"I love him," she said 
^ There was a crashing silence. It was the 
silence of utter shock— the silence of death 
itself, for indeed nothing moved, not even 
breath. 

Finally Daw's suddenly white lips moved, 
slackened, moved again. "You love him," 
he whispered. "You?" 

She was just as pale. "We all have our 
own kind of cowardice," she said. "Bronze 
once told me what Garth Gesell thought of 



INCVBI OF PARALLEL X 



25 



your madness. He said you were a Guardian because you had retired from a real 
world. You've gone mad trying to save 
the old ways for yourself. You can doom 
the world to the new savagery if by doing 
it you can return to patrolling the Court 
and humbling yourself before the portrait." 

Daw half raised his arms as if to ward 
off her hot words. He kept his eyes fixed 
on her, and when she stopped he said only, 

"You're Escaped!" 

"Yes!" she cried, "Damn you! You 
never knew, did you? One of the rules you 
made up for yourself was that only the 
poor robbed hulk of a woman, with her 
womanhood completely gone, could become a Guardian. It's what you chose to 
believe and what I let you believe- I told 
you we all have our form of cowardice. 
Mine was to pretend I was Returned. I 
stole the privilege of those poor creatures 
who had been discarded by the Ffanx. 
I lived with them and learned their ways. 
They walk in safety all over the world, 
and I took their coloration. And when the 
chance came to hide further under the 
cowl of a Guardian, I took it. I let myself 
sleep safely here. But I'm awake now . . ." 
Her lower lip became full, and her eyes 
grew very bright. ". . . awake and I love 
him, I love him, I love him . . ." 

She lapsed into silence. She heard Daw 
grind his teeth. 

"Slut !" he said hoarsely. "To think that 
for these years I've been living next to a 
— a — " In his mounting rage he stopped 
using words, and instead uttered a series 
of creaking, dripping animal sounds. 

"Now that we know what we are, 
Guardian," she said coldly, "Let's fix the 
Gateway." 

"I am the Guardian and I am the Gateway, and in me alone is the trust, the duty, 
the fidelity, the—" 

Suddenly he was upon her, raging. Gone 
was the last vestige of control. Gone was 
the carefully schooled impersonality of 
Guardian behavior, gone was the deeply 
conditioned, pitying reverence for the woman Returned. 

His wild leap bowled her off her feet. 
They rolled over and over on the floor. 
Daw didn't strike out at her with fists; 



he clawed. He pulled her hair and her 
clothes. He raked his fingernails down 
her body, twisted her, grasped and clutched 
and pawed. 

At first she tried to gtt away, to protect herself. She writhed and scrambled 
and fell and pushed at him. Suddenly he 
was kneeling by her, both hands full of 
her hair, both army stiff, pinning her head 
down to the floor. The pain of her scalp 
turned to terror — a roweling primitive terror that was like nothing she had ever 
known in intensity. And in the briefest 
moments it was surpassed by another, new 
emotion. She had been afraid before, in 
her life, but this was something different. 

For as he bent over her, brought his 
face close to her, she looked up into his 
eyes. They were round, staring, veined and 
toned with red. His jaws were open, and 
his bitten, bloody tongue flashed insanely 
in and out. Blood and froth splashed on 
her face, and at its touch, this transcending new emotion overtook her like a great 
flood-tide. 

It was more than horror. It was disgust 
and revulsion raised to a peak almost impossible to contain. In one great surge 
she rose. She felt her hair tear away with 
a kind of savage joy. How she found the 
holds she never was to know, but one slim 
hand fastened into the side of Daw's neck 
and the other on his thigh. She sprang 
straight up under him with her feet solidly 
planted and every dyne of energy in her 
healthy legs, back and shoulders behind 
the movement. Daw's body went straight 
up. 

When the weight came off her hands he 
was nearly at arm's length over her head. 
She dug in her nails and kept her grip, 
and as he began to fall she pulled hard 
with her left hand, which was on his neck. 
Head down he hurtled, with all her convulsive strength speeding him on his way. 
He struck . . . 

For a long time she stood like a castiron statue, her unseeing eyes on the thing 
which lay there, its misshapen head all but 
concealed, twisted grotesquely under the 
scrawny body. Then she became dimly 
conscious of an ache that became a pain 
that became a roaring agony — the knotting 
muscles in her calves, cramping with the 



26 PLA3VET 

onset of nervous shock. She tottered backwards, brought up against the wall. 

She crouched there, breathing in great 
open-throated gasps. Suddenly she began 
to cry — high, squeaky crying that tore her 
throat and burned her eyes. She cried for 
a long time. 

But the next day, and the next and the 
next, found her working. 

GARTH LAY UNDER the rock, his 
heart beating suffocatingly, but his 
eyes studying the amazing spread of calloused flesh that was the giant foot. Another came down beside it, and the first 
one lifted and kicked over a massive boulder nearby. Garth felt his sheltering rock 
vibrate alarmingly. He bunched his shoulders and waited. 

At last the feet moved away. He edged 
out and lay prone, hardly daring to lift 
his head. The three women were working 
away from him, scanning the ground carefully. He got on all fours and scuttled 
backward into the shadow of a projecting 
rock, pulled himself to his feet and looked 
around. 

The Gateway was gone. Viki was gone 
— probably through the Gateway, he surmised- Bronze was gone — captured certainly, dead probably. He wondered what 
that green fire had been. It looked like neotourmaline, but the rays had not burned 
Bronze's body, at least not as far as he 
had been able to see. It was a little like the 
damper crystals that his father had developed, to capture and store energy. 

But a crystal as big as that, with the 
pulling power it must have, couldn't be 
turned on a human being without snuffing 
out the man's tiny store of electro-chemical. 

"Bronze . . ." he said aloud. 

Big, bluff, faithful Bronze, with his 
quick temper and his hammer-thinking. 
Garth got a flash of memory — Bronze's 
face when Garth had pulled him up short, 
pointing out some end result of Bronze's 
impulsiveness. He used to get a puzzled, 
slightly hurt expression on his broad face, 
but he always began nodding his head in 
agreement before he had figured out if 
Garth was right or not. 

Garth's eyes felt hot. Then, with a pro


STOMFS 

found effort of will, he shut his mind to 
his regrets and concentrated on his surroundings. 

Moving carefully, he worked his way 
over to the spare tank that Viki had dropped. He worried it in between the two 
tanks he already carried. He'd live a little 
longer with it. "Though what for," he muttered, "I wouldn't know/' He gave a last, 
despairing glance to the site of the Gateway and began to move toward the distant 
helicopter. 

A hundred feet away he found a leaf 
— a tremendous thing, eleven feet long and 
nearly five feet broad at its widest. He 
picked it up gratefully. It was very light 
and spongy. He pulled the stem over his 
shoulder and walked through the rocks, 
dragging it. The leaf was almost exactly 
the color of the soil, and ideal camouflage. 
All he need do would be to drop it flat 
and pull it over himself. 

He was two-thirds of the way to the 
plane when a thudding from the earth 
warned him. He looked back and saw the 
three women coming up rapidly. They 
seemed to be sauntering, but their stride 
was twenty to twenty-five feet, and they 
covered ground at a frightening pace. He 
dropped and covered himself. The steps 
came nearer and nearer, until he wondered how the earth itself stood up under that 
monstrous thread. Then they were past. 
He got up. They walked with their heads 
up, talking their booming syllables. They 
were obviously searching no longer. 

He began to run. He had no choice except to stay with these creatures. What 
he would do, where he would go if they 
took off, he simply did not know. 

They climbed into the cabin, one by 
one. He could see the landing gear — tremendous wheels as tall as a two-story 
house — spread as they took the weight 
of the giants. 

There was a belly-thumping cough and 
the incredible rotor-blades began to turn. 

Garth flung down his leaf and ran 
straight toward the ship, trusting to luck 
that he wouldn't be seen. When he was 
under the slow-whirling tips of the rotor 
he still had what seemed an impossible 
distance to run. He found some more energy somewhere and applied it to his 



INCVBl OF PARALLEL X 



27 



pumping legs. 

A tire lost the swelling at the base that 
indicated weight-bearing. It lifted free. 
Garth swerved slightly and made for the 
other. It leapt upward as he approached. 
He ran despairingly under it. Only the 
nose-wheel was left. Without slackening 
speed he rushed it. Fortunately it was 
smaller than the others — the rim of the 
wheel was only about as high as his collarbone when the tire rested on the ground. 
But it was off the ground when he got 
there. He grunted with effort and made a 
desperate leap. 

His outthrust arm went through the 
lightening hole just as the wheel jerked 
upward. He crooked his elbow grimly as 
his momentum swung his flailing legs under the tire. Then he got his other arm 
through the hole. It was just big enough 
for his head and the upper part of his 
shoulders. The air-tanks kept him from 
wriggling further. 

Then, to his horror, he saw the strut 
above him fold on a hinge. 

The wheel was retractable! 

He had to turn his whole body to look 
upward through his helmet-glass, and 
somehow he managed it. He had no way 
of gauging how deep the wheel recess was. 
Was it deep enough to accept the wheel 
— and him too? 

He looked down. 

It would have to be deep enough . . . 
the craft was a hundred feet up and rising 
rapidly ! 

He doubled up and got one toe on the 
edge of the lightening hole. He could just 
grasp the fork of the wheel He swarmed 
up it, caught the other arm of the fork 
and lay belly down on the top part of the 
tire-tread. Then the wheel was inside, and 
the great bayflaps swung closed. The inside of the recess touched his back, squeezed, and stopped. 

He couldn't move but he wasn't crushed. 

IT WAS NIGHT. 
Garth crouched by a building the size 
of a mountain. It was built of wooden 
planks that looked like sections of a fourlane highway. 

He tried to forget the flight, though 
he knew it would haunt him for years — 



the cramped position, the slight kink in his 
airhose and the large kink in his neck 
which had caused such misery, and finally 
the horror of the landing, when the wheel 
he clung to had contacted and rolled. Stift 
as he was, he'd had to hit the ground ahead of it and leap out of the way. 

He moved along the wall, looking for 
a way in. He would try the doorways a9 
a last resort, for not only were they at 
the top of steps with seven-foot risers but 
they were flooded with light. 

He stumbed and fell heavily into a 
dark hollow scooped out at the ground 
line. It was about four feet deep. He got 
to his knees, caught a movement in the 
dim light, and froze- Before him was a 
black opening through which he could see 
the bright-yellow stripes of artificial light 
seeping between enormous floorboards. 
And in the dim light he was aware of 
something which crouched beside him in 
the dark. It was horny and smooth, and 
at one end two graceful, sensitive whips 
trembled and twirled. 

It was a cockroach, very nearly as long 
as his leg. 

He wet his lips. "After you, friend/' 
he said politely. 

As if it had heard him, the creature 
flirted its antennae and scuttled into the 
hole. Garth drew a deep breath and followed. 

It was black and brilliant, black and 
brilliant under that floor. Twice he fell into 
holes, and one of them was wet. Filthy and 
determined, he explored further and further, until he lost all sense of direction. 
He didn't know where the entrance hole 
was and he no longer cared very much. 
He knew what he was looking for and at 
last found it 

Near one wall was a considerable hump 
on the rough earth floor he walked on. 
A wide, oval patch of light above showed 
the presence of a tremendous knot-hole. 
He climbed toward it. 

The wood was soft under his fingers, 
like balsa. He began tearing out chunks 
of it, widening the knothole. The earth 
here was about three feet under the hole, 
so he had to squat and work upward. It 
was extremely tiring but he kept at it 
until he had a hole large enough to put 



28 



PLAIVET STORIES 



his head through. 

Because of the small size of his helmet 
glass, he had to put his head almost all 
the way up before he could see anything. 
And because of the brilliance above, he 
had to stay there a moment to accustom 
his eyes to the glare — What he saw made 
him, for the first time in his life, fully 
understand the phrase "And when I 
looked, I thought I was going to faint!" 

He dropped back down the hole and lay 
gasping with reaction. One of the giantesses was sitting on the floor, propped up 
by one arm stretched out behind her. And 
he had busily dug his hole and thrust 
out his head exactly between her widespread thumb and forefinger! 

He sat up and looked about him very 
carefully indeed. He followed the mammoth outline of the girl's shadow, where 
it crossed the lines of light between the 
floorboards. And then he lay back patiently to wait until she moved. 

He must have dozed, and in the meantime become immune to the thunderous 
shuffling and subsonic bellowings of the 
creatures above, for when he opened his 
eyes again the shadow was gone- He knelt 
and cautiously put his head up through the 
hole. 

THE FLOOR stretched away from him 
like a pampa. There were eight or 
nine of the huge women in the room, as 
far as he could see. Several were in a 
stage of dress which, under different circumstances, he might have found intriguing. 

He pressed up harder. The tanks caught 
on the edge of the hole. He gritted his 
teeth and pushed with his legs under the 
floor and his arms above. He felt the wood 
yield under his hands. Then the tanks ripped their way through and he was at last 
in the room. 

He backed cautiously up to the baseboard, darting glances in every direction. 
Making sure that none of the women was 
looking in his direction, he darted for 
the only patch of shadow he could see — 
a loose-hung fishnet that covered a window, serving as sort of a drape. He slid 
behind it and peered through the mesh. It 
seemed to be indifferent concealment; yet, 



from their point of view, he knew he 
would be hard to locate. 

He paused to switch tanks — his air was 
getting foul — and then took stock. 

The women were gathered around a table near the center of the room, rumbling 
and gesticulating in their strange, slowmotion fashion. None were looking his 
way. He looked down to the right. A small 
table stood in the corner and there was 
another fishnet behind it. Garth moved 
toward it, passing one leg which was like 
a redwood tree and, reaching up, twined 
his hands in the wide mesh of the drape. 
It sagged alarmingly as his weight came 
on it. He waited until it was still and then 
climbed up a few feet. Putting both feet 
into the mesh he jumped hard to test it. 
It sagged again, but held. 

To the underside of the table seemed 
the longest thirty feet he had ever determined to travel, but he started up. The 
fishnet seemed to stretch a foot for every 
eighteen inches he climbed. He looked 
down and saw it touch the floor, then begin 
piling up. 

He suddenly remembered the incredible 
density of the tiny Ffanx invaders, and 
a great light dawned in his brain. 

Excitedly he climbed higher, higher, and 
at last reached the table top. He swung 
onto it, teetered for a hair-raising moment 
on the edge, recovered his balance, and 
stood on the wooden surface. Sure enough, 
his footprints showed on the table top as 
he walked away from the edge. 

There was a piece of electrical equipment on the table, which he ignored. He 
went to the far edge, crouched by the side 
of the machine, and gazed across to the 
center table around which the giants were 
gathered. 

His blood froze. 

Under a glaring floodlight, in the center 
of the enormous table, lay a sealed glass 
cage. Lying in it, devoid of his helmet, 
lay Bronze's body. The leader, the one 
who looked so very much like Glory Gehman, was handling the delicate controls of 
a remote-apparatus which passed a series 
of rods through pressure sleeves into the 
cage. At the end of the rods were clamps, 
clumps of white material as rough as coconut fibre, tweezers, a sway, and a gleam





INCVBI OF PARALLEL X 



29 



ing scalpel as long as a two-handed sword. 
If they're being that particular about 
atmosphere, he thought, Bronze must be 
alive ! 

The flood of joy this thought brought 
him died a quick death, for it was followed 
by . . . and they're about to vivisect him. 
He yielded to a short moment of panic 
and despair. He rushed back toward the 
drape as if to slide down it and attack the 
women by force. He stopped, then got hold 
of himself. 

He looked around him. Suddenly, he 
straightened and smiled. Then he went 
into furious action. 
"Isn't he pretty!" 

The women gathered about the tiny figure. "We shouldn't cut him up until the 
rest of the girls have a chance to look at 
him. He's just a doll!" said one. 

"You've forgotten that all the Ffanx 
are just dolls," said the leader coolly. "Do 
you propose to lead thirty-two hundred 
women, one by one, past this little devil? 
You'd have a wave of hysteria I'd as soon 
not have to handle. Let's keep to ourselves 
what we have here. We'll learn what we 
can and file it away." 

"Oh, you're so duty-bound," said the 
blonde petulantly. "Well, go ahead if you 
must." 

They crowded closer. The leader propped her elbows on the table to steady her 
hands, and carefully manipulated the 
clamps. One descended over each thigh of 
the tiny figure and trapped it firmly to 
the floor of the cage. Two more captured 
the biceps, and another pair settled over 
the wrists. Then the scalpel swung up and 
positioned itself. The leader suddenly 
stopped. 

"Did you leave that thing on?" 
In unison they swung toward the corner. 
One of the women walked over and looked. 
"No, but the tubes are warm." 

"It's a warm night," said another. "Go 
ahead. Cut." 

They gathered about the table again. 
The blade turned, descended slowly. 

"STOP I" roared a voice — a deep, masculine voice. 

"A man!" squeaked one of the women. 
Another quickly drew her tunic together 
and belted it. A third squeaked "Where? 



Where? I haven't seen a man in so long 
I could just — " 

"Glory Gehman !" said the voice- " 'Hally Gehman — short for 'Hallelujah' — remember? 

"Gesell!" gasped the leader. 
"The fool," growled the blonde. "I knew 
a man wouldn't be able to leave us alone. 
This is his idea of a joke — but he set up 
the Gateway to play it. No wonder these 
little devils got through." She raised her 
voice. "Where are you?" 

The blonde snapped her fingers. "It's a 
broadcast of some sort," she said. "He hasn't answered you once, Glory !" She turned 
to the corner. "What's my name, Dr. Gesell?" 

There was a pause. Somewhere there 
was a squeaky sound, like the distant shattering of a field creature. "Everybody calls 
you Butch, towhead," said the voice. 
"Come over here, tapeworms." 
"The recorder!" 

They raced across the room, clustered 
around the small table. 

"I thought you said it was turned off? 
Look — the tape's moving!" Glory reached 
out a hand to turn it off. 

"Don't turn it off," said the voice. "Now, 
listen to me. You've got to believe me. 
I'm Gesell. No matter what you see, no 
matter what you think, you've got to understand that. Now, hear me out. You'll 
get your opportunity to test my identity 
after I'm finished." 

"No one but Gesell ever called me Hally," said Glory. 

"Shh !" hissed the blonde. 
"I'm right here in this room, and youll 
see me in a moment. But before you do, 
Glory, I want to spout some math at you. 
"Remember the vibratory interaction 
theory of matter? It hypothesized that universes interlock. Universe A presents itself for x duration, one cycle, then ceases 
to exist. Universe B replaces it ; C replaces 
B; D replaces C, each for one micromilli-sub-w-second of time. At the end of the 
chain, Universe A presents itself again. 
The two appearances of Universe A are 
consecutive in terms of an observer in Universe A. Same with B and C and 
all the others. Each seems to its observers to be continuous, whereas they are 



30 



PLANET STORIES 



actually recurrent. All that's elementary. 
"Here are the formulae for each theoretical universe in a limited series of four 
inter-recurrent continua . . ." 

There followed a series of mathematical 
gobbledegook which was completely unintelligible to everyone in the room but 
Glory Gehman. She listened intently, her 
high-arched brows drawn together in deep 
thought. She drew out a tablet and stylus 
from her pocket and began to calculate 
rapidly as the voice went on. 

"Now notice the quantitative shift in the 
first phase of each cycle. To achieve an 
overall resonance there has to be a shift. 
To put it in simple terms, if you drew an 
hyperbolic curve with a trembling hand, 
the. curve is the overall resonance of the 
whole series of small cyclic motions. And 
there's only one way in which that can 
have a physical effect — in the continuum 
itself. Each cycle occurs in a slightly altered condition of space-time. That accounts for the super-density of the Ffanx 
and everything they owned and handled. 
What was normal to us was rarefied to 
them. We saw them as dense little androids, and they saw us as rarefied-molecule giants. There must be some point in 
the cycle where they are rarefied in terms 
of our condition. But space characteristics 
are only part of the continuum. The timerate must alter with it. 

"According to my calculations you have 
been here for something more than seven 
but less than eight-and-a-half months, 
and are waiting with considerable patience 
for the three-year minimum it would take 
to prepare the cyanide capsule for the 
Ffanx world. 

"It's with mixed feelings that I inform 
you that the Ffanx war was over twentytwo earth years ago. Dr. Gilbert Gesell died 
in a Ffanx raid that closed the Gateway. 
The Gateway has been opened again momentarily but something has gone wrong 
with it — I don't know what. I must tell 
you too that in terms of Earth standard 
you cute cuddly creatures are in the neiborhood of seventy-five feet tall. 

"So check your figures before you fly 
off the handle and kill any small, dense 
creature which arrives through a Gateway 
wearing a breathing helmet. It might be 



Dr. Gesell's little boy Garth, grown up to 
be all of seven inches tall, and recording 
into your tape at its highest speed and 
playing it back slowly . . ." 

"I'm clinging to the fishnet just under 
the level of the table-top. Treat me gently, 
sisters- I've come a long way." 

There was a concerted lunge for the 
drape, a concerted reaction of horror away 
from it. "Ffanx," someone blurted. "Kill 
it!" 

"We have to kill it," said the blonde. 
"We can't take chances, Glory." Behind 
her voice was the concentrated horror of 
the conquest of Earth . . . the forcefield 
pens ... the hollow, piteous presence of 
the handful of "returned" women. "This 
could be a new Ffanx trick, a new weapon . . ." 

"The math is . . ." 

"The hell with the math!" screamed a 
girl from the edge of the crowd. 

"She's right!" 

"She's right r 

"Kill it!" 

GARTH STEPPED over to the table 
top and walked toward the tape-machine. The circle of women widened instantly. Garth muscled the huge controls, 
placed his helmet firmly against the microphone, and chattered shrilly as the tape 
raced through the guides. Then he rewound, stopped the spools, and began the 
playback : 

"I got that, and I must say I expected 
it. You'll follow your own consciences in 
the end, but be sure it's your conscience 
and not your panic that you follow. I want 
to tell you this, though Earth is a mess. 
There's a new dark age back there. It's 
slipped into a tribal state — polyandrous in 
some places, feudal in others, matriarchal 
in many. You three thousand women, and 
the daughters that many of you will bear, 
will mean a great deal to Earth." 

The chattering ran high. 

"Polyandrous?" 

"One woman — several husbands." 

"Lead me to it ! Poly wants an androus !" 

"If he's seven inches high here, we'd 
be seventy-five feet tall there. Oh my !" 

Garth's voice cut in. "You'll want to 
know how you can get back to Earth size, 



INCMJEt OF PARALLEL X 



31 



or how to get to Earth when its size 
corresponds to yours. I can tell you. But 
I'm not going to. If you can argue about my 
life, I can bargain with it." 

A pause. "Now tell me if you've killed 
that boy over there." Slyly, Garth added, 
"Go look at him again. He's six-three, and 
a hundred and two percent man." 

One, two, two more drifted over to the 
big table, to look with awed eyes at the 
magnificent miniature. 

Glory, as if sensitive to a voice-tone she 
had noticed, snatched up the mike. "No, he 
isn't dead. He would have been, but he 
fired with a blaster just as I put the neotourmaline soaker field on him. The blaster 
threw out all the energy the crystal could 
absorb." 

Garth held up his arms for the mike. 
When his voice came again, it said, "Glory, 
get together the best math minds you have 
here. I want to give you some raw material to work on." 

There was a sudden crash of sound. 
To Garth it was a great thudding bass that 
struck at his helmet like soft-nosed bullets. 
To the women it was a shrill siren-alarm. 

Glory yelped, "Get the 'copter warm. 
Asta, Marion, Josephine this time. Jo — 
check the transistor leads on the direction 
finder in the plane. It kept losing a stage 
of amplification this morning." She turned 
to the microphone. "That's a Gateway. 
We'll damn soon find out whether the 
Ffanx war is over or not. I'm going to park 
you with your friend there. Just pray that 
these cats will obey orders while I'm gone." 
She dropped the mike and raced to the big 
table. "Butch. Put that one in with the 
other. If you touch either one of them until I get back, so help me I'll pry you 
loose from your wall eyes. You hear me." 

"You'll be sorry for that," snapped the 
blonde. "When you find out that these 
lousy Ffanx have been sending out a homing signal for their playmates — they're telepathic, you know — then you can apologize." 

"On bended knee," said Glory. "Meantime, A-cup, do as you're told." She ran 
out. 

"Come on. Orders is orders." 

Garth watched them come. He took one 
step backward, then relaxed. He had shot 



his bolt, and all he could do was to wait. 
The pudgy one picked him up gingerly, 
tried to carry him at arm's length, found 
he was too heavy, and hurried across the 
floor with him. She set him down gently 
on the table. One of the women hurried 
up with a 9mall edition of the cage. Garth 
stepped in and a gate was sealed. A tube 
was fitted to it, and Garth heard air hissing in. He was grateful for the increased 
pressure, his skin had felt raw and distended for hours. 

The pudgy one lifted the small cage 
bodily and set it on top of the larger glass 
cell in which Bronze lay. A lever was flipped, and Garth dropped ungracefully into 
the large one. 

His first act was to run to Bronze and 
feel his pulse. It was weak but steady. 
Garth unbuckled his helmet and pulled it 
off, then knelt by Bronze, 

"Bronze . . ." 

No answer. 

"Bronze!" 

No answer. 

"Bronzie boy . . . look at all those 
women." 

"Gug?" Bronze's eyes opened and he 
blinked owlishly. 

Garth chuckled. "Bronze, you were after women. Look, man." 

Bronze's gaze got as far as the glass 
wall, tested its shaky focus, and then penetrated outward. He sat bolt upright. "For 
me?" 

Then he keeled over in a dead faint. 

Garth sat and chafed his wrists, laughing weakly. Then, after a while, he went 
to sleep. 

THE PUDGY ONE was relieved after 
a while. Butch waved away her own 
relief and stayed, elbows on the table, head 
low, glaring hatred and fear at the men. 
There was some sort of distant call. All 
the other women left But the big blonde 
still stayed. y 

Garth had a dream in which he was 
chasing a girl in a brown cowl. She ran 
because she feared him, but he chased 
her because he knew he could show her 
there was nothing to fear. And as he gained 
on her, he heard Bronze's voice. 

"Garth." It was very quiet. Intense, but 










32 



PLANET STORIES 



weak. 

Garth sat tip abruptly. Something hard 
and sharp whacked him in the forehead. 
There was a gout of blood. He fell back, 
dazed, then opened his eyes. He saw that 
Butch had manuevered the point of the 
scalpel within a few inches of his forehead as he slept. He could see her looking 
at him, her face twisted in slow-motion 
convulsions of laughter. The all but inaudible boom of her voice was a tangible 
thing threatening the glass. 

Garth turned to Bronze. He was lying on his back with one of the U-shaped 
clamps on his throat. It was pressing just 
tight enough to pin him down, just tight 
enough to keep his face scarlet. His breath 
rasped. "Garth," he whispered. 

Garth staggered to his feet. Blood ran 
into his eyes. There was another deep 
hoot of laughter from outside. Garth wiped 
the blood away and staggered toward 
Bronze. The scalpel whistled down and 
across his path. He dodged, but lost his 
footing and fell. 

There was a thunderous pounding on 
the table- Butch was apparently having herself a hell of a time. 

Garth looked at the scalpel. It hung 
limply. He crawled toward Bronze. A 
tweezer-clamp shot out and caught his ankle. He pulled free of it, leaving foursquare 
inches of skin in its serrated jaws. He 
went on doggedly. He reached Bronze, put 
a foot on each side of the big man's neck, 
got a good grip on the U-clamp and pulled 
it upward. Bronze rolled free, his great 
lungs pumping. The flat of the scalpel hit 
Garth between the shoulder-blades and 
knocked him sprawling next to Bronze. 

"How long have we been here? ,, asked 
Bronze painfully. 

"Day — day and a half. On Earth, that's 
eight, nine months. Wonder what Vila s 
doing ?" 

He looked around, suddenly sat up* 
Butch was gone. 

"Here come the rest of them. We'll 
know pretty soon." 

They stood up and watched the slow, 
distance-eating march of the giants. 

"They're carrying something . . . Will 
you look at those faces, Bronze ! 
"They look wild." 



"Glory ... See her? The tall cool one." 

"I see a tall one," said Bronze, deadpan. 

"She's putting something on the big table here. Hey, what is that thing?" 

"Looks like a tombstone." 

Garth said, "I've heard of making the 
prisoner dig his own grave, but this — " 

The stone was put in the small box and 
aired. Big hands lifted it and set it on 
their roof. 

"Get out from under." 

The stone dropped, teteered. Garth leapt 
up and steadied it. It settled back on its 
base. 

It was a rough monolith, about three 
feet tall, cut from soft, snow-white limestone. In it was a chamber with a glass 
door. 

"Will you ever look at that," breathed 
Bronze. 

Garth stared. 

Cut into the base of the stone were the 
words, 

THE GATEWAY 

OF 

GESELL 



"I don't get it," said Garth. 
Bronze said, "Look in the thing. The 
little door." 

Garth peered, and saw a plastic scroll. 
He opened the door, took out the scroll 
and unrolled it. In exquisitely neat script 
it read: 

This is your Gateway to all that is hur 

mom; 
to all that sweats, and cries, and tries; 
to all hungers, to all puzzlement; 
to mistakes compounded, 
to mysteries cleared, 
to growth, to strength, to complication 
to ultimate simplicity. 
Friends, be welcome, 
others be warned. 
Gesell is your gate 
As he zvas mine. 

A closed gate should never be guarded. 
My gate is open, I guard it well. 
Gesell knows I love him. 
Please tell him I know it too. 
Viki (Escaped) 



INCVBI OF PARALLEL X 



33 



There was a long quiet. 

"Escaped," said Garth. "Escaped." 

There was a thump over their heads. 
The airlock box had been placed there. 
There was a speaker baffle into it. It dropped. Bronze caught it, handed it to Garth. 

Garth looked out through the wall and 
saw Glory, her calm face suffused, her 
eyes misty. 

"Garth Gesell, you've read the scroll. 
I brought it because I didn't want you to 
wait ; I didn't want you to just hear about 
it. She fixed your Gateway, Garth, and 
shoved the stone through so we'd find it. 
Then, when we were whooping and bawling properly, she let us find her. 

"We couldn't have trusted any calculations, any statements. But we examined 
her and she's Escaped — oh, beyond question. That we could trust- For the one 
thing the Ffanx would never spend, not 
even to bait a trap for the biggest game, 
was a single drop of extradiol, which she 
carries unmolested. Viki's given us back 
a world, Garth, just by loving you . . . 

"Are you ready to start on the calculations?" 

Garth leaned against the wall near the 
speaker. Standing upright seemed to make 
his heart labor. "Not until IVe seen Viki," 
he said. 

There was a pause. Then Glory's voice 
again, "Bronze. Put on that helmet." 

Unquestioningly, Bronze did. The airlock box thumped above them. Garth sat 
down and leaned against the wall- His 



heart would not be quiet. 

Bronze was suddenly beside him, helmeted. He clasped Garth's shoulder so 
hard it hurt, and as suddenly was gone. 
There was a slight scuffling sound. Garth 
turned. Bronze, in the lock, was lowering 
someone into the cage. Then the upper 
box was taken away. 

She stood and looked at him gravely, 
unafraid. But this time there was a world 
of difference. 

He put out his arms. One of them 
moved. Perhaps both. He pressed her 
cheek against his, and when he took it away, both were wet. So one of them wept. 

Perhaps both. 

With her mathematical staff, Glory said, 
"He was quite right about the shift, you 
see. He and Viki and Bronze can go back 
through their own Gateway. But we'll have 
to open another. We go to a world where 
-we will be only three times the size of 
the natives. There we build still another 
Gateway. And that will be Earth, and we'll 
be home." 

"If it's as easy as that," asked the pudgy 
one, "Why did we have to be so cautious? 
Why didn't we go straight to that intermediate world and wait there?" 

"Because," said Glory Gehman, "the intermediate world is the Ffanx planet. Do 
you see?" 

Earth keeps a solemn festival at the meadows of Hack and Sack, through whose 
blue arch came first death, and then life. 



TWO COMPUTi 

SCIENCE ADVENTURE 



900KS 



#########»###< 



SWORD OF XOTA 

By JAMES BLISH 



an d The CITADEL IN SPACE 

By NEIL R. JONES 



3— Planet Storiea— Sept. 






SANCTUARY, 

OH ULLA! 

by J. T. Mac INTOSH 

Too smart, too shrewd, this fugitive from the Galactic Patrol. 
Alganet paid off the war-bemused Lilians with cheap back-firing 
images. His one wise mistake was to purchase a Ullan Woman. 



AL GANNETT HAD ALWAYS 
been smart. "I don't brag about it," 
he used to say modestly. "I can't 
take any credit for it. It just comes natural." 
Another of his maxims was: "Some people 
do everything the easy way. Not me. I 
sometimes take the hard way, just for 
practice." 

It had been the hard way all right, when 
he went in for space piracy, to prey on the 
milionaires , ships instead of tramps nobody cared about — too hard, perhaps. Anyway, he left Sol's system in a tiny ship 
without his loot, without his mob, and with 
half the G. P. on his tail. Some people 
might have said he hadn't been so very 
smart. But Al thought philosophically as 
he shot across space to nowhere in particular: "Maybe I did bite off more than 
I could chew. But, boy, look at what I 
bit!" 

Which, in a way, was smart. He could 
also console himself — and did — with the 
reflection that not everyone got a sendoff 
from half the Galactic Patrol. And being 
Al, he was planning even before he had 
slipped the great ships thundering in his 
wake. 

He had very little to help him to plan. 
He was alone, his ship was stripped for 
speed, and he had nothing but a copy of 
the Green Book as a starting point. So he 
started from that. 
34 



The Green Book is the guide to nowhere, where Al was going. A new edition 
comes out every year, and Al's was only 
three weeks off the presses. He had been 
buying it every year for a long while, always meaning to read it when he had the 
time. Now he had the time. 

The Green Book contains not a word 
about anything in Sol's system, but everything that is known about all stars, dead 
and alive, all planets and all nebulae outside it. It is small as treatises go, because 
the operative word is 'known'. A possibility 
can't get into the Green Book. Even a 
probability hasn't much hope. Nothing less 
than reasonable certainty has more than 
the chance of a banana split at a children's 
party with the editors of the Green Book. 

Without any sort of selection Al began to read. But he was used to finding 
what he was looking for, by the simple 
process of deciding he had been looking 
for what he found. And before he had 
finished reading the section on Ulla his 
plan was complete. 

"Boy," he said to himself softly, "that'll 
show them." 

Ulla was the second planet of the small 
star Morn, invisible from Earth and even 
from the new observatory on Mars. Morn 
was only some twenty light-years from 
Earth, but it was such a little star that 
its light gave up on the way. But Ulla. in 




TAen at hit the diet w« fcoeJL But /We were no lights . • ■ 



35 



36 PLANET 

compensation, was only some fourteen million miles from its sun, and was remarkably Earthlike. It was the same geological age as Earth to a day — as geological 
age went — had a mass equal to that of 
Venus, an atmosphere that was the twin of 
Earth's, and was populated by a humannoid race — possibly a human race. 

There had been some communication 
with the Ullans, said the Green Book, but 
it had been discontinued because the Ullans 
had human intelligence, human belligerence, and might be dangerous. The Ullans' 
attitude had been, Al read, translating as 
he went for his own benefit, "Hands off, 
or we'll poke you in the belly. We're doing 
all right. Maybe we can lick you, maybe 
not. But we're ready to try. Make one 
wrong move and we'll come out swinging." 

There was more of it, and when he had 
read it all Al summed up aloud. "They 
don't like us one little bit. There's nothing 
they'd like better than to lick the pants off 
the G. P. and the rest of the system. But 
they think just possibly we might lick the 
pants off them. 

"Point two," he went on, "from the 
way this is written the G. P. isn't quite 
sure either. Earth takes anything it can 
get But it's not sure it can take Ulla. 
So? So this is where Al Gannett comes 
in." 

He pointed his ship towards Morn. The 
G. P., he observed, seemed to have given 
up the chase. 

Y'ES, ULLA LOOKED amazingly like 
Earth. There was more land surface, land 
teeming with Ullans, according to the 
Green Book. Al had writen the estimated 
total population in the margin, complete 
with all the zeros: 7,000,000,000,000. It 
was impressive for a planet only fourfifths the size of Earth, and with some 
pretty big seas. That, he thought, could be 
a lot of cannon fodder. He dropped his 
ship lower and lower. 

His reception was mixed. He landed 
near a huge grey city, and when he came 
out there were a lot of Ullans waiting for 
him. They didin't fall on his neck, but no 
one shot him. They were very careful, the 
Ullans. 
They were also, he noticed with pleas


STORIES 

ure, near enough human to make no difference to him. That is, the Ullan girls 
were contoured on a familiar but not uninteresting pattern. It would be the men 
he would have to work with, but he had 
always known there was more to life than 
work. 

Illogically, like all races greeting a member of another, they were talking to him. 
He grinned, shaking his head. Then he 
tried to tell them he had a message for 
them, but would have to learn their language first. He didn't know whether that 
got across. But his second effort at communication did. At first they clearly 
thought they must have misunderstood him, 
but he hammered patiently at his point until they took it in. He was giving them his 
ship. It was theirs. They could destroy it, 
fly it, or take it apart, as the spirit moved 
them. 

Their surprise at this gave him a chance 
to observe them more closely. They — the 
girls, of course ; why should he look at the 
men ? — were smaller than Earth girls, with 
other major measurements in proportion. 
Their skin was faintly yellow, exactly like 
pure Chinese, but there was nothing Oriental about their features. The cheekbones 
were Slav, the mouth French, the eyes 
Arabic. The hair was black and oily and 
rather unpleasant. But a few had lighter, 
really beautiful hair. Pick one, he told himself, very tall for her race (five feet three), 
blonde as Ullans went (rich chestnut), 
unusually plump (waist 24) and with 
big feet (a little over half the size of his), 
and she could walk down any Terran street 
and pass as an Earthling and a lovely one 
at that. 

He knew he was safe. He had left the 
Green Book somewhere behind in space. 
For curiosity, if nothing else, they had to 
keep him safe at least until he knew their 
language. As a prisoner, perhaps ; but that 
suited him. Back on Earth he would be a 
prisoner or worse. 

It was a pity, he thought, about their 
clothes. A plain smock, even well-fitting 
and neat, even worn over nothing in particular, could never be very attractive. It 
wasn't even a dress — just a simple thing 
with plain round holes for arms and neck, 
falling as a short skirt to the knees. 



SANCTUARY, 

He became aware that while a crowd 
almost hid the ship from sight, a man beside him was pointing to objects and giving 
them names. Hell, he thought, that was 
going too far. He wanted to learn the 
language, sure, but they might at least 
give him time to look around or sit down 
somewhere before they sent him to school. 

It was time he did something to assert 
himself. The man was a foot shorter than 
Al. He pushed him gently but implacably 
aside and let his eyes rove around. Almost 
at once he found her — the girl who could 
walk down any street on Earth and have a 
lot of interest taken in the fact. 

"Okay," he said. "If I must have a 
teacher, you're it. Start talking." 

It took them a surprisingly short time 
to reach an understanding . ♦ . 

AS THE WEEKS went by Al marveled at his luck. He almost decided 
not to go through with his plan, things 
were so good as they were. But when he 
thought how all the things that could have 
been wrong fitted so neatly into the plan 
formulated before he had even seen Ulla, 
it seemed to him that he was meant to 
go on with it. 

One afternoon as he lay in the cool sunlight— -it warmed, but didn't burn as Sol 
did, on Earth and Venus, at any rate — he 
realised it was time for the next step. He 
opened his mouth to speak to Vellin, the 
tutor he had chosen, then shut it again, 
looking at her with pride. 

The Ullans had met him halfway. He 
was still a prisoner, but the fact was not 
constantly impressed on him. He had reasonable freedom and every comfort while 
he learned the language. 

Vellin had met him more than halfway, 
but, to his great regret, not much. She 
was sitting there placidly, dressed in the 
outfit he had designed for her — the less 
said about that the better — but she was still 
his very official tutor, despite all the modifications he had tried to superimpose on 
the relationship. She smiled, she laughed, 
she treated him almost as a brother, she 
talked of what he wanted to hear, she 
taught when he was ready to be taught and 
relaxed when he wanted to relax. But . . . 

She hadn't been a member of Ullan Se


©H VLLLA! 



37 



curity when he picked her out. She had 
been a mill worker — which was a hard life, 
and she was glad to have a rest from it. 
When he selected her as his tutor she had 
immediately been appointed an acting officer in Security — he knew all about that — 
and at once had an even harder life, spending most of the day with him and the rest 
being coached herself, so that she could instruct him. There was no secret about that 
either. She had to learn a lot more about 
the language than she had known, and 
more about Ullan customs, resources, psychology and a dozen other things. She didn't necessarily tell all this to Al — but she 
had to know it. She had to know not only 
what to tell him, but what not to tell him. 

So altogether she exchanged a tough job 
for an even tougher one. But she seemed 
happy. For one thing it was a complete 
change from anything she had known. For 
another, she didn't work all the time when 
she was with Al. And one more factor: 
she experienced from him another thing 
she had never know before — unconcealed 
admiration. Among her own people she 
was just a girl — too tall, too fat, too half a 
dozen other things. Not ugly, just not 
pretty. But Al- — well, Al had never pretended to be indifferent to women, nor 
pretended to them that he was. 

"Vellin," said Al at last. She looked up 
with that gratifying attention of hers. "Vellin, Fm ready to talk now. I think I've got 
the hang of this language of yours. It's 
not hard, not if you're smart. I wasn't 
going to talk until I was sure I could make 
myself understood and understand everything that was said to me. But now I talk 
as well as you. Better maybe." 

Vellin nodded, smiling. "You have a 
tongue that can break stones," she said. 
It was a compliment, in the unpoetic Ullan 
language. 

"Well, bring on a few boulders," said 
Al. "The high-ups, mind. I don't want to 
talk to some tenth-rate Security officer." 

"Security officers are never tenth-rate," 
said Vellin mildly. "Fm not tenth-rate myself now. Fm very important." She said 
it with the happy wonder of a child. 

"So they must expect something from 
me," retorted Al. "And maybe they're 
right" 



38 



PLANET STORIES 



«T WANT VelUn there/' said Al de
A cidedly. 

"Certainly," agreed Maber, the only officer apart from Vellin that Al had seen so 
far. "But not . . ." He glanced at her in 
distaste. A plain girl dressed like a peacock 
looks even more like a very plain girl. 
And to Maber, Vellin was only a little 
above hideousness. 

"No, she's got a uniform," said Al. "So 
have I. Give us ten minutes/* 

And in ten minutes tutor and pupil met 
outside the conference room — the biggest 
room in Al's chalet. Al nodded, satisfied, 
and Vellin looked at him in open admiration. 

Al was too smart to wear a gaudy, too 
splendid uniform. He and Vellin entered 
the room in plain grey tunics with silver 
buttons, razor-edged grey slacks, and shining black shoes. Only a subtle but quite 
sufficient modification of cut allowed for 
the difference in sex. In the uniforms he 
had designed he and Vellin were very impressive indeed, Al knew, even to Ullans. 
That was the idea. And he wasn't unaware 
of the advantage he gained by having Vellin in similar uniform to his. It was like 
gaining an ally. 

There was a formal presentation ceremony. There seemed to be no rank in Security. Everyone was just an officer. There 
were Al and Vellin, Maber, and two men 
he had never seen before, Holn and Ader. 

Al didn't waste any time. First he told 
them a little of what he had learned about 
them. They never, as a people, went back 
on their word. He could trust them, he said. 
(Al had never trusted anyone, but this was 
one time when he had no choice). So if 
they gave their word that he would be 
treated well, as one of them, he was ready 
to take it. That was all he wanted. He 
never meant to go back to Sol's system. 

"You wish your gift of your spaceship," 
said Maber, "to pay for your acceptance 
among us." 

"No," replied Al. "I can give you a lot 
more than the spaceship. And in return I 
want no more than I've already asked." 

The others glanced quickly at Vellin, 
trying to read something from her expression. But she betrayed nothing, neither 
knowledge nor, in this case, ignorance. 




"You're afraid of Earth," said Al softly. 
There was a stir. No one ever told an 
Ullan he was afraid of anything. "You're 
afraid," Al insisted, "and you're jealous. 
You'd attack if you knew enough, and 
thought you'd succeed. But you don't know 
enough, and you might not succeed. Well, 
I can tell you what you want to know. 
From me you can learn whether to attack 
or to leave Earth alone. And remember, 
whatever happens, I'm one of you. Whatever happens, I take it as an Ullan." 

"You could have been sent," said Holn, 
"to make us attack." 

"Why? The advantage is always with 
the attacker. If Earth wanted to fight, she'd 
attack. But she's scared as you are." 

"But how can you help us, Al?" asked 
Vellin, giving away her ignorance. "You're 
no technician." 

"I can answer that," said Maber. "Alganet already knows more of our science 
than you do, Vellin. Or can apply it better. From a man we can deduce the optimum level of technology of his race. Alganet is clever. He is an Earthman. From 
him we can discover the task that would be 
before us in an attack on Earth. We need 
only him and his spaceship." 

HE LOOKED searchingly at Al. "Yes, 
you are very clever, Alganet. You 
knew we would do this anyway. So you 
offer it freely, and ask a small price. We 
agree, naturally. And the initiative is with 
you, not us." 

"One thing I want to ask," said Holn. 
"Alganet, why are you betraying your 
system?" 

1 'Betray' is a hard word," said Al easily. 
"Maybe I don't like Earth as it is. Maybe 
I like you. Maybe I think it would be better for both if you stepped in." 

"That point of view is not inconceivable," 
Holn admitted. 

"Then . . .?" 

"I have answered you already," said 
Maber. "Taking you as the optimum Earthman . . ." 

• "I wouldn't do that," said Al modestly. 
"There's some pretty smart boys on Earth. 
I've run across one or two." 

"Taking you as an intelligent Earthman 
then, as you must be, and your ship as a 






SAHCTUARY, 

recent product of your technology, we can 
find both your race's potentialities and the 
point it has reached. The technique has 
been highly developed. Of course we follow 
your plan, Alganet. You are ready to submit to the most rigorous mental and physical examination?" 

"I've said so, haven't I?" 

"No — merely implied it. But if you are, 
then in a year's time we should be ready 
for war. If we have a good chance of 
success, we'll take it." 

"I knew you would. You're afraid of 
Earth, and afraid to leave her alone. So 
because you're afraid, you'll fight. I know 
Ullan psychology too, Maber." 

IT WAS STRANGE that Vellin had to 
be compelled to marry Al. She had always liked and admired him — which to 
an Ullan meant she loved him. But perhaps Security didn't handle her right. 
They told her it was desirable to have all 
possible holds on Alganet, and that he had 
expressed his willingness to marry her. It 
was only necessary, in their view, to instruct her to marry him. 

She didn't rebel because it was impossible for her to think of rebellion. She accepted the verdict that it was part of her 
job to marry Al. 

But Al didn't want thatr"No girl marries me because she has to," he told her 
bluntly. "If you don't like the idea, fineI'll tell Security I've changed my mind." 

Vellin gasped. "Don't do that," she begged. "They'll blame me. They'll think I—" 

"They'll think what I tell them to think. 
Sure, maybe Til have to leave them with a 
vague suspicion that yott must have handled me the wrong way. But if you can only 
marry me as a duty, baby, I'm dealing myself out." 

Vellin's only answer to the first real 
mental problem of her life was to burst 
into tears. Al looked at her thoughtfully. 
Try to comfort a weeping woman and you 
only make yourself look silly, he thought. 
Al had never made a habit of looking silly. 
It. was one of the many things in which 
there was no percentage. 

"Okay," he said, "mop up and stop making a noise. It only means I have to talk 
louder, and why should I waste my energy? 



OH VLLLA! 



39 



I'll tell you what I'll do, Vellin. I'll give 
you time to make up your mind. I was always a patient guy. I'll tell Security I'm 
in no hurry to g^t married. Any time you 
change your mind, let me know. If you 
keep on thinking it's your duty to marry 
me, after a while I'll tell Security you're 
not my type." 

Vellin had stopped crying, but there was 
still doubt in her face. "But it is a duty," 
she said. "I don't understand what you 
want. I " 

"Look, baby," said Al dispassionately. 
"You've heard of a thing called love, haven't 
you? You Ullans don't talk about it as 
much as we do, but you still know about 
it. I've had women in love with me, and 
I didn't marry them. But one thing's sure 
— before I do marry any girl, she has to 
be in love with me. Believe me, if it ever 
happens to you, you'll know it." 

He sighed. "I suppose I must be half in 
love with you myself," he admitted, "otherwise I wouldn't take so much trouble over 
you. You may be dumb, but I like you. 
And that's more than I ever said to any 
Earth girl." 

When Vellin looked at him there was 
something in her eyes that showed him 
he wouldn't have to wait long before she 
knew what he was talking about. 

THE DAY CAME when the ships began to take off, one every thirty seconds for thirty-five days. Ulla was a single 
minded, industrial planet. In a year it could 
have built ships for its entire population. 
Instead it built some hundred thousand 
great ships of war, not as fast as the G. 
P. ships Al described, but heavier and 
twice as deadly. As that vast navy took off 
and gathered in space, Al felt almost sorry 
for the civilization built round Earth. 

It was a long wait, and there was nothing for anyone on Ulla to do but wait. 
Except Al, who had always been good at 
waiting and finding something useful to 
do. The end of a wait had often meant 
success, riches, luxury for a while. Even 
oftener it had meant getting smoothly on 
the run, so during any wait there was always the job of preparing for escape, just 
in case. 

He didn't think it necessary to prepare 



40 



PLANET 



for leaving Ulla in a hurry. But it was so 
much a habit, and had served him so well, 
that he made his preparations as usual. 

He was no longer a prisoner. The Ullans 
knew he had thrown in his lot with them, 
so they didn't have to guard him any 
more. The tests he had gone through were 
enough to convince them he was sincere. 

His own ship was out of the question 
as a means of escape, but one of the first 
jobs the Ullans had done as an experiment 
had been duplicating it. One night Al went 
back to something he hadn't done for a 
long time— he did a job himself, and did 
it well. He hadn't lost his talent. He left 
a yard blazing, evidence of how the fire 
had started — a faulty fuse — and so much 
damage in a limited area that no one could 
ever discover that the wreckage of one of 
the small experimental ships was missing. 

Yes, it was a good job. Al thought of it 
with satisfaction. He had never done a 
better job. He had his ship, no one knew 
it, and he hadn't even had to kill anyone. 

The only problem had been what to do 
with his ship when he had it. But that had 
been fairly obvious. It had to be close at 
hand. So Al put it in a cellar and walled 
up the entrance. He would have to blow 
up the wall to get to it. But that wouldn't 
matter if he was making a getaway. 

He reassured himself again. It wasn't 
likely. But it was smart to be ready for 
anything. 

Thenhe went back to giving Vellin plenty 
of opportunity to appreciate his good qualities. So if the time had passed slowly for 
Ulla, it didn't hang heavily on Al's hands. 

Then at last the fleet was back. Every 
one on Ulla saw it, everyone looked up — 
for the ships converged on their landinggrounds all over the planet at once. Everyone feverishly sought the lights of victory. 
Everyone tried to believe the ships were 
ablaze with light. 

But there were no lights. It was defeat. 

Al stared like the rest, Vellin at his side. 
He counted the ship automatically. Seventeen. There had only been eighteen from 
that field. One missing — only one. Seventeen of them might have been missing, 
and the one that was left might have returned blazing with the lights of victory. 



STORIES 

Seventeen back — did it mean there had 
been no conflict at all? But then there 
would have been flashes, not seventeen 
dark, silent ships dropping to the field. 

"Well," he said harshly, turning to Vellin, "whatever went wrong they'll blame 
it on me. I didn't tell them Earth had this 
or that. I misled them in saying so-and-so. 
My ship must have been centuries out of 
date. That's what they'll say. 

"You were smart after all/' he added. 
"You didn't link yourself to a failure — 
or someone your people will call a failure. 
Look what you saved yourself from. The 
wrath of a whole beaten planet that has 
to work it off on someone else." 

Vellin said nothing, but the hurt in her 
eyes made Al wish he hadn't been so bitter. 

PRIDE OR CAPRICE made Al receive 
them in his uniform. He had never been 
in any army; but somehow he had more 
control over himself in that neat, sober 
costume that made him look as if he were 
somebody. 

The obvious thing for him to do, of 
course, was to make his escape while he 
could. But Al was curious. He couldn't 
leave without discovering exactly what had 
happened. 

Besides, he was in no hurry to decide 
all was lost. It was still possible that a 
bold stroke — a typical Al Gannett manoeuvre — would save for him all he seemed 
to have lost. 

Vellin wore her uniform too. Al didn't 
know quite how to take that. Was she facing both ways ? Then he saw it, and a glow 
of confidence ran through him. She was 
backing him. Her world had been beaten, 
but not Alganet. He would never be beaten. 

Lightly, just before Maber arrived, he 
kissed her. She stepped back quickly, surprised. Ullan love-making was torrid, with 
nothing of tenderness in it. She had never 
encountered gentleness — and probably 
never expected it from Al. 

Maber came with two officers unknown 
to Al. That was good, Al thought — a ceremonial approach. A high official like Maber 
wouldn't come to drag him away personally. 

"Holn and Ader are dead," said Maber 
coldly. "You are responsible for their 



SANCTUARY, 

deaths/' 

"I thought that would be the line," retorted Al with equal coolness. "It's all my 
fault, is that it?" 

Maber stared at him levelly. "We're 
not vindictive, Alganet," he said. "And 
you were sincere. We still know that. But 
thousands of our men have died — " 

"And you need a scapegoat. That's nothing new. But first — what happened?" 

"A patrol met us. Twenty ships. Twenty 
ships against a hundred thousand. We used 
our vibration ray. Nothing happened. They 
must have some insulation that damps it 
out. Or a screen that stops it. We tried 
our energy beam. They sucked it in. They 
took all we could give them and swung in 
front of the ships that had sent out no 
beam, as if asking for more. We tried missiles. Their radio brushed our control aside 
and they sent the missiles back. Some ships 
were destroyed then by their own shells. 
We tried unguided missiles. They curved 
slightly and shot past the Earth ships. 

"But why go on? They made us show 
them every trick we had. They were brave 
men in those ships. They must have met 
us expecting to be blasted to nothing. Probably they only hoped to delay us until a 
larger force arrived. Then they found they 
could handle us without help — one ship to 
five thousand of ours. They kept inviting 
us to produce our strongest weapon, whatever we'd kept in reserve. 

"We had nothing in reserve," Maber 
went on heavily. "We were weaponless. 
We might as well have left our vibration 
ray and energy beam and rockets and 
everything else back here. They were cautious at the start. But soon they saw we 
represented no problem. 

"Then we tried to pass them. We 
thought we might accomplish something 
by sheer numbers. We drove on towards 
Earth. 

"When they saw what we were doing, 
they began to pick off our leaders. Holn 
and Ader were in one of the first ships 
to be destroyed. The Earth ships used a 
beam concentrated to the thickness of a 
finger. I don't know whether it was a heat 
ray or not. But it could hardly touch a 
ship without destroying it. Imagine a hole 
driven right through a ship, through every


OH VLLLAI 41 

thing in its path. But usually they swung 
their ray and it cut ships in half. Sometimes two or three at a time. Still we drove 
on, with the twenty Earth ships darting 
about among us. 

"Soon we saw that not a single ship 
could ever reach Earth. At the rate we 
were being eliminated, the whole fleet 
would have been gone long before we got 
within striking distance of the inner planets." 

"And it wouldn't have made any difference," said Al, "for they're fortified 
more strongly than the whole fleet, let 
alone twenty ships." 

"When we turned, they left us alone," 
said Maber bitterly. "They lost interest. 
We were only a toy fleet." 

THEY STOOD in silence for a moment. It might have been a remembrance ceremony for the dead dreams of 
conquest formulated at previous meetings. 

"They'll be here soon," said Al. "They 
won't destroy Ulla. They'll be civil and 
polite, but they'll still be conquerors. There 
will be trade, and Ulla will benefit — but 
on Earth's terms." 

"But you," said Maber softly, "won't be 
here to see it." 

Al laughed. He didn't feel as brave as 
he looked. No one could be. He was in a 
tight spot, and perhaps he should have 
escaped while he could. But to where? 

"Threats, Maber?" he taunted. "I've 
heard threats before, in a dozen languages, 
on a score of worlds. But I'm still here." 

"And alive," Maber admitted, "for the 
moment." 

They saw no movement. One moment 
Al was smiling coolly at them, the next he 
was holding a blaster that covered them 
all. 

"I admit this is a poor argument," he 
said, "but it lends force to what I have 
to say." 

"You're mad," Maber told him. "What 
do you think you can accomplish, on a 
world where everyone is against you?" 

Vellin was behind Al. Tensed, he could 
hear her excited breathing and moved 
gradually so that he could cover her also. 

But he paid too much attention to Vellin, who didn't matter, and Maber, who 






42 PLANET 

was merely trying to hold it. He whirled as 
he saw a movement out of the corner of 
his eye. One of the officers had drawn a 
blaster, not the ceremonial gun at his belt, 
but another weapon from his shoulder. And 
as he flicked his own blaster round Al 
knew he was too late. 

There was a faint hiss, and the officer 
was staring at the stump of an arm. Blaster and hand had disappeared in a flash 
of blue flame. 

It was safe for Al to turn his head. Vellin, her blaster still levelled, was white but 
determined. 

"Thanks, Vellin," he said. "You're with 
me, after all?" 

Vellin, tensed and resolute, didn't answer. But it was an unnecessary question. 

"Two traitors/' said Maber harshly. "A 
traitor to Earth and a traitor to Ulla. You 
make a perfect pair. What now, traitors? 
Do you think you can escape ?". 

"Tie that man's hand before he bleeds 
to death, Vellin," said Al. "He may be 
needed yet." 

HE TURNED BACK to Maber and 
grinned crookedly. He was beginning to sense something he didn't like. But 
he had never been afraid to face facts. It 
wasn't smart to deny things which were 
obviously true. 

"I don't think you told me the whole 
story, Maber," he said. "Why blame me? 
What did I do wrong?" 

Maber smiled too, and there was no 
more warmth in his smile than in Al's. 

"According to the picture we had of 
Earth, nothing like this could have happened," he said. "They were a race on our 
level, we thought, with a certain superiority 
in technique and experience which could 
be overcome by numbers and surprise. That 
was the picture our scientists built up from 
their study of you and your ship. 

"But," he went on slowly, "there was 
one wrong inference. Your ship was all 
right. But you — we thought you were 
clever. You thought yourself clever, and 
you seemed so to us. But, Alganet, we 
were both wrong. Our defeat shows plainly that you must be a very ordinary Earthman. Perhaps even stupid. It was in believing in your high relative intelligence 



STOMES 

that we made our mistake. If we had had 
ouly two Earthmen for purposes of psychological comparison, we could have 
found the probable variation in level of 
intelligence, and realized we hadn't a 
chance." 

Al felt a wild urge to shout and rave that 
Maber was wrong and that he was smart 
and had always been smart. That Maber 
was covering up for the Ullan scientists' 
mistakes. That they had simply failed to 
realize how smart he was. 

Instead he said evenly: "That's not my 
affair. You said we couldn't escape, Maber. 
You were wrong. I was smart enough to 
plan even for this. We could escape right 
now — but we won't. You need me, Maber. 
You may not like it, but that doesn't alter 
the fact. Stupid, am I? I'll show you just 
how stupid I can be." 

He put away his blaster. It was merely 
a gesture. He could have it out again before Maber could move. But it was a 
good gesture. He said over his shoulder: 

"Vellin. Put away your gun." 

She hesitated in disbelief. Then as she 
saw that Al meant it, she slowly pushed the 
blaster back in her belt. 

"Go on, Maber," Al invited. "Two traitors. What was it you were going to do ?" 

"You said " Maber stumbled on 

the words. "You said we needed you." 

"You'll always need me, Maber," said 
Al. "I may not be smart on Earth, but I'm 
smart here. Maybe some day I'll have to 
move out — when some bigger operator 
moves in. But meanwhile, Maber, you need 
me to meet the envoys from Earth and talk 
to them — and that's only the beginning. 
I'll get better terms than you would. They 
won't like me — they chased me out. You 
don't like me either. But you'll both need 
me as a go-between for a while." 

"Earth will demand you as a criminal," 
Maber retorted. "Besides, we're conquered. They won't treat with us, they'll tell 
us what they want." 

Al shook his head slowly. "You don't 
understand economics. There are over 7,000,000,000,000 Ullans, and this is an industrial planet. Earth can't rule Ulla. You 
forget that. It would need too much power 
and too many men to keep Ulla subjected 
Can't you see that?" 



SANCTUARY, 

He grinned as Maber brightened. "But 
Earth will have to keep that vast potential 
in check," Al went on, "and the only way 
is trade. We'll be rich, Maber. Have you 
no imagination ?" 

He made a derisive gesture. "As for 
Earth demanding me as a criminal, they'll 
think twice about that when I have seven 
million million Ullans behind me. And I 
will have, Maber, won't I?" 

It was Al's greatest coup. He had said 
just enough — enough to show the brighter 
possibilities and conceal the difficulties. But 
difficulties, Al thought contentedly — I 
thrive on them. Vellin was a difficulty, and 
she came round in the end. 

She had made up her mind now. One 



O0 ULLLA! 



43 



glance at her showed she thought there was 
no one in the galaxy like Al. And Al wasn't 
the one to deny it. 

"It's only a respite," said Maber. "It 
can't last." 

Al grinned, and this time there was a 
whole world of amusement in his smile. 

"My whole life has been made up of 
respites," he said. "I'm always sitting on 
top of a volcano, Maber. I like it. There's 
no fun in doing things the easy way." 

"But maybe this time I'll try to make 
it last." He put his arm about Vellin's 
waist. "I never tried it before. But now 
I've got responsibilities. 

"It's a new feeling," he added thoughtfully. 



Give to Conquer 

Cancer 



AMERICAN CANCER SOCIETY 



Why was it, Gongo wondered, that the Earthman lay asleep 
itt his space-freighter bunk and whispered in many yokes? 




it teat u mistake for Viorton @ 
have gone back to sleep ■ a • 



the inhabited MEN 



NORTON WAS THE ONLY ONE 
of the three on the Ara who was 
superstitious, and even he didn't 
attempt serious argument against landing 
on the planetoid. Making repairs on the 
Ara was absolutely necessary; the repairs 
couldn't be made in space ; and he couldn't 
even remember who had told him that the 
planetoid was unlucky, So they landed. 
44 



by 

MARGARET 

ST. CLAIR 



THE INHABITED MEN 

went briskly. The crew cloth bag. 



The repairs 
worked for eighteen hours out of the day, 
and ate on the job. Inside of a week the 
Ara was lifting her tired old shoulders up 
from the surface of the planetoid. She got 
to a frequented portion of the spaceways 
before she broke down completely. It was 
as much as her crew had dared hope 
for. They were picked up by a passing 
freighter which claimed the Ara as salvage, 
and six months later they were landed, 
gaunt and angry and soiled, at Port Pendraith. None of the three, Evans or Norton or Miller, was ever to realize that on 
the planetoid he had been colonized. 
^ In Pendraith, they discussed their situation. They wanted to stay together, if it 
was possible. They tried to lease another 
ship, and couldn't raise the deposit money. 
They asked acquaintances and friends for 
grubstakes, and were rejected. Finally they 
saw that if they weren't to starve in Pendraith, they'd have to separate. And from 
then on different things happened to them. 
But they ended up exactly the same. 

■^JORTON was the superstitious one. 
«t^ He was short, dark, thickset, and inclined to be irascible. He shipped out of 
Pendraith on a freighter which was almost 
as foul and ill-found as the one which had 
landed him there in the first place. On the 
ship he was assigned to the steward's department, as waiter and galley boy. 

The cook, Gongo, was a native of Pendraith. He had been kicked about, with 
various degrees of brutality, ever since his 
fifth birthday, and by now he could fawn 
or cringe or snarl with equal facility. In 
his way, he was a religious man. 

Gongo and Norton bunked together in a 
room so small that if one of them stood up 
in it, the other had to stretch out full 
length in his berth. The one desirable thing 
in the room was the airduct which, instead 
of being in the ceiling as was customary, 
had been located in the wall just over the 
upper berth. Fresh air can be a considerable luxury. Gongo slept in the upper berth. 

On the second day out from Pendraith, 
Norton took Gongo's things out of the 
upper berth and put his own in. Naturally, 
he moved the bedding at the same time. 
Under Gongo's pillow he found a small 



45 



He opened it. It held a vaguely manshaped piece of hard root, a wad of lint 
mixed with hair, and some crystals of 
what looked like rock salt. 

Norton held the bag by the strings, 
thinking. A less superstitious man would 
have laughed and put the bag back under 
the pillow of Gongo's new bunk. But Norton was a little afraid of the thing. After 
a minute he took it out in the corridor 
and threw it in the reducer. It flared up 
briefly and then went to join the freighter's auxiliary fuel supply. 

Gongo discovered the change of bunks 
that night. He was not much surprised. 
He had been rather expecting it, since 
Norton was bigger and heavier than he. 
But when he felt under the pillow of his 
new bunk and couldn't find his bag, he 
turned quite white. He said, "What did 
you do with my bag?" 

"Threw it out, sticky." The last word 
was a nickname much resented by the 
natives of Pendraith. Norton was lying 
in the upper bunk. His hand was resting 
on the blaster he wasn't supposed to have, 
and did have. "Want to make something 
out of it?" 

There was a silence. Then Gongo said, 
"I guess not." 

In the third week, when the two men 
were in the galley, Gongo said, "What's 
the matter, you don't eat? You think I 
poison the food?" There was hopeful 
malice in his voice. 

"Naw," Norton replied judicially, '"you 
wouldn't have the nerve." He spat into the 
sink. "Your chow's not so hot, that's all. 
It don't appeal to my appetite." 

That night Norton talked in his sleep. 
The voice was thin and small, to come 
from his chunky body. Gongo would not 
have heard it at all if he had not been lying 
awake thinking of his lost god. 

After a second he slipped out of his 
bunk and stood with his head leaned toward Norton in the dark. "Thya," came 
a thread, a wisp of sound, "do you hear 
me ?" 

"Why not?" 

"And I." 

"And I." 

"Isn't it wonderful," came the first fila


46 PLANET 

ment, "to live, be free, grow, expand?" 

"I warn you — Thya, Pohm, Rya, all the 
res t — you grow too far. It is dangerous. 
You grow too far." The wisp of sound 
managed to be harsh. 

"How can we help it? It is difficult to 
refuse to grow." 

"You must try. No excuses. It must be 
done." 

The half-dozen filaments of sound swelled into a tiny clamor in the dark. Gongo 
sucked in his breath. He was thinking of 
folk-lore. He found the switch and turned 
on the light. 

Norton sat up in his bunk, instantly 
angry. "What the hell do you think you're 
doing?" 

"You were talking in your sleep." 

"Oh," Norton yawned and rubbed his 
hand over his face. "Did I say anything?" 
he asked. 

"You. ♦ . .were talking about growing. 
There were more voices than one in your 
throat." 

"Yeah? You must of imagined it. Stow 
it, sticky, and turn out the light. I got to 
have my sleep." 

He rolled over as Gongo obeyed. Gongo 
sat down on the edge of his berth. He 
was badly frightened. 

He sat there in the dark, thinking about 
what had happened to his divinity and the 
various disguises the devil can assume, until Norton's breathing grew regular. When 
he was sure that Norton was asleep again, 
he got one of his kitchen knives out from 
under his mattress. He opened Norton 
with it from pubic bone to diaphragm. It 
was a mistake for Norton to have gone 
back to sleep. 

EVANS was the second of the crew of 
the Am. He was a big, slow-moving 
man, with a friendly smile and a mind 
which also moved rather slowly. Since he 
spoke politely and was presentable, he got 
a berth on a luxury liner as a steward. 

The name of the liner was the Bootic. 
It was a new ship, equipped with the latest 
devices, and it carried four stewardesses 
to cater to the needs of women passengers. 
Since Evans was friendly, obliging, and 
not offensively on the make, he soon got 
to be a favorite with the stewardesses. 



STORIES 

One of them, a small, dark girl named 
Helen Dawes, he more than liked. She 
teased him a good deal, since he was easy 
to tease, but he thought she liked him 
too. He began to wonder what the attitude 
of the Booties owners would be toward 
letting a married couple work out on the 
same ship, and how much the down payment on a semi-house in Port Pendraith 
would be. 

The fuel tanks of the Bootic exploded 
when the ship was entering the asteroid 
belt. For a moment there was a flare almost as bright as a nova, and then the 
safety devices went to work. The result 
was that though everybody aft of partition 
number one was killed almost instantly, 
those forward of it had about two minutes 
to don suits and get out through the emergency hatch. 

Evans and Helen and a middle-aged 
woman named Edna Kinch were on the 
right side. The emergency hatch, though 
it was red-hot, worked. When the three 
of them were about half a kilo away they 
turned and saw the Bootic, with the curious 
transparent look burning objects have, eaten with fire from stem to stern. Then they 
jetted their way to the nearest asteroid 
and sat down to wait. 

For the first hour or so they talked 
about rescue. The Bootic, after all, had 
been in a main-travelled spaceway. Though 
the explosion had given her no time to 
send out an S.O.S., the force of the explosion — (What had caused it? Evans said 
he thought some tiny irregularity must 
have developed in the lining of the fuel 
tanks since they had had their last microscopic inspection. The Board of Inquiry, 
months later, was to echo his opinion.)— 
the force of the explosion would certainly 
have registered on the instrument panel of 
any ship in the vicinity. 

That meant that ships would soon be 
jetting up to look for survivors. And, 
though the asteroid the three had landed 
on was only about a third of a kilo through, 
and their suit radios couldn't project a 
signal for more than a kilo and a half, it 
was reasonable to assume they'd be found. 
Oh, yes. But as time passed and the three 
began to realize the odds against them, 
they fell silent. 




They had oxygen 
hours. The joker in their theories about 
rescue, of course, was that ships in space 
are usually separated by the kind of distance known as astronomical. It was almost impossible that any ship had been 
near enough to the Bootic to have the explosion register. When the time came at 
which the Bootic ought to have reached 
another signal point in her course, and no 
signal was sent, she would be missed. A 
search ship would be sent out then, no 
doubt about it. But that would take almost 
six days. The survivors had oxygen for 
twelve hours. 

Edna Kinch had hurt her leg rather 
badly getting through the escape hatch. 
There were analgesics in her suit, and she 
took doses of them, but even when she 
was nearly unconscious she kept moaning. 
Since the other two couldn't help her, 
they walked — floated, rather— a little away 
from her and sat down. They looked out 
at the stars. 

The constellations were not much changed from their familiar shapes on earth. 
The swan was overhead, eternally flying 
between Altair and Vega, and Antares 
burned redly in the forepart of the scorpion. If Evans and his girl wanted to 
see Achenar, all they had to do was to 
walk around the asteroid. 

Helen said, "Vega's a beautiful star, . . . 
I can't realize that we're going to die." 



THE INHABITED MEN 47 

for about twelve three-quarters to half to one quarter and 
on down. When the needles pointed to 
one eighth, Helen said, "We've got an. 
algesics, Bill. Let's take them. That way, 
we won't ever know." 

He nodded. Together, smiling at each 
other in the starlight, they sipped at their 
stirrup cups. The stars seemed to swell 
and billow, and then a fog fell over them. 
It got dark. 

Evans roused at last. He was confused, 
and then surprised, and then he looked 
around for Helen. Had there been a miracle? 

She had fallen over on her side. Her 
face was dark and congested, and when 
he saw her he was glad he hadn't let himself hope. He went back to Edna Kinch, 
and found that she was dead too. Both 
Helen's tank and hers were quite empty. 
So was his. But he was still alive. 

Evans couldn't understand it. He 
thought for a while, and then he took off 
his helmet. No rush of air left his suit; 
it was empty. He wasn't breathing. But 
he was still alive. 

He sat there for about half an hour, 
between the bodies of the two women, 
trying to understand it. He couldn't make 
any sense out of it. Finally he unhooked 
his blaster from its holster. The gauge 
read full charge. So he blew his head off. 



EVANS wanted to kiss her so much 
that he felt like crying. He didn't dare 
open his helmet, of course. He put his 
arm around her, and they sat with their 
gloved fingers interlaced. He told her how 
he felt about her, and about the semihouse in Port Pendraith. 

She said, "One of those semi-houses with 
the round living room. Yes. I wish I 
could kiss you, Bill. . . .1 wish " 

He said, "I'm going to give you my 
oxygen tank." 

She cried out at that. "You can't be so 
cruel ! No, please, no. I love you, Bill. Are 
you going to make me watch you die?" 

So he gave up that idea. He put his 
arm around her again and they sat there, 
talking from time to time, and seeing the 
gauges on their oxy-tanks move from 



M 



ILLER had the hardest time of the 
three getting a job. He hung around 
employment agencies until the clerks frowned when they saw his lean, angry face 
coming in the door. He borrowed money 
from acquaintances as long as they would 
loan him any, and then he tried panhandling. He grew desperate. He didn't take to 
drinking — that was not one of his vices 
— but if he had not pawned his blaster 
early in his difficulties, he would certainly 
have tried a stick-up job with it. He had 
almost reached the point of no return 
which separates the merely unemployed 
from the unemployable, when Quilk, the 
proprietor of the Royal Glory, hired him. 
The Royal Glory was a "louse house", 
a fifth-rate stereo theatre which specialized 
in pornographic tactifilms and historical 
epics slanted to appeal to Pendraithian 
patriotism. Whether the undernourished 



48 PLANET 

derelicts who composed the Royal Glory's 
audiences were capable of responding to 
either of these classes of stimuli is doubtful, but Quilk took his programs seriously. 
He thought of himself as a patron of the 
arts, and he wanted to attract "A better 
class of personages" than the Royal Glory 
had been getting. He laid down, as a 
house rule, that nobody was to sit through 
the same program more than three times. 
And he hired Miller, as ticket-taker and 
bouncer, to enforce this. 

Miller did not dislike his new work. His 
air of repressed anger made him an efficient bouncer, and he was amused by 
Quilk. As he grew more familiar with the 
Royal Glory's routine, he had leisure moments, and he took to spending these in a 
tiny paved court at the back of the theatre 
where Quilk also took the air. 

Quilk was a health faddist. He would 
sit on a bench in the patch of sunlight in 
the little court, sipping a health drink or 
occasionally getting up to take an exercise, 
and discourse to Miller about the benefits 
of the latest health diet he was following. 
He tried a new one every week or so. 
Miller, sprawled on the pavement, would 
listen in indolent, half-scornful amusement, as pleased with the sunlight as a 
vegetable. 

Time passed, Miller though Quilk was 
paying him poorly, was saving money. 
Quilk let him sleep in the ticket office — 
he took the box-office receipts home with 
him at night, of course — and Miller's expenditure for food was almost nothing. It 
was not that he was starving himself — in 
fact, he was gaining weight. But food did 
not much interest him. He began to think 
dreamily of buying a new spaceman's outfit and going back to the employment 
agencies. Presentable and prosperous-looking, he was sure he could ship out into 
space again. Then the green plague broke 
out in Port Pendriath. 

Quilk was terrified. He talked of closing 
up the Royal Glory, and for a day Miller's 
future hung in the balance. Then the two 
strongest traits in Quilk's personality reasserted themselves. 

"The show must go on/' he said solemnly 
to his employee. "In a time of crisis such 
as this, personages have a particular need 



STORIES 

for the solace of art. The show must go 
on! Don't you agree, Miller?" 

"Sure," Miller answered. Quilk, as always, amused him. He was trying to smile. 

"And beside, I am in no danger," Quilk 
continued, a little hastily. "Personally, I 
mean. It is not as if I were an ignorant, 
undernourished Pendraithian, with no 
awareness of the basic laws of health. With 

my new diet Yes, the show must go 

on!" 

"You bet !" Miller agreed. This time, he 
did smile. Quilk looked at him a little 
suspiciously. 

"Of course, we will take elementary 
prophylactic measures. You can wear my 
blaster. When you take the tickets, Miller, 
I want you to look in their mouths." 

"H'um?" Miller said. 

"Yes, in their mouths. It is well known 
that the first signs of the plague appear 
there. If there are spots, they are not to 
enter. Perhaps in their ears also. I have 
heard that sometimes it appears in the 
ears." 

Quilk was shivering. Miller, though he 
never could take him seriously, was sorry 
for him. "O.K. I'll look in their mouths 
and ears." 

MILLER made his inspections conscientiously. He turned away two or 
three of the infected daily. He was not at 
all afraid of the plague himself, though 
terrestrials did contract it, for he had never 
felt more fit in his life. 

Surprisingly, business at the Royal 
\Glory was good. Perhaps Quilk had been 
right, and personages at a time of crisis 
did need the solace of art. Quilk, counting 
his receipts at night and shivering, could 
congratulate himself. 

The port health authorities, meantime, 
were not idle. Disease is no respecter of 
status. What begins in the slums of a city 
may end by menacing government hill. They 
laid down a cordon sanitaire around the 
infected areas. For a while, as the plague 
grew more severe, the cordon tightened. 
Then it began to relax. In the fourth week 
the city was officially declared free of 
plague. 

"We came through that rather nicely, 
I think," Quilk said. It was after theatre 



hours, and he was putting the night's take 
in a metal mesh satchel. 'Tomorrow I will 
get out some new posters — The only Vid 
House that stayed open all during the 
plague! The Royal Glory is first, as always 
—first in service, first in programs, first 
in artistic pleasure for you !' " He nodded. 
He picked up his blaster from the desk 
and strapped it around his waist. 

"Sounds good," Miller said, in lazy 
agreement. He yawned and stretched. The 
light fell full in his open mouth. 

Quilk looked at him. His jaw dropped. 
Miller saw, without understanding it, that 
he had turned pale. Quilk said, in a wobbling voice, "It isn't possible. They said 
there were no new cases." He began to 
back away, one hand on his blaster, • the 
other on the metal valise. 

"What are you talking about?" Miller 
asked irritably. 

"Your throat. There are plague spots, 
the green plague spots, in your throat." 

"No, there aren't. You're crazy. I'm not 
sick." 

"I saw the spots myself," Quilk answered. He wa§ trembling all over. "Keep 
away from me. After all my precautions! 
Get out P 

Miller couldn't understand the situation. 
After a minute he asked, "You mean I'm 
fired?" 

"If you like. Anything. Only get out." 

"You owe me four days' wages." 

"Take it, then." Quilk opened the valise, 
took out a handful of coins, and threw it 
at him. "Get out." 

Miller turned an angry red. "Don't talk 
to me like that, sticky. What in hell is the 
matter with you?" He advanced a step. 

Quilk drew the blaster. "Don't come 
near me ! I'm warning you !" 

"I tell you, I haven't got the plague," 
Miller answered. He was trying to be 
reasonable. "You're too excitable." Once 
more Quilk saw the plague spots in his 
throat. 

"Stay away! Stay away!" The blaster 
described a wobbling circle in Quilk's 
hand. 



THE INHABITED MEN 49 

Miller bit his lip. Even at this moment 
the contemptuous amusement Quilk inspired in him kept him from taking the 
Pendraithian seriously. He picked up the 
coins from the floor and counted them. 
"You're a day and a half short, sticky," 
he said, looking at Quilk. "Pay me." He 
walked toward him, holding out his hand. 

"No! Don't! I—" Quilk shuddered. He 
couldn't get any farther away from Miller 
because he was already against the wall of 
the box-office. He moaned. Then he closed 
his eyes and fired. 

It was all a mistake, of course. Miller 
never did have the plague. But he was just 
as dead, after Quilk blasted him, as if 
he had. 



THE ORGANISMS that had colonized 
the crew of the Ara died with them, 
naturally. They were able to survive for 
considerably longer than the men, but the 
knife wound and the blaster charges disrupted their nicely-balanced economy beyond repair. 

What they had done, as they grew on 
the men's mucous membranes and in their 
body cavities, was to convert Norton and 
Evans and Miller into Wardian cases, 
terrariums — units in which chlorophyll and 
radiant energy (it did not have to be sunlight) cooperated to turn the carbon dioxide of katabolism into oxygen, complex 
starches, and growth. After the economy 
was well established, its hosts, had they 
known it, were potentially immortal. They 
could have gone for years without needing 
to eat or breathe. But the plants in a Wardian case die when the case is broken. And 
the tenants of Norton and Evans and Miller, for all their complex mental organization, were basically plants. 

They were not in the least resigned to 
dying, however. For hours they fought 
against it, screaming to each other, imploring, cursing, praying not to die. In 
the end, Evans and Miller and Norton had 
this in common, that each of them kept 
on talking for a long time after he was 
dead. 



4— Planet Stories— Sept. 



Sardonic, wasn't it, that when the Pic 



ipt the universe, 
when the fate of entire star-colonies hung on that blackedout serum-station on Tarn II, the only man within jetting c/;stance was an ineffectual little geologist named Whaley . . . 

lUHLMMWK 




"Haiti" fa soW again, foolishly, for of course it meant nothina fo the Tamians, 

THE STAR-FOOL 

by GORDON DICKSON 



NO ONE KNOWS WHO FIRST 
pinned that unkind name upon the 
wandering scholars of the galaxy 
but it is not hard to guess from what class 
of men he came. Undoubtedly he was some 
one of the pioneering element, miner, 
merchant, middleman, or any of the other 
various groups that tore into the .endless 
planetary frontier during the twenty-eighth 
century. To these men, exploitation, pure 
and simple, was the only worthwhile oc50 



cupation. They looked with contemptuous 
scorn on the geologists, archeologists, paleontologists, all those whose aim was the 
acquisition of pure knowledge. 

Consequently, there was a certain 
amount of ironic humor in a situation that 
arose on Krynor IV near the close of the 
twenty-eighth century. It began when an 
epidemic of nerve-disease broke out among 
the pioneering element there. It grew when 
the officials of the Federation Government 



THE STAR-FOOL 



51 



tried to get in touch with their medical 
station on Tarn II, where the remedy for 
that particularly virulent plague was cultured in a serum made from native blood. 
They were answered by the ravings of a 
madman. And it reached its peak of humorous irony when those same officials 
discovered that the only human within reasonable distance of the station was a starfool, an insignificant little geologist by 
the name of Peter Whaley . . . 

IT IS NOT TRUE that every man must 
have some kind of companion if he is 
going to wander the depths of space. There 
are some few self-sufficient individuals 
who find the company of their work quite 
sufficient, and, in fact, prefer it to the 
society of their own kind. Peter Whaley 
was one of these, A young man with an 
addiction to sloppy, comfortable clothes and 
a distaste for combing his hair, he had not 
the slightest objection to company — when 
he was not busy. When he was busy, the 
existence of the rest of the human race 
was superfluous. 

At the present moment, on the airless 
moon of Tarn II, he was busy. 

"George/' he said, gazing into the large 
scanner set into one wall of his controlroom, "bring me a specimen from that 
large black boulder to your right." 

Fifty miles away, a small robot chirped 
an acknowledement of the order, rolled, 
hopped and jumped to the boulder in question, and excised a small chunk of it. 
Having done so, it tucked the specimen 
into a place in its body and chirped again 
to signify that the specimen was secured. 

"Very good, George," said Peter Whaley, approvingly. "Now bring all the specimens you've got back to the ship." 

The little robot chirped and began to 
roll. Peter turned away from the screen. 
No need to watch further. George was the 
last word in specimen-collectors, and could 
be relied on to return safely over any kind 
of terrain. 

He was laying out his apparatus for 
chemical analysis, when the deep-space 
communicator buzzed. With a puzzled 
frown, he laid down the test-tube he was 
holding and walked over to the communicator screen, switched it on. 



There was a second of blurring motion 
as the tubes warmed ; then the features of 
Rad Dowell, Commissioner, Thirty-Ninth 
Galactic Sector, spring into sharp relief on 
the screen. To Peter, who had seen them 
twice before during news space-casts, they 
were only vaguely familiar, as the face of 
someone known a long time ago. 

"Whaley, geologist, speaking," said Peter, automatically. There was a long pause 
as his voice and image crossed lightyears 
of distance, to Thirty-Ninth Headquarters 
on Tynan V. Then the image in the ships' 
screen spoke again. 

"Rad Dowell, Sector Commissioner, calling," said the grey-haired man in the 
dark blue uniform of a Federation official. 
"Are you at present on the moon of Tarn 
II?" 

"I am," answered Peter. "There is a 
black basalt here which, in my opinion, is 
decidedly unusual for a moon of this type. 
Not only its prevalence, but its peculiar 
structure reflect a kind of igneous action 
in the local strata — " He broke off noticing 
a look of exasperation on the Commissioner s lined face. "I beg your pardon," he 
said. "What did you call me about?" 

THE COMMISSIONER sighed. The 
words star-fool were so obviously passing through his mind that they might as 
well have been printed on the screen. This, 
then, was the only man available to handle 
a crisis that meant life or death to literally 
millions. 

"Whaley," said the Commissioner, heavily, "do you know what nerve disease is ?" 

"No, I don't," answered Peter, truthfully. 

"It's a virus infection that strikes humans whose natural resistance has been 
lowered by exposure to cosmic radiation," 
explained the older man. "If we catch it 
in time, we can cure it — with the proper 
serum. The| only difficulty is that it has a 
three-month incubation period and can only 
be detected during the last two or three 
weeks of that period. Since it is highly infectious, that means that by the time an 
epidemic breaks into the open, it has usually spread over half a dozen or more planets 
and thousands of people are already infected. That means that when an epidemic 



52 



PLANET STORIES 









does break out, we have to rush serum immediately to all possible danger points and 
start general inoculations. Whaley, we have 
an epidemic on our hands right now — and 
that planet below you is the galaxy's only 
source of serum!" 

And, swiftly, the Commissioner outlined 
the situation to Peter Whaley. 

"You are not government personnel/' he 
wound up. "You have absolutely no training in handling alien races and the situation 
down there is probably dangerous as hell. 
I can't order you to go, and I don't know 
what you can do if you do go. All I can 
do is ask — will you?" 

It was quite a question. 

Peter Whaley, geologist, looked at his 
chemical apparatus spread out on the workbench, and thought of the little robot skittering back over the moon's airless surface 
even now. That was his work, not this. 
What could he do, if he went, seeing that 
he was without training and without experience? Barring a minor miracle he 
would probably do no more than make a 
ridiculous mess of things and die a stupid 
death. And the Lord only knew what he 
would find down there. 

But, when he opened his mouth to refuse, a sudden irrational pride mixed with 
anger came swelling up in his throat like a 
bubble to choke off his words. Wasn't he, 
after all, as good as the next man, as good 
as these hard-headed empire builders? 
Abruptly a tingling urge for adventure ran 
hotly through his veins, and he threw 
logic and common sense together to the 
winds. 

"Of course, Commissioner," he said. "I'll 
leave right away." 

Surprise and hope mixed themselves for 
a moment in the expression on Rad Dowell's face. 

"Good man!" he answered. "There's a 
ship on the way from here to pick up the 
serum. See if you can have a load ready 
for them when they get there. Every day's 
delay means several thousand lives. And 
— good luck." 

"Thanks," said Peter, feeling suddenly 
embarrassed, and cut the connection. 

For a moment he stood, bemused, until 
an insistent chirping brought him from his 
trance and set him to opening the air


lock. The little robot had hit a stretch of 
smooth rock and made good time on the 
way back. Peter closed the outer lock, opened the inner, and the squat mechanical 
rolled in, blinking its red toplight furiously 
in warning that it was still too cold from 
exposure to airless space to be safely 
touched. 

"It's all right, George," said Peter, wryly. "We won't be getting to work on those 
samples for quite some time. Just dump 
them into the storage bin and get ready 
for takeoff." 

George turned and wheeled off in the 
direction of the storage bin, and Peter 
settled himself at the controls. Actually, 
although it was not really necessary with 
the almost automatic ship he drove, Peter 
was a better than average pilot and he 
procrastinated a little, checking various 
dials and indicators until there was no 
longer any real excuse for delaying the 
takeoff. When there was no more reason 
for delay, he sighed once, cleared his tubes 
with a short blast, and took off. 

FROM ABOVE, the station looked like 
a small colony of ant-hills. Only the 
metallic sheen of the domed huts and the 
signal tower denied the impression. There 
was no answer to Peter's beamed announcement of landing ; and neither human 
nor alien stirred in the clearing. He cut 
his power and dropped to the baked clay 
of the landing spot. 

Still, nothing moved. Peter sat at the 
silent controls and wondered. The first 
emergency call from Sector Headquarters, 
they said, had been answered by a blank 
screen from which came senseless ravings 
in a voice which could no longer be identified as one of the station members. Since 
then, the station had not answered at all. 
The question was: was the madman still 
alive and waiting for Peter, someplace out 
there? 

Peter rubbed his nose, thoughtfully. Inside him, a cold little voice was regretting 
his hasty acceptance of the Commissioner's 
request. What are you doing here? the 
voice was asking. This is not your line of 
business. Leave adventure for the men 
who are trained for it. At the same time, 
however, an innate stubbornness rose up to 



THE STAR-FOOL 



53 



combat his uneasiness. Peter had the dogged persistence characteristic of his kind, 
and he had never yet abandoned, unfinished, a job to which he had committed himself. Madman or not, it was necessary that 
Peter investigate the station. Consequently, 
there was no point in delaying further. 

He rose from the controls and put on 
an air-helmet. Then, from a dusty and almost forgotten locker, he dug out an explosive pellet handgun and clipped it to his 
belt. This done, he activated the airlocks, 
keyed them for re-entrance, and went out 
into the clearing. 

Outside the ship, he headed for the 
nearest cone, which was the communications-shack. His visual image, checked by 
the automatic scanner and passed as human, opened the door before him, and he 
stepped inside. 

Within, the body of a man lay sprawled 
before the deep-space communicator. His 
skull had been crushed from behind, and 
the evidence of the blood dried brown on 
the floor and the partial decay of his body 
bore witness that he had been dead for 
some time. 

Peter looked around without touching 
anything; then went back outside and continued his search through the other buildings. It was as he had suspected. No living 
human remained in the station. Only five 
silent bodies. And of these, four had been 
murdered and one was a suicide. 

He returned to the communicationsshack and called Sector Headquaters. 

"Well?" asked Rad Dowell, as soon as 
his face appeared on the screen. 

"How many men," asked Peter, "were 
here at the station ?" 

"Five," answered the Commissioner. 
"One psychologist, three medical technicians, and the station chief, a sort of medical administrator and contact man with the 
natives." 

"They're all dead," said Peter, and went 
on to recite what he had seen. "Evidently 
one of the technicians went insane and was 
confined to the infirmary. Somehow he killed his attendent, broke out and killed the 
rest of the men, and then hung himself. 
There's evidence of a struggle in the infirmary, but all the others were killed evidently without warning." 



The lines on the Commissioner's face 
deepened. 

"And the serum?" he asked. "It should 
be in the storehouse next to the culture 
lab." 

"I checked," answered Peter. "The 
storehouse is empty." 

Incredulity replaced the worry etched 
on the Commissioner's features. "Empty?" 
he said. "You mean that the drums m the 
storehouse are empty ?" 

"I mean there are no drums," Peter informed him. 

"But where could they have gone to?" 
said the Commissioner, bewilderedly. 
"There must be drums . . . And some of 
them must contain serum ! Find out where 
they've gone to, Whaley. Ask the natives. 
There's a translator in the main office 
that'll make you intelligible to them." 

Peter set his jaw. 

"There are no natives," he said. 

In the screen the Commissioner seemed 
to sag within his uniform. 

"There's hundreds sick here," he said, in 
a hollow voice, "and nobody knows how 
many more infected that don't know it 
yet. On the frontier planets where it 
started, twenty per cent of the population 
are dying. And all those people have their 
hopes pinned on a ship which is on its 
way to you to pick up the serum that 
should be stored there. And now you tell 
me that there isn't any." There was something almost pathetic in the tone of his 
concluding words. 

Peter looked steadily at him. 

"What do you want me to do?" asked. 

"I don't know," said Rad Dowell. "Find 
the drums. They must be somewhere/ 
There must be some serum in them. If 
you can't do that — " his voice trailed off 
on a note of hopelessness — "wait until the 
ship comes, I suppose. Perhaps — " 

But what the rest of his sentence was, 
Peter never heard. For at that moment, 
there was the crash of a heavy body striking the wall of the communications-shack, 
and the set went dead. The abrupt violence shocked him into a momentary paralysis. For a second he stood there, staring 
stupidly at the screen as if he expected it 
to light up again of its own accord. Then, 
when the patent absurdity of this had 







PLANET STORIES 



penetrated his mind, he reacted swiftly 
with an action that was as foolish as it was 
brave. Unclipping the handgun from his 
belt, he walked to the door with it held in 
his right hand, and stepped out into the 
open. 



"H 



ALT!" 

For a second, the scene had all 
the appearance of a tableau. There was 
Peter, brought to an abrupt halt by what 
he saw, the pellet gun upraised in one 
hand, and there was the cause of the disturbance, a group of Tarnian natives, frozen, holding the treetrunk they had been 
using as a battering ram on the tower of 
the communications-shack. 

"Halt," he said again, foolishly, for of 
course it meant nothing to the Tarnians. 

After that things began to happen quick
iy. 

The natives, losing their nerve at the 
actual appearance of the human they had 
been threating, dropped the treetrunk and 
went bounding in great kangeroo-like hops 
for the forest at the edge of the clearing. 
Peter yelled — a quite meaningless and 
thoroughly instinctive battle-sound — and 
fired the gun at random. The pellets streamed from its muzzle at ten-thousand feet 
per second, missed the natives by a wide 
margin, and blew some fifty square meters 
of the forest beyond to smoking fragments. 
The natives, convinced that their doom was 
inescapably upon them, skidded to a halt 
and stood, their large, fish-like eyes rolling 
in terror, antennae quivering, too frightened to either advance into the devastated 
area or return toward Peter. 

"Halt !" yelled Peter, a wild exhilaration 
filling him at finding himself in command 
of the situation. "Don't move. I'll be right 
back." 

He might as well have spoken in Sanskrit for all the natives understood but the 
command was unnecessary. Nothing short 
of an earthquake could have moved the 
Tarnian raiding party at that moment. 

Peter ducked hurriedly into the main 
office building, picked up the translator — 
a dark colored box with two adjustable 
helmets attached — and ducked out again. 
He walked up to the raiding party and 
dropped the "alien" helmet on the an


tennaed head of the first squat green creature he came to. Then he put the "human" 
helmet on his own head and switched on 
the power. 

"Who's in charge here?" Peter demanded. 

"Not this one, Lord, not this one," chattered the earphones terrifiedly in his ear. 
"This one loves the lords. This one was 
made to come here by that one chief — " 
and a trembling green paw indicated a 
scowling Tarnian who was glaring at Peter's informant with murder in his eyes. 

"Ha!" said Peter. He lifted the "alien" 
helmet from the head of the one he had 
been talking to, walked over, and dumped 
it on the native indicated. 

"Are you the chief?" 

"This one chief," was the sullen acknowledgement. 

"Why did you break the communications 
tower?" Peter asked. 

"Don't want tower," growled the native. 

"Why not?" 

"This one tower not tree. Break down. 
This one lord not Tarn-man. Go away." 

"Just as I thought," said Peter grimly. 
"So you were trying to scare me off. Well, 
I don't scare. What made you decide that 
you didn't want humans here?" 

"Lords take Tarn-blood. Those ones 
Lords say these ones Tarn-men give blood 
and those ones Lords protect Tarn-men 
from devils. Those ones Lords lie." 

"Oh?" said Peter. "And what made you 
think they lied?" 

"Those ones lords dead long time now. 
No devils." 

PETER GRIMACED a trifle wryly. 
The native's logic was simple but definite enough. His thought fast. 

"Did it ever occur to you," he said, "that 
something might still be protecting you 
from devils?" 

"Yes." 

The answer stopped Peter. He blinked. 

"Oh?" he said. "Who, then?" 

"The old gods," was the complacent and 
surprising answer. "The spirit who lives 
in the village idols protects these ones villages." 

Peter shook his head inside the helmet. 
This kind of crisis in native-human rela








THE STAR-FOOL 



55 



tions called for a trained administrator. 
Best to let it ride until the ship got here. 
But there was one thing he could do. 

"In that one building," he said, slipping 
into the Tarnian phraseology, and indicating the storehouse, "were a lot of large 
metal drums. Where are they?" 

"These ones take," answered the native. 

"Bring them back!" snapped Peter. 

"Gods say no," returned the other stubbornly. "Those ones drums have Tarnblood in them." 

"But it isn't Tarn-blood any longer, you 
fool," said Peter desperately. "It's serum." 

"Tarn-blood," repeated the native doggedly. "Sacred." 

Peter stared at him. The frustrations, 
he thought, must be making him ill. A 
strange sort of dizziness made his head 
swim. Abruptly, he lost all control of 
his temper — 

"Bring them back, damn you!" he 
screamed, lashing out with his fist at the 
small native. "Bring them back !" 

The native ducked, and the helmet flopued from his head. Finding himself free, 
he began to run. The others bolted after 
him, and in a second the clearing was empty, except for Peter. 

Dizzily, he turned and headed back toward his ship. Have to report this, he 
thought, and, with the communicationsshack out of order, the only transmitter 
was aboard his vessel. His emotions seemed oddly difficult to control. Once he turned about in a sudden fit of rage and, 
screaming curses, sent a stream of pellets 
to explode into the forest where the Tarnians had disappeared. Then he made his 
way into the ship and switched on his set, 
calling Sector Headquarters. 

The face of Rad Dowell took form on 
the screen. 

"Hello, Whaley," the Commissioner 
said. "Any luck?" 

"Why should I have luck?" asked Peter, sourly. "The natives are trying to 
break away from human control. They've 
reverted to worship of their village idols. 
They've stolen the serum from the storehouse and won't bring it back." 

Rad Dowell shook his head despairingly. 

"It looks hopeless," he said. 

"Of course it's hopeless," snapped Peter. 



"You knew that when you sent me here." 

The Commissioner's eyes narrowed suddenly; he looked suspiciously at Peter. 

"Tell me, Whaley," he asked, "you had 
inoculations yourself before you left for 
the Tarn moon, didn't you?" 

"What inoculations?'' demanded Peter. 

"Why — Tarn itself is the home of the 
nerve disease!" said the Commissioner. "I. 
thought you knew that. That's why the 
native blood can be used as a culture for 
the preventive serum. Only on Tarn it's 
that much worse, because while the disease runs for the regular two weeks 
through alternate periods of excitement 
and lassitude before it kills the patient, 
there's no incubation period required if 
you catch it directly from a native carrier. 
But you must have been inoculated before they gave your ship clearance papers 
for Tarn from your last stop." 

Peter looked at him dully. 

"I didn't have clearance papers for 
Tarn," he replied. "Just for the moon of 
Tarn." He paused. Somewhere within him, 
a thick black vein of anger pulsed and 
throbbed feverishly; the screen in front of 
him seemed to shake in time with its beating. Then, abruptly, it rose like a fiery 
tide inside him and rage spewed words 
from his mouth. 

"You knew it!" he screamed, as the 
walls of the ship spun crazily about him. 
"You sent me to my death. To my death! 
To my death!" And, whipping the handgun from his belt, he sent it crashing, 
butt first, directly into the screen. 

There was an instantaneous flash of intense, blue-violet light, and the set went 
dead. 

.,«TF YOU WANT my opinion, Cushey 

X — * began third-mate Ron Parker. 

"Which I don't," interrupted the little 
doctor, bristling, 

"As I say," continued the young officer, 
imperturbably, "if you want my opinion, 
he's already dead; and we two are going 
to look like damn fools, leaping off the 
ship the minute she lands and rushing up 
to a corpse with revivicator and half 
the medical equipment the City of Parth 
carries on board." 

He looked moodily out the airlock 



56 



PLAJVET STORIES 



scanner, watching the medical station of 
Tarn II float up to them as the big government-ship eased in for a landing. 

"And what if he isn't, hey?" barked 
Major Cushey. "What if there's a flicker 
of life left in him and we can bring him 
back enough to tell us something of what's 
been going on around here . . . what if 
he finally found out where the drums are 
kept, hey? Isn't a thousand to one chance 
worth a little physical effort, even to you, 
if it means halting an epidemic? Lazy 
young lout!" 

"Not lazy. Just no point in expecting — M 
Ron began. A slight jar announced that 
they had grounded. "Oh, welt, here we 
go, ready or not — " and the two men flipped their air-helmets down over their heads 
and clipped them tight. 

Before them, the outer lock swung open. 
They leaped out and hit the ground running, Major Cushey bouncing ahead like 
a particularly energetic, if overfed rabbit, 
and Ron loping clumsily along behind, the 
long, awkward bulk of the revivicator 
clutched lovingly to his chest. 

"Try the office building first," Cushey's 
voice shrilled in the young officer's earphones. Ron cursed and followed the 
shorter man to the building with the Federation flag flying above it. They reached 
it. The scanner, noting their speed, checked 
them hastily, and the door swung open. 
They plunged inside . . . 

. . . And skidded to a shocked and 
startled halt. For rising from a chair to 
greet them, unsteady, pale, but undeniably 
alive, was the man they had come to save. 

"You'll excuse me for not going outside to meet the ship," he said. "I heard 
you landing, but I'm a little too weak to 
walk that far yet." 

They stared at him. 

"But you're not sick !" said Cushey peevishly, as if it were rather unkind of Peter 
to be alive at all. 

"Not any more," answered Peter, sinking back in his chair. 

"How did this happen, this — this cure," 
barked the little doctor. 

"In the most ordinary way," said Peter, 
"I took some of the serum." 

"But you told the Commissioner the 
natives had taken all the serum there was." 



"They hid," said Peter. He closed his 
eyes and chuckled. "I — er — persuaded 
them to bring it back. The storehouse is 
full of drums of it right now — a full load 
for you to take back." 

The two officers looked at each other. 

"Pardon me," said Cushey, and stepped 
forward to curl two fingers over Peter's 
pulse. 

Peter chuckled again. "No, I'm quite 
well," he said. "Look in the storehouse if 
you don't believe me." 

"But how could you do it?" cried Ron 
. . . a star-fool, like you! his words implied. 

"Simple," answered Peter. "They 
thought that their village idols were ample protection against devils — that they 
didn't need human protection. So I supplied 
them with a devil that their idols were no 
protection against. They came crying to me 
for help. I tottered out into the clearing, 
challenged It, and when It showed up, 
blew It to bits." He paused. "After that, 
they fell over themselves to be good to 
me. Brought the serum back, and offered 
to bleed all over the place for me — "course 
I couldn't take them up on that, not knowing how to make the serum. But when 
you're ready for them, I can whistle them 
up in a jiffy." 

"But I still don't understand," protested 
the bewildered Ron. "What was the devil? 
Where would you get a devil?" 

"The devil?" echoed Peter. "Oh, that 
was George, my specimen collector. Poor 
George. I hated to blow him to oieces, but 
it was him or me." 

"Specimen collector?" repeated the medical major in an odd tone of voice, applying his stethescope to Peter's chest. "But 
I know what they are. They're just small 
robots that chip off pieces of rock and 
bring them to you for examination. Ruggedly built, of course ; but I don't see what 
devil-like aspects one of those could have. 
Your George was utterly harmless." 

Peter laughed out loud. And this time 
he opened his eyes and looked them both 
full in the face. 

"Not," he said, cheerfully," when he 
went around on my orders collecting specimens from all of the village idols, he 




The Canopans silently carried the bodies outside. 



LAST NIGHT OUT 

by LEE GREGOR 

They shoved through the hate-filled crowds of Terra, 

looking for a little pleasure, a little entertainment. For 
tomorrow Ensign Grey and his blue-furred space-mate, 

Canopus 43C, would go off to war — if tomorrow ever came. 



THE UNFRIENDLY STREET 
stretched ahead of them, pouring 
bitter waves of hostility through their 
nervous systems. They had ridden the bus 
from the space-port into town, and now 
they stood on the pavement soaking up 
the profusion of sensations which permeated the atmosphere of the brawly town. 
Joe, his iridescent fur registering a pale 



blue of distaste and his antennae quivering 
in a controlled agitation, kept a warm tentacle curled firmly in the hand of Jed Grey. 
Since his native name was a soundless, telepathic abstraction, the records of the Solarian Fleet labeled him Canopus 647-B43C. To Ensign Jed Grey, his Terran 
team-mate, he was Joe. 
The blue of Grey's Space Fleet uniform 

57 



58 



PLANET STORIES 



matched, for the moment, the evanescent 
hue of Joe's pelt, as, in a curious manner, 
the pattern created by Joe's thoughts 
matched that of Grey. 

The sky had created a raucous sunset, 
challenging the lurid glitter of the neon 
signs which lined the main street of Selby, 
Texas. The light reflected garishly from 
the multicolored and multishaped uniforms 
which swarmed about the thoroughfare. 

Terrans, scaly-headed Arcturians, spined 
Sirians, the dark and stocky inhabitants 
of a strange planet which circled a star 
whose name to Terran astronomers was 
only a number in the star catalogue — all 
of these walked in small groups along the 
length of the street, seeking a spot where 
they could relax for the evening and forget where they had been or where they 
were going. 

Jed Grey asked Joe, "Where are the 
rest of your boys?" 

Joe allowed his perceptual sense to range 
through the town, his sensitive antennae 
tirect and rigid. Through the murky welter 
of conflicting thought patterns he sought 
the familiar, gentle sensation created by the 
furred Canopans. 

"It's hard to find them,' , he transmitted 
to Grey. "I know they must be in town 
somewhere. They came on the bus before 
ours. But there are too many Terrans about and it is bad . . ." 

JED GREY knew precisely how bad it 
was. Habitually en rapport with his 
Canopan partner, he sensed in every nerve 
the hostile atmosphere of the street, tearing 
at the hard shell of defense which he had 
learned to erect. 

The Arcturians, habitually suspicious of 
strange planetary types, were sufficiently 
unpleasant in their thought patterns. However, it was from the native earthmen, 
whose blue uniforms vastly outnumbered 
all others, that the bulk of the torment 
arose. 

Grey could sense it even though he avoided observing their faces. He could 
feel the alcoholic thoughts of the mechanic 
across the street: "An earthman holding 
hands with a snake ! Damned snake man !" 

It was now months since Grey had learned what that meant. The pain with which 



he had learned that was by now gone. He 
did not think that Joe's tentacles looked 
like snakes, and he cared nothing for the 
opinions of the others. Yet it was difficult 
to keep out of his mind the intruding 
thoughts of the Fleetmen who glared at 
him with disgust on their faces. 

"I have found the others," Joe thought 
to Grey. "They are in a small bar at the 
other end of town called the Purple Claw. 
It seems to be an interesting place." 

There was no need for Joe to ask, 
"Shall we go there?" For there was no 
place else to go. This was a repetition of 
the problem which always occurred when 
the pair arrived at a new base or a new 
town. Where could they spend an evening? 

It never occurred to Grey that he might 
go off by himself. 

Making their way through the crowded 
street was no longer the ordeal which it 
had been when Jed Grey and Joe had first 
been assigned to work together. By this 
time it no longer turned Grey sick when a 
highly-painted female hysterically turned 
around and whined: "It's reading my 
mind! The damn snake's reading my 
mind!" 

"I see that the Arcturians hang out at 
the Zig Zag," Joe observed. The Zig Zag's 
brilliant mercury-vapor sign made Grey's 
complexion a virulent blue as they passed 
beneath it. 

"And extra police floating around," Grey 
noticed. "This is a bad town. Many transients here— on their way in or out. Coming to town for a big time — either the last 
one or the first one in months." 

THE PURPLE CLAW was housed in 
a ramshackle building of ancient vintage, and sported as publicity a modest 
violet lobster which glowed erratically above the door. 

Within, the air reeked of tobacco smoke, 
beer, telka. It heaved with the beat of 
something which was part American jazz, 
part Sirian drum-music, with a flavor of 
strains from half a dozen other star-systems. 

Behind the bar was a monstrously fat 
character whose hair was white as the 
clouds of Venus, and whose face was as 
black as space itself. Elby Jones had a love 



LAST NIGHT ©l/T 



59 



for wine and women which was matched 
only by his addiction to the music which 
the small band in the corner emitted. 

He nodded to the pair as they entered, 
and waddled over to the small table where 
they seated themselves. 

"Evenin', Joe and Mister Grey/' he 
greeted them. "You'll have Space Punch 
and smokes ?" 

This, casually — even though never before had they been in this place. 

Just as casual was Grey's reply, "Sure 
enough, Elby. Nice place you've got." 

No need to show surprise at the fact 
that Jones was, himself, a telepath. The 
very fact that his place was the congregating point for the Canopan crowd attested 
to that probability. 

With a goblet of warm Space Punch between his hands, Grey leaned back and absorbed the peace and relaxation which he 
had sensed within these walls the moment 
he had stepped through the door. Joe, immune to alcohol, took the first ecstatic 
drag from a long white cigarette — a cigarette of very ordinary tobacco. 

Through the dimly-lit, smoke-laden atmosphere of the room, Grey could see the 
musicians at the far end, the small tables 
at which the Terrans sat with their Canopan partners, the few Sirians who sat alone 
with their tekla glasses. 

Joe, performing an indescribalbe feat 
of mental recognition, happily greeted a 
Sirian who sat across the room. To Grey 
the Sirians all appeared identical, but he 
received the impression that this was the 
one they'd gone on a tear with last month 
in Joplin. It had been a most memorable 
occasion. He suddenly laughed uproarously 
as he recalled the picture they'd made 
marching down Joplin's main thoroughfare singing the Sirian national anthem 
in harmony — with Joe taking two of the 
parts simultaneously — both mentally. 

Joe, having no vocal apparatus, performed his music telepathically. At times it was 
indescribable, and at other times it was — 
well — magnificent. 

Within the Purple Claw there was music permeating the smoky air, coursing 
through the nerve channels of the listeners. 
It was slow and hot, loose and tight at 
the same time. 



Grey slipped down farther into his chair. 
A horn took a high passage, and the chill 
began to pass up and down Grey's spine. 
He knew, then, that he was in — that the 
night was good and the music right. 

JOE'S ANTENNAE swayed quietly, 
in time with the beat, in time with the 
antennae of the other Canopans who sat 
there, spreading a net of rapport through 
the room. Imperceptibly there was produced an augmentation of the music, a 
heightened receptivity, as though the entire 
audience was in itself a musical instrument, guided by the band, and in return 
leading the band ahead. 

"Lawdy, that was good," Grey sighed 
when the spell finally broke and the audience shuffled feet, scraped chairs, ordered 
fresh drinks, and relit forgotten smokes. 

These moments of complete retreat had 
become more and more rare during the 
past few months. 

The mobilization had been accelerating, 
and the training periods had become more 
and more intense, in preparation for this 
day when they were now assigned to a 
ship and were about to push off for a training run, followed by the long trip to the 
battle sector. 

It had been slightly more than a year 
ago that the first enigmatic events had 
been noticed in a corner of the galaxy 
which was just newly being explored and 
developed. Ships had failed to return — colonies had ceased communicating with their 
prime bases. 

To Jed Grey, a young man still in school 
on Terra, far within the borders of the 
civilized galaxy, these events had seemed 
distant and impersonal. They had been 
words in the newspapers, on the news 
broadcasts. They had been vague events 
taking place on just another of the many 
hundreds of habitable planets which by 
that time had been discovered. 

Then the knowledge had grown that the 
events taking place thousands of light 
years distant were to have an impact on 
the life of Jed Grey and the others living 
on Terra. Gradually it developed that the 
civilized galaxy was rapidly becoming immersed in a struggle for existence against 
an enemy whose character was initially 



60 PLANET 

somewhat obscure, but whose unfriendly 
aims were quite definite. 

Overnight, it seemed to Grey, Terra 
flew into a turmoil of mobilization, manufacture of spaceships and weapons, research for the creation of new weapons 
and new defenses against the strange attack methods of the enemy. In the tiny 
circle of existence in which he walked, 
that which he observed was the increased 
crowds of people on their way to work in 
the factories, the increased difficulty of 
buying various items, and inevitably the 
card which had ordered him to the mobilization center. 

Among the many classification tests 
which they gave Grey was a curious one 
which seemed nonsensical until later on in 
the course of his training its purpose became quite obvious. It was given by a 
young man with very large and quiet eyes, 
who was seated beside an individual with 
soft, silky fur that changed color from 
moment to moment, and whose antennae 
had a fascinating, restless mobility. The 
four tentacles were brown and graceful, 
while the total attitude of the creature was 
one of repose and dignity. 

GREY STARED at this personage with 
curiosity, and with a slight chill. 
From photographs he knew the form of 
the natives of the fourth planet of Canopus, and from rumors and bar-room tales 
he had heard sufficient concerning them to 
ring a note of alarm in his brain. 

Yet, as he sat there for a moment, the 
alarm died away for although to his untrained eyes the Canopan was practically 
featureless, there was an aura of pleasantness about it appearing from a source 
which at that time he was not able to 
identify. 

Into his mind the thought came, "What 
if they can read my mind, like everybody 
says? He doesn't look like he would hurt 
me. But . . ." 

The voice of the examiner cut his 
thoughts short. 

"Here are ten cards lying face down on 
the table. Tell me what markings are on 
the front of these cards." 

"But how can I tell you if the cards 
are face down?" 



STORIES 

The man smiled. "Just try, anyway." 

Grey wanted to snort and laugh in the 
man's face ; but then suddenly he shivered, 
for actually he knew . . . 

"Why there's a circle, a square, a triangle, another circle . . ." 

Then there was a sealed box in which he 
identified a cube, a sphere, a cylinder, and 
a more difficult object which turned out 
to be a key. 

The examiner grinned at him and said, 
"That's fine. Welcome to the fraternity 
of telepaths and perceptors." 

And, amazingly, there came a thought 
of congratulation which was unmistakably 
from the Canopan, who extended a tentacle 
and laid it for a moment upon his arm. 

A gate in his mind swung open. A flood 
of memories crowded into his consciousness. Small items. Incidents in which he 
had known things before he had seen them. 
Incidents so unaccountable that he had put 
them out of his mind, had refused to consider them. Now they jigsawed together 
into a pattern which revolved about the 
important fact that he possessed the rare 
skill of perception coupled with telepathy. 

How rudimentary this skill was he realized later when his training began. 

In a month, feeling drab in his work 
uniform and exhausted from the preliminary training, he was brought face to 
face with the Canopan whom he soon 
learned to call Joe, and who was to become 
his partner for as long as should be necessary. 

THE FIRST MEETING was stilted 
and formal. They sat in the small 
room together with the Terran and Canopan training officers, and within Grey 
there was the nervous sensation that the 
Canopans recognized every one of his 
thoughts. There was the embarrassing 
realization that his dislike of Canopans 
was as plain to them as the expression 
on his face, and the embarrassment was 
intensified by the fact that he had not the 
slightest idea why the dislike was there. 
"Sure, Grey," the officer said, abruptly. 
"We know you don't like Canopans. Nobody on earth does — except the people 
who actually know them. We know the 
whole story. But you'll get over that 



LAST NIGHT OUT 



You're going to spend the rest of this war 
working together with this fellow here— 
since he doesn't talk a language, he doesn't 
have a verbal name. You won't have trouble conversing with him, however, because 
he knows what you think, and you will 
know what he thinks when he wants you 
to." 

"Then they do read minds," Grey said. 

"Sure. What of it? You can almost do 
it, yourself. Why do you think we picked 
you for this job? Out of the thousands 
that we test, a few here and there have 
the right kind of sensitivity. When the 
professors learn more about the science of 
psychomechanics maybe we'll learn how 
it works. Now all we know is that it 
works." 

"What's wrong with them, then?" The 
question was involuntary, dropping suddenly from Grey's mouth. Confused by 
his own frankness, he stammered, "I— 
I mean, why don't people like them?" 

"This is a question with many angles," 
the officer said, gravely. 'It's an old story. 
We had barely obtained a world government when interstellar travel was on hand 
and we came into contact with strange 
types of intelligent beings. Man was still 
trying to overcome distrust between the 
slightly different groups within his own 
species. When he came to deal with species 
of such strange shapes and psychologies 
as those on the other planets, the distrust 
was intensified many times. 

"Particularly, people fear the telepathic 
powers of the Canopans. They fear the 
mysterious and the supernatural. Telepathy still seems a supernatural thing to the 
ignorant and — I'm afraid — to some who 
are not so ignorant. People are afraid of 
their minds being invaded. Their sense 
of privacy is outraged. 

"They cannot visualize the fact that the 
Canopans are completely uninterested in 
what thoughts a Terran may have. The 
Canopan psychology is sufficiently different 
from ours that our private thoughts may 
be interesting, perhaps curious, but never 
the sort of thing upon which they would 
put a moral judgment. Their sense of morality is too different from ours for moral 
judgments to have meaning. 

"You may accept this intellectually at 



61 

the moment without absorbing it into your 
system. In a short time you will really be 
convinced that this is so. In the meantime, 
the two of you must become friendly enough so that you can perform your jobs." 

GREY LOOKED from the officer to 
his Canopan partner, and clearly received the verification that all of this was 
really so. Inside Grey there was an impression of relief, a loosening of tensions. 

From that moment on, Grey and Joe 
were inseparable. They lived together, ate 
together, and in their training they were 
as one mentality. 

"Doggone if you wouldn't think we were 
married," Grey kept saying. 

Surely the extreme rapport, and the 
warm feeling of relaxation and mental capability which Grey felt when in the presence of Joe, indicated an intimacy which 
was the equal of any physical attraction. 

With the extreme complexity of the 
control and communication equipment in 
the great space vessels, there had arisen 
the need for something radically different 
in maintenance technicians. The delay of 
testing circuits for faults and breakdowns 
had to be eliminated. For this purpose the 
peculiarly suited Canopans had been 
brought to Earth by the thousands. 

Even in the specialized branch of computing-machines to which Grey had been 
assigned, the magnitude of the knowledge 
to be absorbed in a few hasty months 
would ordinarily have made the task impossible. With the two nervous systems 
of Grey and Joe acting as one, however, 
they were able to absorb huge chunks 
of knowledge at one gulp, assort it, store 
it away, and go on to the next item. 

Carefully supervised by psychiatrists to 
ensure that no breakdowns would occur 
from overloading of nervous connections, 
Grey advanced from the status of an untrained youngster to that of a highly skilled 
electro-technician. 

"Joe, with all the brains that you fellows have," Grey remarked one day, "it's 
a wonder that you haven't advanced any 
farther than you have, as far as technical 
things are concerned. I don't know why 
you need me around. You know all the 
stuff that I know, and maybe a lot more. 






62 PLANET 

Why don't you Canopans just take over 
the whole works?" 

"We're really not very interested in electronics and such things," Joe replied. "We 
put up with this as a rather unhappy necessity, but our creative instincts do not 
lie in that direction. Since we have developed without hands, and with a brain of 
capabilities which are strange to you, our 
culture has become more introspective — 
more interested in the being within than 
in the things without— more interested in 
creating things of beauty to perceive rather 
than machines of complexity for the control of nature." 

"Very pretty," Grey sighed. "And just 
as well, for otherwise I would be out of 
a job." 

Even so, Grey felt little more useful 
than a soldering-iron or a screw-driver in 
the hands of a master mechanic. For Joe, 
with his ability to perceive without sight, 
with his capability of feeling the very 
electric currents flowing through a machine 

he was the diagnostician, the one who 

squatted before a defunct piece of equipment and without hesitation unerringly decided what was wrong with it and directed 
Grey to the point where the repair had 
to be made. From that point on Grey 
wielded the tools. 

But there was no room for false pride. 
The two of them together constituted a 
working team. The two of them made one 
mechanic. 

In addition to learning the technical 
things required for maintenance of machinery, both Jed Grey and the Canopan 
had to learn many other things which inevitably went with their partnership. 

They had to learn how it was to walk 
down a city street and feel the ebb and 
flow of thoughts about them— thoughts 
concerning the race of Canopans in general and concerning the type of Terran who 
would walk down a street arm in arm with 
a Canopan. 

They learned this quickly. Gradually the 
psychic hurts healed over and in their place 
was a hard defense-mechanism compounded of wisdom, mental toughness, and a 
contempt for the opinions of the others. 

Actually, to Joe, the opinions of the Ter


STORFES 

rans were of no interest. But as he once 
remarked to Grey: "It's an impersonal 
sort of unpleasantness — like walking 
through a street filled with a bad odor, like 
walking through a room filled with buzzsaws. It jars the nerves." 

Grey presently came to feel in the same 
manner. 

"I'm not quite a Terran any more," 
he said. 

Joe assented. "You are a real cosmopolitan. You have the real interstellar attitude. In time everybody will see it that 
way." 

TIME— TIME. It went so rapidly. It 
swept them along through the several stages of their training, and now it 
was their last night out before stepping 
into the great t battlewagon for the final 
and irrevocable journey across space to 
the war, which up to now had been a hazy 
background to their work. 

Elby Jones brought Grey another drink 
"It's a good night here tonight." 

"I'm glad it is," said Grey. 

Yes, it had to be a good night, because 
the last one had to be good. There had to 
be that much to remember out there a 
thousand light-years away. 

The music started once more, and it 
brought to Grey the thought that it was 
curious how the Canopans had taken to 
American Jazz and cigarettes and had intensified their effects to a degree previous/y 
unknown. What a group of characters they 
were. They could go on an intellectual jag 
from a Bach Fugue as quickly as they 
could go on a nicotine binge. Their entire 
psychology was geared to the obtaining 
of pleasure from sensations of many different kinds. 

"The Terrans do likewise, you know," 
Joe transmitted to him. 

Grey grinned back at Joe. You couldn't 
keep a stray thought-wave away from the 
guy. 

"It's different the way you do it," he 
replied. "You don't get blind stinkin' drunk 
when you go on a jag. You do it for exhilaration, for an uplift." 

"The process of getting stinking is . . * 
Joe broke off suddenly. 



LAST NIGHT OVT 



63 



Simultaneously, Grey could sense that 
the other Canopans had shifted their attentions, that the music, although it kept 
playing, echoed hollowly between the walls, 
unsupported by the listeners. 

Grey caught the faint jar of a commotion outside the door. A roar of voices 
and heavy footsteps crescendoed suddenly 
as a mob in blue uniforms burst into the 
place. As it seemed to Grey in the first 
violent moment, each had a bottle in one 
hand and a brightly-painted female in the 
other. There seemed to be a squadron ot 
them. It turned out, finally, that there were 
perhaps ten altogether. 

From the insignia on their uniforms, 
Grey guessed that these were combat men 
on their way back from the battle sector, 
ready to tear up the first town that they 
hit on the first night out. 

"Cripes! The place is full of snakes !" 
one of them shouted. " What're snakes doing here when there's some good or earthmen lookin' for a place to sit down?" 

One of the girls pulled back. "Let's get 
out of here, Jack," she whispered, nervously. "I'm afraid of them snakes." 

"They ain't gonna hurt you, honey," 
Jack told her, hoarsely. "I always wondered if them snakes grew together if you 
pulled them apart." 

He walked a few paces inside the door. 
"If you snakes can read my mind, you 
know what I'm gonna do if you don't 
clear outta here pronto. An' readin' my 
mind ain't gonna help you against my good 
right arm." 

GREY FELT SICK. A brawl on the 
last night . . . There was a stray 
thought in his mind that he and Joe would 
make a good fighting team if the two of 
them could coordinate fast enough. 

"No," Joe's reply came to him instantly"This isn't your fight. We'll handle this." 

"The hell you say!" Grey attempted 
to stand — found himself limp as a rag. He 
could suddenly smell his own perspiration 
as he strained to move, and as he looked 
about the room he saw that the other Terrans at the tables were remaining there, 
their expressions startled and anxious. 

The Canopans had risen, and were slowly making their way between the tables to 



the front of the room. The band was still 
playing a slightly mad background to the 
picture which consisted of the smoky room 
with the dim lights, the Terrans sitting 
paralyzed at their tables, the Canopans 
moving in on the Fleetmen at the door ... 
who stared in disbelief, began to swing 
their bottles, and collapsed quietly on the 
floor. 

The girls, without time to shriek, collapsed just as quietly, and lay there in an 
unmoving heap. 

Grey abruptly was stone cold sober. 
He wanted out, as fast as possible. The 
idea of going up for murder appealed to 
him not at all. 

"Forget it," Joe flashed at him. "They're 
not dead. But we'll have to get rid of them. 
We'll be back in a minute." 

The Canopans silently carried the bodies 
outside the door, leaving Grey sitting still 
at his table, performing a great quantity of 
furious thinking. 

Joe was back quickly. He anticipated 
Grey's questions. 

"They'll wake up, and they'll think 
somebody slipped them a Mickey. But they 
won't remember what happened." 

He hesitated, sat down, and lit another 
smoke. "You're okay, now, by the way." 

Grey tried, and found that the nervous 
impulses now went where they were supposed to go. He stood up, shakily. Then 
he sat down again. While he was searching 
for words to say something, Joe interrupted. 

"Look," he transmitted. "This has to 
be kept under cover. Things are bad enough for us without this sort of thing 
getting around. I didn't even want you 
to know, but that couldn't be helped. I 
didn't feel like getting bashed." 

Grey accepted another glass gratefully 
from Elby Jones. 

"Sure," he said. "I don't talk to anybody, anyway. But you have to tell me. 
How much can you do?" 

Joe considered for a moment befor£ replying. 

"I don't know, really. Terran nervous 
systems are not like ours. We have had 
only a short time to discover what we can 
do and what we can't do. We don't have 
real control — although there are certain 






64 



PLANET STORIES 



possibilities with a modified hypnotic suggestion. At present we are only able to 
introduce resistances temporarily in certain 
nerve paths, so that inhibitions are produced." 

"So for a while I was just inhibited 
against standing up, and they were inhibited against being conscious. It that it?" 

"Approximately." 

Grey sipped from his glass, peering over 
the edge of it at Joe. Precisely how much 
was there, he thought, hidden within the 
recesses of that brain? Just how much 
did this innocent little character have on 
the ball? 

JOE CHOSE this moment to become 
taciturn. The music was riding once 
more, and the place was settling down after the sudden disturbance. It took Jed 
Grey several more minutes and another 
glass to throw off the nervous tension 
which sat like a blanket over his shoulders. 
Gradually he began to relax, and the warm 
spot within his belly proceeded to creep 
up into his head. 

"Tomorrow," he thought drowsily, "we 
will be taking off, and there will be no 
more of this. No more music except from 
cans. No more . . . 

Abruptly he realized that the rapport 
had been broken off again by the Canopans, and that at the other end of town 
there was the faint howl of the police siren. 

"There's a brawl down the street," Joe 
informed Grey. "Some of our heroes back 
from the battle sector feel that they haven't 
had enough fighting/' 

"I bet you a pack of smokes that the 
guys in the fight haven't been within a light 
year of an actual battle," said Grey, dryly. 
"They're the ones who always try to make 
like tough heroes when they get back/' 

Through the Canopan's sense of perception Jed Grey could catch faint impluses of the tumult which filled the street 
a hundred yards away. There was a violence in the thoughts projected from that 
area which caused the colors of Joe's fur 
to shift erratically, nervously. In Grey 
they caused a tightening of the stomach 
and a heavy feeling in the chest. 

"It hurts almost as much to listen in to 
a fight as it does to be right in the middle 



of it," he remarked. "Why don't you just 
shut it off if you can't take it?" 

"As well try to shut off your sense of 
hearing," Joe snapped back. 

The sirens down the street had wailed 
to a halt. Grey lit another cigarette and 
tried what was left in his glass. It was 
fiat. The warm glow which had diffused 
through his body was gone, and in its place 
there was a bitter taste and a burning sensation around the eyes. 

Abruptly he mashed out his cigarette 
and stood up. 

"The night's washed up," he growled. 
"Let's get out of here/' 

Joe, with a thought of regret, assented, 
and the two of them left. 

It was bitter to end the last night upon 
such an uncompleted note. 

THE TWO OF THEM strolled back 
in the direction of the bus station. The 
fresh night, bright with the blaze of stars 
and saloon signs, should have exhilarated 
them; but the mental tension which filled 
the street pressed hard on Joe's receptors, 
and, through him, against Grey. 

A pair of police cars squatted at the 
corner. Fleet Police milled through the 
crowds, shock sticks in hand. An ambulance helicopter roaring in from the Fleet 
Base settled down in the center of the 
street. 

The fight was over, but so keyed up 
were the Fleetmen in town that for Grey 
and the Canopan to walk through the 
street was to walk through a sticky, obscene glue of malevolence. 

Joe's fur colors had faded to a dismal 
blue. Grey glanced at this with alarm. 

The thoughts in the crowd around them 
had been impersonal ones — fight thoughts, 
pleasure thoughts, passion thoughts — violent and unnerving to the pair who had to 
thread their way through this tumult, but 
yet impersonal. 

It began to change. 

They began again with the snake 
thoughts and the thoughts about the Terran who walked with the damn snake. 
They looked at the pair who walked in 
their midst, and in their state of excitement 
with violence not yet out of their minds, 
there was a redirection of passion from 



LAST NIGHT OUT 



65 



the recent fight to the new center of attention. 

Grey gasped as the force of this new 
agitation struck them. 

The pair of Fleet Police ahead of them 
changed their direction of motion and 
started walking towards them. Grey's face 
twitched as he felt the increased tension 
within Joe's nervous system. 

4 'Hold it, son," he cautioned. "Remember we're supposed to be tough. Remember the nerves of steel we're supposed to 
have, like it says in the books." 

Joe's grip on Grey's arm tightened, and 
then relaxed. 

"I thought I could take anything. Tonight has been almost too much." 

The Fleet Police were directly in front 
of them. The one on the right pointed at 
Grey with his stick and began to say something. 

The door of the adjacent saloon swung 
open and a giant of a bearded Fleetman 
roared out. The girl hanging to his arm 
caught a sudden sight of Joe, and a burst 
of fright exploded in her empty little head, 
shocking Joe with its intensity. 

She screamed, "It's thinking about me!" 

The big Fleetman clapped his hand to 
his hip. There was no gun holstered there, 
but Joe reared back in a dismayed reflex 
... In the next moment the Fleetman 
slumped to the pavement, where he lay 
quite still. 

That was all- — for a moment. 

The Fleet Police looked at Joe and they 
looked down at the Fleetman. Then they 
looked back at Joe. One of them stooped 
down and remained there for a long minute. He rose, and his face was white. 

"The guy's dead," he said, and his shock 
stick came up, pointing at Joe. "You do 
that?" he snapped. 

"He didn't touch the guy," Grey said. 

"Maybe yes and maybe no. Guy's don't 
just drop and die. I think both of you'd 
better come." 

AT THE FLEET POLICE headquarters the medic turned pale when he 
examined the body. A number of urgent 
calls were made. The Canopan liaison of
-Planet Stortefr-Sept. 



f icer arrived after' a nasty fifteen minutes 
during which the doctor and the Fleet Police Commandant argued violently and then 
stood staring blackly at the floor. 

Grey's eyes widened when behind the 
Canopan there stalked not only the commanding officer of his ship, but the Commandant of the entire Fleet Base. 

"The joint's lousy with brass tonight," 
he flashed silently at Joe as the two of 
them stood rigidly at attention. "I think 
you've become notorious." 

He caught a sense of amusement from 
an undetermined source, and in a moment 
narrowed it down as coming from the Canopan liaison officer. 

Good for our side, Grey thought in relief — at least Canopan officers kept their 
minds unbound by brass. They'd stand behind Joe. 

The Fleet Base Commandant knifed Joe 
with a rigid stare. He spoke rapidly and 
bitingly. "It is difficult enough to keep harmony among the various planetary groups 
at the base without it becoming know that 
the Canopans can kill Terrans by their 
mental powers. You have been trained in 
self-control. By this incident tonight you 
have jeopardized the morale of all the 
troops in the region." 

The Canopan officer put in gently, "This 
was clearly a case of self-defense. The 
Fleetman was drawing a gun." 

"Unfortunately for that argument," 
stated the Commandant, "the Fleetman 
was not carrying a gun." 

"But this 34C could not see in the first 
instant. His attention was on the thoughts 
which the Fleetman transmitted at that 
moment. The Fleetman forgot he was not 
wearing a sidearm, and in his mind there 
was the distinct picture of drawing his 
gun and shooting 34C. To 34C this was 
the reality of the moment. In his extreme 
nervousness he misjudged the force needed, and projected a lethal thought." 

"A pretty legality," the Base Commandant growled. "Is it self-defense when you 
kill a person for thinking that he is about 
to kill you?" 

"I know nothing of your law," the Canopan replied. "We have warned that an 



66 PLANET 

incident such as this was bound to occur 
sooner or later in the tense atmosphere of 
this town. May I suggest . . ." 

"I kaow, I know." The Commandant 
passed a hand through his hair in disgust. 
"Your ideas about orienting the entire 
fleet. Subconscious psychological training 
. . ; still sounds like hypnotism to me. But 
if we must, then we must" 

"And you, Jeffreys." He turned to 
Grey's ship-oommander. "You're taking off 
tomorrow. You wouldn't want to lose a 
team, would you?" 

"Certainly not, sir." Grey caught the relief in the commander's mind. "They're 
a good team." 

"The* as far as anybody is concerned 
there has been no incident tonight." The 
Commandant turned to the medic. "Get 
that?" 

Commander Jeffreys motioned to Joe 
and Grey. "You two will return to the 
base with me." 

Grey nodded mutely and began to fol


STOIUFS 

low the commander out of die door, hia attention focussed upon an idea which had 
sprung into his consciousness daring the 
past minute. 

"Look, Joe," he thought. "If you can 
do that to a Terran, what could you do 
to one of the enemy?" 

Joe began, "If I knew what the enemy 
was like . • ." 

A blast of thought broke into their 
minds. It blazed a warning signal in vivid, 
incandescent pictures, and in roaring 
sound. It said, in numerous and tumultuous manners, Stop where you are — keep 
out — restricted, confidential, top-secret territory! 

Grey jerked his head around. He stared 
for one astounded moment at the Canopaa 
officer. 

Then he was walking out to the waiting 
helicopter, the palm of his hand moist as 
he tightly held one of Joe's tentacles. 

The people who ran a war were not always the obvious ones, he thought. 



tf£o* the Bedi in 
T FAST- ACTION FICTION . . . 

Reach for a Fiction House Magazine 

PLANET JUNGLE Two WESTERN 

NORTHWEST FRONTIER BASEBALL 

FOOTBALL Two WESTERN ACTION WINGS 
Two SCIENCE-ADVENTURE Two COMPLETE DETECTIVE 



Spot the BulVs-Eyv (»(®)* i ) on the Covers 






So unpredictable, these dead-world Tower Dwellers! 

Tab old Tydore who placed such an inestimably 
valuable gift in the greed-hands of one he hated. 




"I made it for you . 



TYDORE'S GIFT 



by ALFRED COPPEL 



THE sun was a shrunken red disk against the starfields, a distant pale 
luminosity surrendering to the encroachment of the falling night. Hoarfrost 
crunched under Marley's feet as he walked 
by the still black waters of the canal, and 
then thin wind whispered over the sand 
and across the breasts of the ancient hills. 
Starlight gleamed in the dark water as 



the day faded. Earth hung low in the sky, 
like an emerald pendant over the bosom 
of a sleeping woman. 

Marley pulled his silks and furs closer 
about his shoulders. The air was sharp and 
cold. His breath froze wraithlike in the 
icy evening as he hurried down the path 
toward Tydore's tower. 

The green planet shone like a beacon 

67 



68 PLANET 

in his eyw. Home. The thought brought 
impatience and a longing to walk again 
under a pale sky and a warm sun. He looked about him with faint distaste. This 
peace — this solitude of low red hills and 
blue-black nights— was alien to Marley. 
It was unreal. Mars was a dream. An ancient wasted slumbering dream. 

Marley's lips compressed as he thought 
of Tydore and their last meeting. It 
seemed that Tydore laughed at him. Tydore withheld too much, and there was so 
little time left. There was an acrid core 
of decadence in the old Martian, Marley 
thought. A consciousness of too many millenia of civilization and decay. Devious 
was the word, perhaps, though it seemed 
a pallid one for the reality of the Martian's 
intricate mind. It was always impossible 
to know what he was thinking — how much 
he knew. About Marley being a spy. About 
the war on Earth. In spite of himself, 
Marley smiled. It sounded so melodramatic that way, but it was the way it really 
was. The Martians held the perfect weapon. Marley needed that weapon, and his 
nation had put forth a gigantic effort to 
get him to Mars so that he might steal 
it. 

Tydore's tower loomed up before him 
in the fading light, a fey filligree of minarettes and graceful flying buttresses too 
delicate for a grosser world than Mars. 
The tower's reflection shimmered in the 
still dark waters of the canal like an alter 
ego extending deep into the liquid depths. 

Marley descended the steps of delicately 
wrought stone that led to the tower's underground entrance with care, for the 
drifted ferric sand made them treacherous. 
How like the Martians, he thought with 
some irritation, to make it necessary to 
travel down in order to enter a tower. 
Everything the long way, the hard and devious way. 

The outer doorway was shaped like a 
fleur-de-lis and it opened from the top 
down, sliding into a recess of ancient, oily 
machinery. It would be far too simple to 
make a door that looked and worked like 
a dcor. Everything Marley had seen during his months on Mars served only to 
increase his sense of alienage. He had seen 
only Tydore, of course, of the living Mar


STOMES 

tians. There were only a handful left and 
they lived in their isolated towers along the 
still canals surrounded by their tissuethin manuscripts and ancient, reedlike 
music spools that filled the air of their 
retreats with skeins ©f weird and enharmonic melody. 

The weapon was Tydore's. He had rebuilt it from plans drawn by some ensorcelled armorer dead over five thousand 
years. Rebuilt it in the paradoxical way 
that Martians seemed to do everything, 
for if there was one thing that no Martian 
needed it was a weapon. No strife had 
marred the planet's peace for millenia. But 
build it he had, and Marley's hands itched 
for the sleek deadliness of it— the smooth 
grained stock- the oddly wrought, ornate 
muzzle. There was a vkious, tangy violence frozen into every line of the weapon. And it was the only hand gun Marley had ever seen that chained the forces 
of the atom. With such weapons an army 
could be invincible. 

TYDORE STOOD to greet him. With 
the elaborate courtesy of his kind, he 
performed the ritual gestures of welcome, 
his slender, finely veined hands tracing 
the ancient symbols in the air. 

"The gods of sand and wind have 
brought you safely to my house, man of 
Earth. I give thanks and pray you find 
peace and wisdom within my walls." 

The old Martian's chanting voice was 
like the fluting grace of a Scarlatti choral. 
It was one with the miniscule paintings 
that covered the walls, the finely wrought 
carvings on the antique flagstones under 
his feet. Marley was not at home in the 
fluid Martian tongue, but the very sound 
of the words conjured for him the serried 
ranks of spectral generations that had 
reached their culmination in this one robed 
ancient. 

And yet, he thought with irritation, Tydore's words mean not at all what they 
said. Through the finely polished phrases 
of welcome ran a thread of hidden mockcry — even hate — for Marley and everything he represented. Never once had Ty 
dore, by word or deed, indicated that he 
felt anything but friendship for his visitor 
from the silvery ship out on the desert, 




TYDOR&8 

and yet there was no mistaking the nuance of contempt. Tydore despised Marley as an outworld savage. One with the 
despoilers of the holy places of Mars. 

Not that the Martians had gods. They 
had lived too long for that, and their deities existed only in their beautifully turned phrases and their hyper-cultured ritual. 
But the first men from Earth had looted 
the libraries and shattered the soaring towers. It was a thing no Martian would 
ever forget — or forgive. It marked Earthmen for what they were. In Martian eyes 
— precocious barbarians. Targets for Martian subtlety. 

"I give thanks for your welcome," Marley said slowly, his tongue clumsy on the 
singing syllables. 

Tydore inclined his head slightly and 
indicated that Marley should follow him 
up the winding ramp that pierced the core 
of the tower. Each time Marley came, 
the ritual was the same, as unchanging 
as the still waters of the dark canals or 
the frozen loneliness of the red hills beyond. They would pass the first level, 
where the old engines supplied Tydore 
with what little heat and sustenance he 
needed. They would go on to the second 
level, where the music spools lay in ordered confusion amid the sonic transcribers 
that Tydore used to weave the sounds of 
the Martian night into atonal poems of 
melody. And then they would reach the 
level of the weapon. 

It would still be in its crystal case, 
guarded by a lock of bronze. A lock to 
which there was one key, and that one 
key on a silver chain around Tydore's 
neck. They would pass the weapon by 
and seek the top level, a platform shielded 
against the frigid night by a crystal canopy. And there they would begin their 
nightly fencing with words and ideas under the guise of friendship. 

Marley's heart was pounding suddenly 
as he drew near to the weapon. His patience was failing him at long last, he knew. 
He was sick of Mars, sick of Tydore. 
Sick of posing as a humble seeker after 
knowledge. If he could not trick the Martian into parting with the weapon soon, 
he knew that he must chance violence. He 
had not dared it before, because he could 



GIFT 69 

never be sure that Tydore and his kind 
were as defenseless as they seemed. It was 
paradoxical that they should possess a weapon such as the weapon and yet be unwilling or unable to use it. 

Still it seemed to Marley that such must 
be the case. He could only explain it to 
himself by saying that they had lived too 
long, amid too much deviousness and inverted purpose to be quite virile. They 
were — the word came readily to mind from 
the days of his training on Earth — decadent. And the meek did not inherit the 
earth or anything else, he told himself 
with satisfaction. Only the militant, the 
ruthless. 

THE TIME HAD COME, Marley 
thought, for the calculated risk. Direct action. He could scarcely contain himself as they passed the weapon and climbed 
to the top level. 

"You seem preoccupied tonight, Marley," Tydore said,, pouring two tiny goblets of wine, "Can it be that you grow 
tired of Mars?" 

Marley sipped the wine thoughtfully. 
To him it seemed completely insipid and 
without flavor. Subtlety again? He doubted it. "I mean to ask a favor of you, Tydore," he said, "And I but ponder how 
I should begin." 

"My house is yours," the Martian replied softly, "And all that it contains." 

Marley's eyes narrowed. Did he imagine 
the accent on the last phrase, or was it 
actually there? He decided to be very 
cautious. "I came here, as you know," he 
said, "To leani everything I might about 
your kind. As you know, we of Earth 
are a young race, still much in need of 
guidance and knowledge." 

"You have learned much," Tydore said. 

Marley's tone grew harder. "But not 
enough." 

Tydore's eyebrows arched delicately. 
"So? You have read my books, listened 
to my music. You have tasted the wines 
and eaten the fruits of Mars. You have 
seen the stars and the sand, the waters and 
the lichens. Have you not known my 
world?" 

"I want more," Marley said flatly. 

Tydore smiled. In that smile Marley 



70 



PLANET STORIES 



saw a flash of more distilled venom and 
ancient hatred that he could have imagined existed. The utter virulence of it 
left him shaken and his illogical fear 
brought anger. 

He got to his feet, the tiny goblet in 
his hand. It was old and delicate, a tiny 
gem of carved jade and ivory. To one 
such as Tydore — priceless. Brutally, Marley crushed it to shards in his hands 
and dropped it to the flagstones. The fragments tinkled as they fell. 

"So it must always be," said Tydore 
in a soft voice. 

"I have not come here to listen to music, Tydore," Marley said, "Nor to read 
your books or to know your world. You 
have one thing that I want. You will give 
it to me, or I will take it from you." He 
ground his heel onto the remains of the 
goblet with a grating sound. 

"The weapon," the Martian said, "You 
want the weapon. You may have it. You 
need not have broken my goblet . . " 

Marley was almost sorry that he had 
won so easily. He suddenly wanted to 
crush the old Martian as he had crushed 
the goblet. In both there was a quality that 
eluded him, and it was maddening. 

Tydore handed him the key. "Gome, we 
will get it together." 

Marley followed him cautiously, alert 
for any trickery. Presently they stood before the case and Marley unlocked it, reaching greedily for the polished stock. He 
cradled the gun in his arms lovingly, savoring triumph. With this in his hands, 
he could defy a world. 

"There is no other like it, nor any but 
I to make one," Tydore said with a strange 
smile. 

"Why did you make it?" asked Marley. 

"I made it for you." 

Marley laughed aloud. It was an alien 
sound in the thin, cold air of the tower. 
"You're a liar, Tydore. You built this weapon long before I ever left Earth and you 
know it." 

"By you, I meant simply men like you," 
Tydore said. "When the first Earthmen 
cime and befouled Mars with their presence, I knew that I must make the weapon." He smiled, showing even white 
teetfa. "A small triumph, but things are 



not to be measured by whether they are 
great or small. Rather by their flavor, their 
grace, and their neatness, Marley." 

"You speak of triumph, old man," snorted Marley derisively, "while your precious 
weapon is in my hands." 

Tydore shrugged. "As I knew it would 
be one day when I spread the tales of 
what the weapon would do. It drew you 
as a lodestone draws a sliver of iron." 

Marley felt a pang of panic. "You mean 
this thing is a fake?" 

Tydore shook his head. "No counterfeit* 
It will do what I said it would do. Kill, 
What more can one ask of a weapon?" 

It was Marley's turn to smile. "Nothing 
And there is only this one. And if you 
were to die . . ." 

Tydore smiled a veiled smile. "It is 
as the gods of sand and wind decree." 

Marley pointed the weapon at Tydore. 
He had only to kill the old Martian and 
return to his ship. The mission was over. 
Completed. He was done with Mars and 
with Tydore and his subtle scorn. 

He cradled the weapon lovingly, laying 
hw cheek to the carven stock. Old Tydore 
had built well. There was perfect balance 
in the feel of it. His finger curled around 
the trigger and he sighted carefully down 
the long barrel at the robed figure of the 
Martian. Tydore was smiling in the face 
of death, and Marley wanted to laugh out 
Joud. This is the way the world ends, he 
was thinking. Not with a bang but a whimper. He squeezed the trigger . . . 

The universe exploded in Marley's face. 
There was a streak of searing pain that 
carried away half his face, and as he fell 
he could hear a strange sound. For the 
first time, Tydore was laughing aloud. It 
was a hideous sound. A voice for the torment and hatred of a race that had lived 
too long, planned too much. Marley felt the 
tower pinwheel around him, the flagstones 
leapt up to meet him, greeting the searing 
agony of his face with the soundless 
laughter of a million intricate patterns of 
lonely death. And blackness welled up out 
of the stones to engulf him, but not 
before he knew — 

Tydore had made the weapon with the 
muzzle resembling the stock. It was as 
simple as that. 






// had taken him ten years to find them — to even convince 
himself that they existed. Now Manson was ready to kilt! 




'*.wrTp?7irr 



THE WATCHERS 

by ROGER DEE 



HE LEFT HIS GRYO ON THE 
dark lawn and circled the villa, 
carefully avoiding the wash of 
light from open windows. The blast gun 
lay snug and cold in his hand, and his 
thought ran bleakly: Here am I, Peter 
Manson, pacifist, idealist, reformer, preacher in print of tolerance and amity — about 
to kidnap a man whom I shall almost cer~ 
tainly kill before morning. 
Tomorrow the telecast would list his 



madness with other insanities: sex murders, suicides, political drumbeatings for 
the coming holocaust of the inevitable 
Fourth War . . . 

War. 

"They're going too far," he said, half 
aloud. "Their routine meddlings were bad 
enough, but another war now might mean 
the end of everything/' 

He found the alien who called himself 
Leonard Havlik in a bright, book-lined 

71 



72 PLAIVET 

study, packing a miscellany of papers into a brief case that bore his name in gold 
lettering. A secretary was helping, a slim 
girl with crisp, copper-colored hair and 
clear green eyes. 

Manson waited, tense with unaccustomed strain. Somewhere a bird trilled sleepily, and the night-wind, fragrant with the 
smell of trampled clover, blew cool against 
his damp face. 

Irrelevantly, the scene inside reminded 
him of his own quiet study where he had 
labored for ten years over the scant gleanings of his search. In that time he had 
written four books, fighting with a reformer's apostolic zeal to open the eyes of 
men to their own possibilities, and he had 
failed. 

He had not awakened his kind, but he 
had found the Watchers. The failure was 
not his fault. It was Theirs . . . 

The girl left the room. Manson straightened at his window, bringing up the blast 
gun. 

"Come out, Havlik," he ordered. "Quickly, or I'll blow you to dust where you 
stand — Watcher!" 

HIS QUARRY looked up, startled— 
a small, dark man with a thin, tired 
face and sparse gray hair, a perfect replica 
of the million ordinary businessmen his 
camouflage of humanity aped. 

Manson snicked off the safety catch of 
his weapon, and Havlik came through the 
window quickly, without protest. Manson 
prodded him into the gyro and manacled 
his wrists together. 

"We Earthmen have a time-tested proverb," Manson said, "to the effect that you 
can't fool all the people all the time. I've 
spent ten years searching iov you, Havlik 
— and here I am." 

He set tho autopilot for his cabin on 
Green River, holding his blast gun warily, 
and sent the gyro slanting upward into 
the night. Havlik smiled faintly, dark eyes 
gleaming in the light of the instrument 
panel. 

"Laugh while you can," Manson said 
grimly. "I've learned something of you 
Watchers already. I'll know more by morning." 

"Force was unnecessary," Havlik said un


STOR1ES 

expectedly. "I would have given you information willingly, since our mission here 
is ended. The Kha Niish, who are our 
masters, have ordered us to leave Earth. 
Tonight." 

Manson stared, the alien's aesurance faning his anger. 

"You're lying — you Watchers have 
mingled with us for centuries, using our 
own ignorance to set its against each 
other. You've kept us in perpetual confusion, deafening us with our own bickering while you tightened your hold on us. 
Now you're fomenting a Fourth War that 
may wipe us out completely, to save yourselves the trouble of liquidating us directly. You'd never go now, with success 
almost in your hands." 

"Perhaps you mistake our intention," 
Havlik said. "How do you know you're 
right?" 

"Because men of themselves would not 
do the brutal, idiotic things that fill the 
telecasts every day," Manson said. "We 
are a gregarious people, craving affection 
— why should we lie and steal and murder 
each other by the millions? Man is a 
rational animal, yet he does not behave in 
a rational manner. By simple induction, 
the basic cause of his social idiocy stems 
from outside himself. Someone, or Something, is setting us against each other. I 
suspected as much ten years ago, and tonight I have proved it." 

Havlik shrugged. "You've wasted your 
time. We leave Earth tonight." 

Manson laughed shortly. "You're not 
going anywhere, my friend. I need you 
for information." 

"What else would you know? Our reason for quitting Earth?" 

"You're not leaving at all," Manson 
said, nettled. "You may have planned a 
routine jump to your base on Pluto, but 
you're not giving up a juicy plum like 
Earth. Not after all these years !" 

HE PEERED through the gyro's side 
glass searching for the white peak 
of Green Mountain to check his position. 
The skyglow of Denver shimmered in the 
east, but the peak was lost in darkness. 
"You misunderstand our motive," the 
alien said. "But you're quite right about 



73 



TBE WATCHERS 

our base on Pluto. Induction again ?" from the cylinder. 

"On a different level, yes," Manson said, 

? U 1° V SOl f a™™ 1 ?-* small, heavy x^ IGURES SWARMED about the ereat 
planet where there should be nothing but V ship, pouring up a wide ramp in orderlarger and lighter world. Pluto was ly embarkation. The girl Manson had seen 



never born to Sol— it's an alien planet, 
brought in from Outside by you Watchers." 

A red light winked oh the control panel, 
and the gyro swerved fractionally. A fiery 
streak of crimson rocket exhaust flared 
ahead and vanished, explaining the deviation. 

"Seattle-Miami express," Manson muttered. Then the unnatural angle of the 
etchaust-trail registered, troubling him. 
"But it shouldn't cross my course — and it 
should be going up, not down!" 

"Your crusade is based on a false premise," Havlik said. "We came to Earth less 
than fifty years ago, not to destroy humanity but to guide it. The Kha Niish sent 
us as missionaries, to sow the seed of 
Their benign culture among men as we 
have sowed it among a thousand other infant races born into Their galaxy." 

The gyro tilted, spiraling down for a 
landing. A farmhouse, lighted windows 
cheerful against the dark oountryside, rose 
to meet it. Beside the house, standing on 
end like a giant cartridge case, Manson 
saw a sleek, shining bulk — a ship. 

He raised incredulous eyes to meet the 
alien's dark stare. Comprehension stunned 
him. 

"You fiend," he breathed. "You've tricked me somehow — you've played cat-andmouse with me from the first !" 

He remembered the gun in his hand and 
swung it up. 

"Let your weapon drop," Hartik said. 
"You set the autopilot at my direction. 
This is our evacuation point." 

The gun slid from Manson's fingers. He 
tried to retrieve it from the floor and 
cried out, startled, when his body refused 
to obey. 

The alien removed his manacles. "You 
will be free again as soon as we lift." 

"Lies," Manson grated. He fought to 
break the stasis that held him, veins knotting in his forehead with the effort. "I 
might have known!" 

The gyro landed gently, a hundred yards 



at the villa came running toward the gyro, 
copper hair blowing in the night-wind. 

"You were almost late," she called to 
Havlik. "We're ready to—" She caught 
sight of the Earthman and broke off. 

In the dark depth of her eyes Manson 
saw understanding and a great pity, and 
for the first time it came to him that 
Havlik had not lied. Aliens they might be, 
but not destroyers— in this girl burned 
the same ideals, the same transcendent zeal 
that drove him. She was as human, basically, as he. 

The same will to raise up the helpless 
is in us both, he thought. The compulsion 
to carry the saving light of reason to those 
in darkness . . . 

"Wait," he begged. 'Tfour master 
wouldn't have ordered you away if Earth 
needed you— and if men can work out 
their own salvation, then they don't need 
me, either ! Take me with you out there — 
let me help you, let me see the Outside 
galaxy of the Kha Niish for myself !" 

He spoke to Havlik, but his eye* clung 
to the girl as to a magnet. She met his 
gaze fully, the compassion in her own eyes 
deeper than grief. 

Havlik shook his head. "Your sanity 
would not bear the presence of the Kha 
Niish, nor of the other races Outside. 
You are drawn to this girl as to another 
of your own kind— but do you suppose that 
the Kha Niish would shape her in Their 
image? She is like the rest of us, an android 
creature, refashioned by the Masters to 
suit the environment of each new world 
we visit." 

The last of the swarming figures vanished into the great cylinder. A muted gongsound thrummed through the night. A 
voice called, urgently. 

"The Kha Niisfe did not order us away 
because men are solving their own problems," the alien said. "We leave you to 
destroy yourselves, as you will, because 
man is one of the rare failures of the 
Galactic Urge. You are a race of incorrigibles." 



74 



PLANET STORIES 



Later Manson sat woodenly in his gyro, 
waiting for volition to return, the scent 
of scorched earth and ozone and trampled 
clover strong in his nostrils. 

We Earthmen have another inerrant old 
saw, he thought bitterly. An excruciatingly 
funny one dealing with silk purses and 



sows? eats . • • 

For a long time he sat quietly, straining 
his eyes to follow the last faint rocketstreak that arced upward against the 
stars. Then the stasis that held him fell 
away, and he reached for the blast gut! 
that lay under his feet. 



~"~" 1 






FIGHT 

INrANTliC 
PARALYSIS 




JOIN "MARCH OF DIMES 



In the dim Water Temple, where the dead grinned down on the 
dead, Hale met his D-day. Should he give an ex-comrade to the 
torturing Lhrai or chance the massacre of Terrestrial thousands? 




Y how," Randy said, "1 was waiting for thai," and he brought the gun down in a calculated arc. 



VENGEANCE ON MARS! 

by D. Be LEWIS 



HALE CUT THE MOTOR AS HE 
swerved off the ancient plastic roadway. His one-man beetle thumped 
over the shoulder and, wheels whispering, 
coasted down the sandy, moonlit slope. It 
threaded between mighty Hnla cacti that had 
the size and shape of spaceships towering 



grey in the night. He braked it to a 
slanting stop and got out, a big, long-legged man who carefully kept the little car 
between himself and the Martian watertempli that sat a short distance away 
where the dunes of the desert began. He 
thought, Strange to be afraid of getting 

75 



76 PLANET 

shot by Randy. 

Weiss said, from the shadows, "Better 
get out of the moonlight, Hale. That beetle 
won't stop a blaster bolt." 

Hale crossed to the clot of men that 
made dark blurs under the linla. Weiss 
said, "What took you so long?" 

Hale said, "I had to get my gun recharged. Sturm was working on it when 
Sam came busting in the shop and told 
me you'd cornered Randy." He touched 
the blaster at his belt, then brought up 
the hand to get out a cigarette from his' 
jacket pocket. He struck a match on the 
blaster butt. "Why call me ? Why not call 
the Patrol?" 

Someone stirred in the darkness, clearing a throat. "Patrol never hung a looter 
yet and as long as Boss Ricco kicks back 
to Patrol brass, they never will. This one, 
we'll take care of personally. The redboys 
want him." 

OVER the cupped match flame, Hale 
sent a hard glance in the direction of 
the voice. "Eight, ten men aren't enough." 

Weiss said placatingly, "We were tipped that he'd try this temple. We were 
waiting for him, but he got past us. First 
thing we knew, he killed the guardian inside. We heard the shot. We called on him 
to surrender, but hell, he knows what 
the redboys will do to him if we get him 
alive." 

Hale said again, "Why call me?" 

"You know these old water-temples. 
One narrow entrance, no windows. He 
can't get out, that's for sure, but we can't 
get at him without losing a lot of men." 
Weiss put a hand on Hale's arm, and 
Hale moved impatiently and Weiss took 
it away, saying, "You know Randy better'n any of us." 

"We came to Mars together,' , said Hale. 
"We worked our way out on the same 
crate. We started our farm, but Randy 
didn't stick. He said there was always easy 
money on a frontier, and Mars shouldn't 
be any different. Said he preferred four 
ladies to a hoe." 

"He should've stuck to cards," said the 
man who had cleared his throat. 

George Weiss said, firmly, "We want 
you to go in and talk to him. You were 



STORIES 

his best friend. He'll listen to you. TeM 
him it's no use." 

Hale said, "That's what I figured." He 
turned to look at the temple, squat and 
white in the gloom. The doorway was tall 
and thin and dead black, and behind it, 
part of the blackness, was Randy and His 
gun. And he'd be desperate. As Hale 
turned back he caught a faint, acrid odor, 
and he knew that a Martian was nearby, 
crouching, waiting to see that this was 
done right. 

44 There' ve been a hundred temples stripped of their twin-stones in the past year,'' 
Weiss said. "Our redboys are getting fed 
up with it. The C. A.'s too busy whipping 
the climate to tend to looters, and the Patrol buys its liquor and mammas with loot 
money. Half the law is too damned busy, 
and the other half's crooked — and we're in 
the middle. The redboys have run out 
of patience." 

Hale nodded. "My own redboys are 
ready to go on the warpath. Okay. So 
Randy's the goat elect. So relax and starve 
him out." 

"They want him tonight. We promised 

"All right, go keep it Hell, I didn't 
promise anything. Damned if I'll risk my 
neck to — " 

" — promised to deliver," Weiss went on 
flatly, "bacuse we had to. We're in a nutcracker, Hale. The Ihrai priests are set 
to trigger another Green Spot unless they 
get Randy to play with. Deadline's dawn." 

Hale remembered Green Spot. It was a 
bloody, terrible memory. Green Spot had 
been one of the earliest and largest farmsettlements on Mars. One night, for some 
other-worldly reason that the Colonial Authority was still puzzling about, the Martian workers had slit two hundred Terrestrial throats and vanished into the red 
desert. The Ihrai priests had conveyed regrets, assuring the Authority at the same 
time that there had been adequate provocation for the act. And the Authority, 
horrified for its sixty thousand colonists, 
had admitted that there must have been. 

Hale thought back, in conflicting terms 
of personal friendship and unit survival. 
These men in the shadows; most of them 
were his friends. He had worked with 






VENGEANCE 

them, leaning on hoes in the fields or sitting in the enclosed warmth of a back 
porch discussing the perversities of Martian geochemistry. He had helled arotind 
Firstport with them, had often led them 
in the helling. His wife was the friend of 
their wives. While Randy — 

Randy was five years ago. Randy was 
thirty acres of crops dumped in Hale's lap 
when they'd needed working. Randy was 
a bitter girl named Susan who waited on 
tables in New Chicago halfway across 
Mars, and the son he never cared that 
he'd given her before he went away. 

"Wait here," said Hale in a sour voice, 
and tossed away his cigarette. "I'll see 
what I can do." 

THE TEMPLE was hexagonal, featureless save for the black slit of the 
doorway, smooth native marble gleaming 
under Phobos' dim silver. 

He stopped a few feet away and called, 
"Randy, it's me. Hale. Don't shoot. I'm 
coming in to talk to you." 

Randy's voice, soft and oddly echoed by 
the temple walls, floated from the black 
slit. "Come on in, Hale. I won a bet with 
myself, that they'd holler for you." 

Hale walked on, slowly, one hand brushing his blaster butt at each step. Again 
the sensation of strangeness, of wrongness, that he should be afraid of being 
shot by Randy. Five years ago Randy had 
been a lean, fox-eyed kid, inclined to be 
touchy, but no hard-case. But after five 
years in the excrescent canal-towns, the 
smoke-filled dives where a coin on the 
bar bought a drink or a drug and, more 
covertly tendered, a life — five years in a 
sour pool, floating with the scums that 
even fresh water collects when it settles — 
and now, a looting and a killing" — 

Hale felt cold, and he was perspiring. 
The blaster was a solid weight on his thigh. 

He reached the doorway and stood uncertainly, knowing the men behind him 
were watching him. Wondering if he'll kill 
me, he thought. Maybe he's turned into 
a ring-tailed killer. Kid, kid, why did 
you have to do it? Why didn't you get 
off Mars, like I told you to? 

The hollow, echoed voice said, "Come 
on in. I wouldn't shoot you, Hale." But 



ON MARS! 77 

the voice had a thin sound to it, and Hale 
thought, He might 

The doorway was about two feet across, 
in a wall six feet thick. Smooth marble 
rustled the leather at Hale's shoulders as 
he entered the thick blackness. Three 
paces, echoing, and his fingertips told him 
he had reached the interior. He felt with 
his feet, located the top of the shallow 
steps that every such temple contained — 
five steps down into a trench which had 
once held precious water, then three steps 
up to the temple floor. His bootheels rang 
sharply — five, two across the trench, three 
— then he stood in darkness, waiting. 

Randy said, "You've gained some 
weight, Hale. Or is it the jacket?" Sort 
of amused, but with that same thin sound. 

Hale said, "Both." He took a forward 
step, at an angle, and saw the faint flood 
of moonlight appear on the temple floor 
and knew that Randy could no longer 
see him. He said, "Weiss said to tell you 
it's no use." 

"George's out there, eh? Thought I recognized his voice. I wonder who tipped 
them off. I've made some enemies along 
the canals, I suppose." 

Startlingly, a match flamed in the blackness, became an orange glow that rose to 
the cigarette between Randy's lips. He 
was over near a wall, his gun in his other 
hand. He puffed hard and his face glowed 
masklike, his eyes seeking Hale. 

Hale, blinking, saw that Randy hadn't 
changed much. He was still dark and slender, his brown eyes large and bright. But 
now his hair came down fully to the fur 
collar of his jacket, in the manner of the 
canal crowd. The movement that brought 
him to Hale's side was graceful. 

"How many are they, Hale? Think I 
could break for it?" 

Hale said, "It'd be quicker than the 
redboys." 

Randy pulled in a hard breath. "My 
blaster's jammed. They could' ve nailed me 
any time they felt like it. It's been hell, 
waiting for that." He looked at the gun. 
The hand that held it was trembling. 

Hale sighed. "I guess I could walk you 
out at gunpoint, then, but I don't want to 
do that. Come out with me on your own 
hook, Randy. You've played your four 












78 PLANET 

queens till now, but you drew a bad hand 
tonight." 

RANDY drew unsteadily on his cigarette. Hale, looking beyond, saw the 
dark mass near one wall that must be 
the guardian. The stain on the fur robe 
was black. The blind sockets in the skull 
of the Lhari, who sprawled batlike against 
the chanting wall, were black too. 

"I didn't want to shoot the redboy." 
Randy slowly bolstered the gun. "I slugged him, but he had a hard head. He came 
at me with a knife while I was prying the 
twin-stones out of the idol. Why couldn't 
he lay quiet? I never wanted to kill anybody." His eyes found Hale's in the gloom, 
and the brightness in them tonight was 
mostly fear. "You always said I ought to 
get off Mars. Last week, I decided to. 
But I didn't have any money, so I went 
to Ricco. He wouldn't trust me off-world 
with his money, but he said he had a tourist interested in a good set of twin-stones. 
He said there was five thousand in it for 
me. He said there was a good pair here, 
and—" 

He stopped short, his young face hardening with shocking suddenness. "By the 
red gods, Ricco!" he ground out. "Of 
course — he tipped them off I'd be here. 
So he'd have me killed over a girl, damn 
his black soul." He spun away from Hale 
in a violent motion, his thin mouth feral 
with rage. Hale waited in the blackness 
and slowly Randy turned back. Carefully 
he flattened the cigarette his clenching fist 
had bruised. "Why didn't I think?" he almost whispered. "They told me he was 
after my skin — " 

Hale started to say something, but 
Randy's hands were suddenly tight on 
Hale's arms, and his breath carried the 
taint of inque liquor to Hale's nostrils. 
"Hale, you've got to help me. I want to 
get off Mars. That was why I did it. It 
was my first mark. Oh, I've drifted the 
canals and chilled some decks, but this was 
my first mark — " 

Hale said, "I came in to try to help, 
Randy. If you'll walk out with me, it'll be 
easier all around." 

Randy shook his head fiercely. "Lord, 
you don't want them to turn me over to 



STORIES 

the redboys, do you? The Ihrai priests can 
peel a man and keep him alive for days—" 

Uncomfortably, Hale said, "I couldn't 
help you if I wanted to. They're waiting 
outside." 

Randy took breath through his teeth. 
"Just stay here. Let me walk out. They 
won't blast, thinking it's you. Is your 
beetle anywhere near the temple?" 

"They're practically sitting on it." 

"Then I can break for the desert. It's 
a good chance in the dark. I can cut up 
along Coprates to Freightport and — " 

Hal said, "No, Randy." 

Randy laughed softly, and the laugh had 
all the old familiar recklessness in it, but 
it couldn't hide the fear. "You will, Hale. 
I got into this mess trying to do what you 
always told me to — get a new start on 
some other clod. There are plenty of jobs 
on Venus. Maybe I can still stowaway to 
Venus. I swear that's where I'll go, i£ 
you'll only let me through that door." 

"Venus has a skid-row, too." 

"I'm through with it. So help me !" 

"You killed that redboy." 

"He tried to kill me. He knew I had 
a gun. What was I supposed to do? Only 
a redboy—'" 

Hale said slowly, "What about George 
and the others? I'll have to face them on 
this." 

"They'll find you on the floor with a 
lump on your head. They'll never hold it 
against you." Randy spread his hands. 
"I'd rather you'd kill me — now — than 
take me out there for the redboys/ > 

HALE felt baffled. It had been like 
this in the old days, Randy had always 
had his way. Coming to Mars in the first 
place had been Randy's idea, and he'd 
pressed it, and Hale had done well on 
Mars. Maybe Randy had a break coming. Hale thought, five years isn't such a 
long time, after all. He said tiredly, "AH 
right. You can have your chance. Good 
luck. And I'll take those twin-stones, Randy." 

Randy let out a long sigh and looked up 
at the roof of the temple, as if he could 
see far-off Venus in that thick blackness. 
He brought the glowing stones from a pocket. "Here's Phobos — here's Deimos," he 



VENGEANCE <WV MARS! 



79 



said wryly. "I thought maybe you'd forget." 

They were heavy in Hale's hand. He 
said, "So long." 

Randy said, "One more thing, friend," 
and there wag an undefinable something 
in his voice. "I'll need a gun. You'll lend 
me yours, won't you? They'll think I took 
it." He reached over and slid Hale's blaster from his holster, and brought the glowing coal of his cigarette close to the dial 
on the butt. "Fully charged. Well, I may 
need every shot — " his eyes met Hale's, 
and that undefinable something was ia 
them too — "for those meddling bastards 
outside. I owe them for tonight. Now — " 
He took a step toward Hale, hefting the 
gun and raising it to strike. 

Without thought, with only a sick feeling all over, Hale stepped back. The twinstones clicked on the floor at his feet. 
"Wait, Randy. You shouid've slugged me 
first ... I don't think I want to let you 
go after all." 

Randy's grin was frozen, and Hale now 
had a name for that something, a kind of 
shame. "I know," Randy said, "I was 
waiting for that," and he brought the gun 
iown in a calculated arc. 

Hale tried to duck, but Randy had the 
edge. The gun-barrel slammed into his 
temple. Agonized, he threw up an arm. 
It chopped against Randy's wrist, and fire 
and thunder erupted in the blackness. 
The gun clattered on stone and from 
somewhere came Randy's furious cursing, "Damn you, Hale, you did that ! Now 
I'll never — " Then Hale was alone in the 
temple with his pain. 

He heard the click of bootheels as Randy 
leaped over the trench, the hollow thudding 



down the corridor doorway — then the 
shouts and the roar of blasters and the 
intolerable glare, a stark wavering white 
rectangle that washed across the fk>or from 
the doorway to flicker upon the stony 
wings and beast- face of Lhrai — and the 
spasmic scream of a man dissolved in 
flame. 

He got to his feet and leaned wearily 
against the wall, face gaunted by pain, 
wondering if Randy had known only at 
the last how ruthless he had become. Life 
was cheap enough out here on a red world 
where red insects bred in your eyes and 
red beasts swallowed you and let their 
juices do the killing, and it took a good 
man to fight the alien fight. But when the 
wrong kind of man came along, it was a 
knife in the back and life had no price 
at all. That kind of man had to be reckoned on, Hale thought bleakly — the bad penny that wouldn't even go away, hard and 
shiny and newly made, like Randy — for 
values slipped in the rat-race that was 
any frontier, and the urge to prey, for 
profit, for power, lay close under a man's 
skin. Hale sighed. He had hoped for a 
while — but no; Randy's stamp had been 
the bloody stamp of the canals, and that 
stamp would sooner or later have cancelled 
out other lives, on Venus or wherever he 
took it. 

Better now, Hale thought, than hunted 
down the years . . . 

George Weiss said, from close by in the 
darkness, "We got him, Hale. Are you bad 
hurt?" 

Hale pressed his temple, and said, "I'll 
get over it," and meant the pain in his 
head. Time would have to work to erase 
the deeper ache. 












Eden could not have been half so good. Delicious fruit. 
An everlasting sun. Six-limbed people fevering to serve the 
fallen Sky Gods. Yet every Eden has a secret serpent ♦ ♦ « 

HOSPITALITY 

by J. W. GROVES 




HOSPITALITY 



81 



THE PLANET HAD no axial rotation of its own. They landed on the 
permanently sunward side, the reaction-tubes in the shoulders of their suits 
lowering them gently through the branches 
of huge fern-trees on to green-blue, mosslike grass. 

. Durgan threw back his helmet revealing 
sharp thin features, pale-blue furtive eyes. 
Brent, more suspicious of the information 
in the Index of Habitable Planets, waited 
for the built-in indicator of his suit to 
confirm the air as breathable before he uncovered his round, balding head. 

"Hope the natives are like you said." 
"Sure they are/ 1 said Durgan. "I read 
all about 'em in a book by a guy named 
Taylor. They're hospitable. Do anything 
to make a stranger comfortable and happy. 
It's part of their religion." 

"Taylor only stopped here for twelve 
hours. We got years . . ." 

"Oh stop whining. Did you have any 
better idea for getting us out of that jam?" 
Brent shook his head. The idea was 
smart enough. Right now the patrol was 
drasing their empty automatically-piloted 
ship. Soon they would see it crash on the 
outermost planet of this system. And if, 
as a precautionary measure, they decided 
to land and analyze its contents they would 
find quite enough organic molecules to account for two dead outlaws — thanks to the 
food convertors which had been working at 
full capacity for days. With reasonable luck 
the names of Brent and Durgan would 
soon be struck off the roll of wanted men. 
"That part's all right," he admitted, 
"But hell!" 

The natives had come out from between 
the shadowy fern-trees with startling suddeness. Great purple-colored brutes they 
were, six-limbed, yet still vaguely humanoid in shape in that they had a distinct 
body and a head above it. Their eyes were 
green, unwinking, and just below the eyes 
was a round permanently-open orifice with 
harp-like strings stretched across it. 

Durgan saw Brent snatch at his boltgun and moved to stop him. Then he 
dropped his 'hand as the other man let his 
fingers fall away from the weapon. The 
purple creatures were bowing obsequiously 
and gesturing toward two structures slung 

6-Plaaet Storiea-Sept. 



from the broad shoulders of four of their 
number. 

"Litters," said Durgan happily. "To 

carry us to their village. Didn't I tell you?" 

The natives responded to the sound 

of his voice with a joyous humming and 

more deep bows. 

Brent grunted. "How're we going to 
talk to them?" 

"We won't need to talk to them/' said 
Durgan. "They'll look after us without 
being told." He tugged resistingly as one 
of the natives would have taken from 
him a foot-square case to carry on another 
litter. "No thanks pal. I'll look after the 
space-radio myself. We're gonna need 
that so we can get ourselves picked up as 
castaways once the heat's off." 

News of their coming had evidently been 
sent ahead of them for a fresh hut, larger 
than the rest, was being finished. The 
two men were escorted to it, and their 
litters gently lowered to the ground. 

"None of the comforts of civilization," 
said Brent. "But I think you're right. 
We're going to be well looked after." 
Durgan nodded. 

Brent, ignoring him, was sampling some 
gaudy looking fruit. He grunted his 
satisfaction. "Try one," he said. "They're 
good." 

Between them they cleared the bowl of 
fruit and started in on the next one that 
was immediately produced. Durgan gave 
up first Brent managed to keep going for 
ten minutes longer. Finally even he had to 
stop. 

He patted his rotund stomach and grinned at the circle of purple green-eyed 
faces around him. "That, my hummingbirds, was swell. And now I think I'll 
have a nice after-dinner snooze." 

The anxious-sounding humming mingled 
with his dreams so that he had to blink 
for some seconds before he came fully 
back to consciousness to find purple hands 
pawing at him, shaking him gently. As 
soon as he sat up the natives fell back. 
He chuckled at Brent who was sweax 
ing vividly. "Wonder why they did 
that?" he said. "Maybe afternoon sleep is 
against local etiquette or something. Oh 
well it doesn't matter much." 
"It might not matter much to you/- said 



82 



PLANET STORIES 



Brent sulkily. "But me, I enjoy my after 
dinner nap." 

"Then this is where you start to learn 
better habits." Durgan rolled off the pile 
of aromatic dried leaves on which he 
had been lying and went over to the 
space-radio. "This thing's indetectable so 
long as you use it for reception only. Let's 
see what programs we can pick up." 

HE FOUND AN OLD broadcast 
that had been spreading out through 
the universe for years. It was faint and 
rather badly marred by static but he enjoyed himself for a while listening to longfamiliar tunes. Then he noticed that 
the gathered natives were- twitching to the 
rythm of the orchestra. "Wonder if we 
oould teach them to dance?" he said'. 
The natives were obsequiously willing. 
Unexpectedly, their dancing, completely 
extempore, had a certain wild grace of its 
own despite their grotesque appearance. 
And when the two men tired of watching 
that Brent suggested that they might be 
taught to run races. 

By the time they were both hungry 
again Brent owed Durgan half a million 
interstellar credits, and two tons of oremite. It didn't really matter very much. 
When they were comfortably replete they 
leaned back on their sweet - smelling 
couches. Durgan looked up at the sun 
still standing unmovingly at its zenith. 
"You," he said gravely, "are a liar. You 
can shout its always midday as much as 
you like but my wrist-ohron says its 
eleven P. M. Bedtime." He turned his 
head lazily. "We'd better get them to 
shift this stuff inside the hut for us. 
Won't be able to sleep properly out in 
the light." 

It wasn't so funny this time when the 
anxious humming and the gently shaking 
hands woke him up. "Let me alone," he 
said irritably. "What's the matter with 
you?" 

For a moment or two he sat up glaring 
at the ring of them that was gathered 
round him. They hummed joyously. "I 
don't see what the hell there is to be so 
pleased about," he snarled. 

"Nor me neither," growled Brent. 
Durgan lay down again. The purple 
hands were shaking him almost before he 



closed his eyes. 

At the end of two more hours of it 
Brent was spluttering with fury. He jerked 
out his bolt-gun. "Let me sleep, damn 
you," he yelled, "or I'll use this on some 
of you . . ." 

"Don't be a fool," snapped Durgan. 
"They don't understand a word you're saying. And if we start shooting we'll arouse 
their hostility." 

"They're arousing my hostility right 
now," said Brent. 

"Forget it! We're absolutely dependent 
on them to keep u>s alive for the next 
few years." Durgan got to his feet. "We'll 
have to try to keep awake a bit longer. 
Wait till we see the rest of them turn 
in." 

Their hosts were delighted when they 
came out of the hut. Fresh fruits were 
piled in front of them. Dancing and the 
running of^races was resumed. But each 
time either "of the men dozed off quietly 
every other activity ceased and solicitously 
humming natives gathered around him, 
gently shaking and prodding . . . 

"It's no good," snarled Brent after being pulled back to consciousness for the 
twentieth time. "I just can't wait for 
their bedtime, whenever it is. Either I 
sleep or I start shooting." 

Durgan nodded. "I'm beginning to feel 
the same way myself. Tell you what, 
we'll go for a walk in the forest and try 
to shake diem off. Then we can hide 
ourselves in the branches of a tree. It 
won't be too safe, I don't know what 
sort of wild life there is loose on the 
planet, but we'll have to chance it" 

THE NATIVES seemed distressed at 
the idea that they should want to go 
out into the forest unescorted. But after 
a lot of emphatic gesturing the men got 
their own way. They wandered wearily 
for a couple of miles and then scrambled 
up into the lower branches of a huge 
tree. 

"Now," grumbled Brent as he fastened 
himself into place with his belt. "Maybe we can get a little shut-eye." 

It was the sound of a spitting bolt-gun 
that wakened Durgan. He came hazily 
back into consciousness, sandy-eyed, and 
blinked for a moment without understand


HOSPITALITY 



83 



ing at the two still, purple figures' that lay 
at Hhe tree's foot. 

"You damned fool I" he snarled. 
"I had to," growled Brent. 'They 
woke me up. Again." 

Durgan groaned, stretched himself as 
best he could in his awkward position. 
"Now we've started shooting we'll have 
to keep it up." He drew his own gun, 
'Til cover you for an hour. Then you 
can take over." 

It was the longest hour ever. His eyelids were made of the stuff of dwarf 
stars. The figures on his wrist-chron were 
embedded in molasses. 

Twice he snapped shots into the shadowy 
forest but he was never sure whether he 
fired at anything real or at conjurations 
of his own half -dreaming brain. When 
at last it came to the time for Brent to 
take over he was asleep almost before the 
tubby little man had drawn his gun. 

The soft hands that dragged him down 
out of the tree, that made his stumbling feet 
start walking, were nightmare, pure nightmare. They had to be . . . 

He heard Brent sobbing. "I only went 

off for a moment. I couldn't help it. And 

then they came and took our guns away." 

He still had strength enough left to 

curse the tubby man viciously. 

But even that much energy drained 
from him as the long hours crept by. 
Under the irresistible thrust of powerful 
purple hands he staggered up and down 
a patch of soft grass between the towering 
trees. 

The creatures around him were fiends. 
Fiends from some forgotten hell ruled by 
that scorching monster above. His wristchron was a cunning device for torturing 
him because it lied that another night had 
come and gone while the blazing ball in 
the sky screeched triumphantly that it 
was still noon. 

A flickering moment of sanity came to 
him. He'd read somewhere of a man falling to sleep while he walked along. Maybe 
it could be done. 

He screamed and started to cry abjectly as the goad pierced searing agony 
into his thigh. 

He heard Brent's croaking voice, "The 



space-radio. I got to get to the space-radio. 
Call the patrol. They'll take us away from 
this." 

It Would have mattered a lot once but 
it didn't matter now. Nothing mattered 
now except that they wouldn't let him 
sleep . . . 

THE CAPTAIN of the patrol cruiser 
found them still stumbling up and 
down the clearing, a dozen mournfully 
humming natives behind each of them, 
prodding them on. The Captain had 
heard of the purple creatures' reputation 
for hospitality. He blinked with amazement and when he had safely secured the 
two prisoners he sent for the language 
expert among his crew and set him to 
work. 

The natives' language was unique in 
that its variations were purely tonal. The 
expert had a tough time trying to make 
sense of it but at last he succeeded. And 
when he was able to give a rough translation of what the creatures had to tell the 
Captain started to laugh. 

Extract from Report No. 1586A/B 

From: — Captain of Patrol Cruiser 'Stella' 
To:— Central H.Q. 

The reputation for hospitality enjoyed 
by the natives of this planet is fully justifield. Their religion enjoins them to treat 
all strangers, particularly those that descend from the heavens, as sacred. 

The plan of escape concocted by Durgan and Brent might well have succeeded 
but for one detail, the planet has no axial 
rotation. 

The natives have never known night and 
consequently never evolved the ability 
to sleep. To them there is only one sort 
of unconsciousness, that caused by illness 
or death. Since their guests were not 
dead they argued that they must be suffering from a hitherto unknown disease, 

The medical system of these creatures, 
though effective in many ways, is essential empirical. To treat a disorder they 
attack the symptoms. 

When we arrived on the planet they 
were still conscientiously trying to find 
a cure. 




LORD of a 
THOUSAND SUNS 

A Man without a World, this 1,000,000-year-old 

Daryesh! Once Lord of a Thousand Suns, now 
condemned to rove the spaceways in alien form, 

searching for love, for life, for the great lost Vwyrdda. 

«Y 3 



"ES, YOU'LL FIND ALMOST of surface conditions and of life evolving 

anything man has ever imagined, to meet them, and of intelligence and civ
somewhere out in the Galaxy," lization appearing in that life. Why, IVe 

I said. "There are so damned many mil- been on worlds with fire-breathing dra
ions of planets, and such a fantastic variety gons, and on worlds where dwarfs fought 



fe/POUl ANDERSON 



84 




He sm Km blossom io space as the great qvns & Vwyrdda ppened up. 



85 



86 



PLANET STORIES 



things that could pass for the goblins our 
mothers used to scare us with, and on a 
planet where a race of witches lived — telepathic pseudohypnosis, you know — oh, 
I'll bet there's not a tall story or fairy tale 
ever told which doesn't have some kind 
of counterpart somewhere in the universe." 

Laird nodded. "Uh-huh," he answered, 
in that oddly slow and soft voice of his. 
"I once let a genie out of a bottle." 
"Eh? What happened?" 
"It killed me:' 

I opened my mouth to laugh, and then 
took a second glance at him and shut it 
again. He was just too dead-pan serious 
about it. Not poker-faced, the way a good 
actor can be when h§'s slipping over a 
tall one — no, there was a sudden misery 
behind his eyes, and somehow it was mixed 
with the damnedest cold humor. 

I didn't know Laird very well Nobody 
did. He was out most of the time on Galactic Survey, prowling a thousand eldritch planets never meant for human eyes. 
He came back to the Solar System more 
rarely and for briefer visits than anyone 
else in his job, and had less to say about 
what he had found. 

A huge man, six-and-a-half feet tall, 
with dark aquiline features and curiously 
brilliant greenish-grey eyes, middle-aged 
now though it didn't show except at the 
temples. He was courteous enough to everyone, but shortspoken and slow to laugh. 
Old friends, who had known him thirty 
years before when he was the gayest and 
most reckless officer in the Solar Navy, 
thought something during the Revolt had 
changed him more than any psychologist 
would admit was possible. But he had never said anything about it, merely resigning 
his commission after the war and going 
into Survey. 

We were sitting alone in a corner of 
the lounge. The Lunar branch of the Explorers' Club maintains its building outside the main dome of Selene Center, and 
we were sitting beside one of the great 
windows, drinking Centaurian sidecars and 
swapping the inevitable shop-talk. Even 
Laird indulged in that, though I suspected 
more because of the information he could 



get than for any desire of companionship. 

Behind us, the long quiet room was almost empty. Before us, the window opened 
on the raw magnificence of moonscape, a 
sweep of crags and cliffs down the crater 
wall to the riven black plains, washed in 
the eerie blue of Earth's light. Space blazed 
above us, utter black and a million sparks 
of frozen flame. 

"Come again?" I said. 

HE LAUGHED, without much humor. 
"I might as well tell you," he said. 
"You won't believe it, and even if you did 
it'd make no difference. Sometimes I tell 
the story — alcohol makes me feel like it — • 
I start remembering old times . . * 

He settled farther back in his chair. 
"Maybe it wasn't a real genie," he went 
on. "More of a ghost, perhaps. That was 
a haunted planet. They were great a million years before man existed on Earth. 
They spanned the stars and they knew 
things the present civilization hasn't even 
guessed at. And then they died. Their own 
weapons swept them away in one burst 
of fire, and only broken ruins were left — 
ruins and desert, and the ghost who lay 
waiting in that bottle." 

I signalled for another round of drinks, 
wondering what he meant, wondering just 
how sane that big man with the worn 
rocky face was. Still— you never know. 
I've seen things out beyond that veil of 
stars which your maddest dreams nerer 
hinted at. I've seen men carried home 
mumbling and empty-eyed, the hollow 
cold of space filling their brains where 
something had broken the thin taut wall 
of their reason. They say spacemen are 
a credulous breed. Before Heaven, they 
have to be! 

"« Y ° U . d ° nt mean New E SyP t? " x asked "Stupid name. Just because there are 
remnants of a great dead culture, they 
have to name it after an insignificent valley 
of ephemeral peasants. I tell you, the men 
of Vwyrdda were like gods, and when 
they were destroyed whole suns were darkened by the forces they used. Why, they 
killed off Earth's dinosaurs in a day, millions of years ago, and only used one shio 
to do it." H 



LORD OF A THOUSAND SUNS 
'How in hell do you know that? I million years ago — 



87 



didn't think the archeologists had deciphered their records." 

"They haven't. All our archeologists 
will ever know is that the Vwyrddans were 
a race of remarkably humanoid appearance, with a highly advanced interstellar 
culture wiped out about a million Earthyears ago. Matter of fact, I don't really 
know that they did it to Earth, but I 
do know that they had a regular policy 
of exterminating the great reptiles of terrestroid planets with an eye to later colonization, and I know that they got this 
far, so I suppose our planet got the treatment too." Laird accepted his fresh drink 
and raised the glass to me. "Thanks. But 
now do be a good fellow and let me ramJble on in my own way. 

"It was — let me see — thirty- three years 
ago now, when I was a bright young lieutenant with bright young ideas. The Revolt was in full swing then, and the Janyards held all that region of space, out 
Sagittari way you know. Things looked 
Jbad for Sol then — I don't think it's ever 
been appreciated how close we were to 
defeat. They were poised to drive right 
through our lines with their battle-fleets, 
slash past our frontiers, and hit Earth 



The planet was far behind the Janyard 
lines, but militarily valueless. They wouldn't garrison it, and I was sure that such 
semi-barbarians wouldn't have my idea, 
especially with victory so close. A oneman sneakboat could get in readily enough 
— it just isn't possible to blockade a region 
of space; too damned inhumanly big. We 
had nothing to lose but me, and maybe a 
lot to gain, so in I went. 

"I made the planet without trouble and 
landed in the Valley of the Gods and began 
work. And that's where the fun started." 

Laird laughed again, with no more mirth 
than before. 

THERE WAS A MOON hanging low 
over the hills, a great scarred shield 
thrice the size of Earth's, and its chill white 
radiance filled the Valley with colorless light 
and long shadows. Overhead flamed the incredible sky of the Sagittarian regions, 
thousands upon thousands of great blazing 
suns swarming in strings and clusters and 
constellations strange to human eyes, 
blinking and glittering in the thin cold 
air. It was so bright that Laird could see 
the fine patterns of his skin, loops and 
whorls on the numbed fingers that groped 



itself with the rain of hell that had al- against the pyramid. He shivered in the 
ready sterilized a score of planets. We wind that streamed past him, blowing dust 
were fighting on the defensive, spread over devils with a dry whisper, searching under 



several million cubic light-years, spread 
horribly thin. Oh, bad! 

"Vwyrdda — New Egypt — had been discovered and some excavation done shortly 
before the war began. We knew about as 
much then as we do now. Especially, we 
knew that the so-called Valley of the Gods 
held more relics than any other spot on 
the surface. I'd been quite interested in 
the work, visited the planet myself, even 
worked with the crew that found and restored that gravitomagnetic generator — the 
one which taught us half of what we 
know now about g-m fields. 

"It was my young and fanciful notion 
that there might be more to be found, 
somewhere in that labyrinth* — and from 
study of the reports I even thought I knew 
about what and where it would be. One 
of the weapons that had novaed suns, a 



his clothes to sheathe his flesh in cold. His 
breath was ghostly white before him, the 
bitter air felt liquid when he breathed. 

Around him loomed the fragments of 
what must have been a city, now reduced 
to a few columns and crumbling walls held 
up by the lava which had flowed. The 
stones reared high in the unreal moonlight, 
seeming almost to move as the shadows 
and the drifting sand passed them. Ghost 
city. Ghost planet. He was the last life 
that stirred on its bleak surface. 
But somewhere above that surface — 
What was it, that descending hum high 
in the sky, sweeping closer out of stars 
and moon and wind? Minutes ago the 
needle on his gravitomagnetic detector had 
wavered down in the depths of the pyramid. He had hurried up and now stood 
looking and listening and feeling his heart 



88 



PLANET STORIES 



turn stiff. 

No, no, no — not a Janyard ship, not 
now — it was the end of everything if they 
ccme. 

Laird cursed with a hopeless fury. The 
wind caught his mouthings and blew them 
away with the scudding sand, buried them 
under the everlasting silence of the valley. 
His eyes traveled to his sneakboat. It was 
invisible against the great pyramid — he'd 
taken that much precaution, shoveling a 
low grave of sand over it — but, if they 
used metal detectors that was valueless. 
He was fast, yes, but almost unarmed; 
they could easily follow his trail down 
into the labyrinth and locate the vault 

Lord if he had led them here — if 
his planning and striving had only ressuited in giving the enemy the weapon 
which woufd destroy Earth — 

His hand closed about the butt of his 
blaster. Silly weapon, stupid popgun — 
what could he do? 

Decision came. With a curse, he whirled 
and ran back into the pyramid. 

His flash lit the endless downward passages with a dim bobbing radiance, and 
the shadows swept above and behind and 
marched beside, the shadows of a million 
years closing in to smother him. His boots 
slammed against the stone floor, thud-thudihud — the echoes caught the rhythm and 
rolled it boomingly ahead of him. A primitive terror rose to drown his dismay; he 
was going down into the grave of a thousand millennia, the grave of the gods, and 
it took all the nerve he had to keep running and never look back. He didn't dare 
look back. 

Down and down and down, past this 
winding tunnel, along this ramp, through 
this passageway into the guts of the planet. 
A man could get lost here. A man could 
wander in the cold and the dark and the 
echoes till he died. It had taken him weeks 
to find his way into the great vault, and 
only the clues given by* Murchison's reports had made it possible at all. Now — 



HE BURST INTO a narrow antechamber. The door he had blasted 
open leaned drunkenly against a well of 



night. It was fifty feet high, that door. He 
fled past it like an ant and came into the 
pyramid storehouse. 

His flash gleamed off metal, glass, substances he could not identify that had lain 
sealed against a million years till he came 
to wake the machines What they were, 
he did not know. He had energized some 
of the units, and they had hummed and 
flickered, but he had not dared experiment. 
His idea had been to rig an antigrav unit 
which would enable him to haul the entire 
mass of it up to his boat. Once he was 
home, the scientists could take over. But 



now


He skinned his teeth in a wolfish grin 
and switched on the big lamp he had installed. White light flooded the tomb, shining darkly back from the monstrous bulks 
of things he could not use, the wisdom 
and techniques of a race which had spanned the stars and moved planets and endured 
for fifty million years. Maybe he could 
puzzle out the use of something before 
the enemy came. Maybe he could wipe 
them out in one demoniac sweep — just 
like a stereofilm hero, jeered his mind — 
or maybe he could simply destroy it all, 
keep it from Janyard hands. 

He should have provided against this. 
He should have rigged a bomb, to blow 
the whole pyramid to hell — 

With an effort, he stopped the frantic 
racing of his mind and looked around. 
There were paintings on the walls, dim 
with age but still legible, pictographs, 
meant perhaps for the one who finally 
found this treasure. The men of New 
Egypt were shown, hardly distinguishable 
from humans — dark of skin and hair, keen 
of feature, tall and stately and robed in 
living light. He had paid special attention 
to one representation. It showed a series 
of actions, like an old time comic-strip — 
a man taking up a glassy object, fitting it 
over his head, throwing a small switch. 
He had been tempted to try it, but — gods, 
what would it do? 

He found the helmet and slipped it gingerly over his skull. It might be some 
kind of last-ditch chance for him. The 
thing was cold and smooth and hard, it 
settled on his head with a slow massive


LORD OF A THOUSAND SUNS 



89 



ness that was strangely — Iking. He shuddered and turned back to the machines. 
This thing now with the long coilwrapped barrel — an energy projector of 
some sort? How did you activate it? Hellfire, which was the muzzle end? 

He heard the faint banging of feet, 
winding closer down the endless passageways. Gods, his mind groaned. They didn't 
waste any time, did they? 

But they hadn't needed to ... a metal 
detector would have located his boat, told 
them that he was in this pyramid rather 
than one of the dozen others scattered 
through the valley. And energy tracers 
would spot him down here . . . 

He doused the light and crouched in 
darkness behind one of the machines. The 
blaster was heavy in his hand. 

A voice hailed him from outside the 
door. "It's useless, Solman. Come out of 
there!" 

He bit back a reply and lay waiting. 
A woman's voice took up the refrain. 
It was a good voice, he thought irrelevantly, low and well modulated, but it had 
an iron ring to it. They were hard, these 
lanyards, even their women led troops 
and piloted ships and killed men. 

"You may as well surrender, Solman. 
All you have done has been to accomplish our work for us. We suspected such 
an attempt might be made. Lacking the 
archeological records, we couldn't hope for 
much success ourselves, but since my 
force was stationed near this sun I had a 
boat lie in an orbit around the planet 
with detectors wide open. We trailed you 
down, and let you work, and now we are 
here to get what you have found." 

"Go back," he bluffed desperately. "I 
planted a bomb. Go back or I'll set it 
off." 

The laugh was hard with scorn. fC Do 
you think we wouldn't know it if you had? 
You haven't even a spacesuit on. Come 
out with your hands up or we'll flood the 
vault with gas." 

Laird's teeth flashed in a snarling grin. 
"All right," he shouted, only half aware 
of what he was saying. "All right, you 
asked for it!" 

He threw the switch on his helmet. 



i 



T WAS LIKE a burst of fire in his 

brain, a soundless roar of splintering 
darkness. He screamed, half crazy with the 
fury that poured into him, feeling the 
hideous thrumming along every nerve and 
sinew, feeling his muscles cave in and his 
body hit the floor. The shadows closed 
in, roaring and rolling, night and death 
and the wreck of the universe, and high 
above it all he heard — laughter. 

He lay sprawled behind the machine, 
twitching and whimpering. They had 
heard him, out in the tunnels, and with 
slow caution they entered and stood over 
him and watched his spasms jerk toward 
stillness. 

They were tall and well-formed, the 
Janyard rebels — Earth had sent her best 
out to colonize the Sagittarian worlds, 
three hundred years ago. But the long cruel 
struggle, conquering and building and adapting to planets that never were and 
never could be Earth, had changed them, 
hardened their metal and frozen something in their souls. 

Ostensibly it was a quarrel over tariff 
and trade rights which had led to their 
revolt against the Empire; actually, it 
was a new culture yelling to life, a thing 
born of fire and loneliness and the great 
empty reaches between the stars, the 
savage rebellion of a mutant child. They 
stood impassively watching the body until 
it lay quiet. Then one of them stooped 
over and removed the shining glassy helmet. 

"He must have taken it for something 
he could use against us," said the Janyard, 
turning the helmet in his hands; "but it 
wasn't adapted to his sort of life. The 
old dwellers here looked human, but I 
don't think it went any deeper tl*an their 
skins." 

The woman commander looked down 
with a certain pity. "He was a brave man." 
she said. 

"Wait — he's still alive, ma'm — he's sitting up — " 

Daryesh forced the shaking body to 
hands and knees. He felt its sickness, 
wretched and cold in throat and nerves 
and muscles, and he felt the roiling of 
fear and urgency in the brain. These were 



; 



90 



PLANET STORIES 



enemies. There was death for a world and 
a civilization here. Most of all, he felt the 
horrible numbness of the nervous system, 
deaf and dumb and blind, cut off in its 
house of bone and peering out through 
five weak senses . . . 

Vwyrdda, Vwyrdda, he was a prisoner in 
a brain without a telepathy transceiver 
lobe. He was a ghost reincarnated in a 
thing that was half a corpse! 

Strong arms helped him to his feet. 
"That was a foolish thing to try," said 
the woman's cool voice. 

Daryesh felt strength flowing back as 
the nervous and muscular and endocrine 
systems found a new balance, as his mind 
took over and fought down the gibbering 
madness which had been Laird. He drew 
a shuddering breath. Air in his nostrils 
after — how long? How long had he been 
dead? 

His eyes focused on the woman. She 
was tall and handsome. Ruddy hair spilled 
from under a peaked cap, wide-set blue 
eyes regarded him frankly out of a face 
sculptured in clean lines and strong curves 
and fresh young coloring. For a moment 
he thought of Ilorna, and the old sickness 
rose — then he throttled it and looked again 
at the woman and smiled. 

It was an insolent grin, and she stiffened 
angrily. "Who are you, Solman?" she 
asked. 

The meaning was clear enough to Daryesh, who had his — host's — memory patterns and linguistic habits as well as those 
of Vwyrdda. He replied steadily, "Lieutenant John Laird of the Imperial Solar 
Navy, at your service. And your name?" 
"You are exceeding yourself," she replied with frost in her voice. "But since 
I will wish to question you at length . . . 
I am Captain Joana Rostov of the Janyard 
Fleet. Conduct yourself accordingly." 

Daryesh looked around him. This wasn't 
good. He hadn't the chance now to search 
Laird's memories in detail, but it was clear 
enough that this was a force of enemies. 
The rights and wrongs of a quarrel ages 
after the death of all that had been Vwyrdda meant nothing to him, but he had to 
learn more of the situation, and be free to 
act as he chose. Especially since Laird 



would presently be reviving and start 
to resist. 

The familiar sight of the machines 
was at once steadying and unnerving. 
There were powers here which could 
smash planets! It looked barbaric, this 
successor culture, and in any event the 
decision as to the use of this leashed hell 
had to be his. His head lifted in unconscious arrogance. His! For he was the last 
man of Vwyrdda, and they had wrought 
the machines, and the heritage was his. 

He had to escape. 

JOANA ROSTOV was looking at him 
with an odd blend of hard suspicion 
and half-frightened puzzlement. "There's 
something wrong about you, Lieutenant," 
she said. "You don't behave like a man 
whose project has just gone to smash. 
What was that helmet for?" 

Daryesh shrugged. "Part of a control 
device," he said easily. "In my excitement 
I failed to adjust it properly. No matter. 
There are plenty of other machines here." 

"What use to you?" 

"Oil — all sorts of uses. For instance, 
that one over there is a nucleonic disintegrator, and this is a shield projector, 
and — " 

"You're lying. You can't know any 
more about this than we do/' 

"Shall I prove it?" 

"Certainly not. Come back from there P 

Coldly, Daryesh estimated distances. 
He had all the superb psychosomatic coordination of his race, the training evolved 
through millions of years, but the subcellular components would be lacking in 
this body. Still— he had to take the chance. 

He launched himself against the Janyard who stood beside him. One hand 
chopped into the man's larynx, the other 
grabbed him by the tunic and threw him 
into the man beyond. In the same movement, Daryesh stepped over the falling 
bodies, picked up the machine rifle which 
one had dropped, and slammed over the 
switch of the magnetic shield projector 
with its long barrel. 

Guns blazed in the dimness. Bullets exploded into molten spray as they hit that 
fantastic magnetic field, Daryesh, behind 



LORD OF A THOUSAND SUNS 



91 



it, raced through the door and out the 
tunnel. 

They'd be after him in seconds, but this 
was a strong longlegged body and he was 
getting the feel of it. He ran easily, breathing in coordination with every movement, 
conserving his strength. He couldn't master control of the involuntary functions 
yet, the nervous system was too different, 
but he could last for a long while at this 
pace. 

He ducked into a remembered side passage. A rifle spewed a rain of slugs after 
him as someone came through the magnetic field. He chuckled in the dark. Unless they had mapped every labyrinthine 
twist and turn of the tunnels, or had lifeenergy detectors, they'd never dare trail 
him. They'd get lost and wander in here 
till they starved. 

Still, that woman had a brain. She'd 
guess he was making for the surface and 
the boats, and try to cut him off. It would 
be a near thing. He settled down to running. 

It was long and black and hollow here, 
cold with age. The air was dry and dusty, 
little moisture could be left on Vwyrdda. 
How long has it been? How long has it 
been? 

JOHN Laird stirred back toward consciousness, stunned neurones lapsing 
into familiar pathways of synapse, the 
pattern which was personality fighting to 
restore itself. Daryesh stumbled as the 
groping mind flashed a random command 
to his muscles, cursed, and willed the other 
self back to blankness. Hold on, Daryesh, 
hold on, a few minutes only — 

He burst out of a small side entrance 
and stood in the tumbled desolation of 
the valley. The keen tenuous air raked his 
sobbing lungs as he looked wildly around 
at sand and stone and the alien stars. 
New constellations— Gods, it had been a 
long time! The moon was larger than he 
remembered, flooding the dead landscape 
with a frosty argence. It must have spiraled close in all those uncounted ages. 

The boat! Hellblaze, where was the 
boat? 

He saw the Janyard ship not far away, 



a long lean torpedo resting on the dunes, 
but it would be guarded — no use trying to 
steal it. Where was this Laird's vessel, 
then? 

Tumbling through a confusion of alien 
memories, he recalled burying it on the 
west side . . . No, it wasn't he who had 
done that but Laird. Damnation, he had 
to work fast. He plunged around the monstrous eroded shape of the pyramid, found 
the long mound, saw the moongleam where 
the wind had blown sand off the metal. 
What a clumsy pup this Laird was. 

He shoveled the sand away from the 
airlock, scooping with his hands, the breath 
raw in throat and lungs. Any second now 
they'd be on him, any instant, and now 
that they really believed he understood 
the machines — 

The lock shone dully before him, cold 
under his hands. He spun the outer dog, 
swearing with a frantic emotion foreign 
to old Vwyrdda, but that was the habit 
of his host, untrained psychosomatically, 
unevolved — There they came! 

Scooping up the stolen rifle, Daryesh 
fired a chattering burst at the group that 
swarmed around the edge of the pyramid. 
They tumbled like jointed dolls, screaming 
in the death-white moonlight Bullets 
howled around him and ricocheted off the 
boat-hull. 

He got the lock open as they retreated 
for another charge. For an instant his 
teeth flashed under the moon, the cold grin 
of Daryesh the warrior who had ruled 
a thousand suns in his day and led the 
fleets of Vwyrdda, 

"Farewell, my lovelies/' he murmured, 
and the remembered syllables of the old 
planet were soft on his tongue. 

Slamming the lock behind him, he ran 
to the control room, letting John Laird's 
almost unconscious habits carry him along. 
He got off to a clumsy start — but then he 
was climbing for the sky, free and away — 

A fist slammed into his back, tossed him 
in his pilot chair to the screaming roar 
of sundered metal. Gods, O gods, the Janyards had fired a heavy ship's gun, they'd 
scored a direct hit on his engines and the 
boat was whistling groundward again. 

Grimly, he estimated that the initial 



92 



PLACET STORIES 



impetus had given him a good trajectory, 
that he'd come down in the hills about a 
hundred miles north of the valley. But 
then he'd have to run for it, they'd be 
after him like beasts of prey in their ship 
— and John Laird would not be denied, 
muscles were twitching and sinews tightening and throat mumbling insanity as the 
resurgent personality fought to regain itself. That was one battle he'd have to have 
out soon! 

Well — mentally, Daryesh shrugged. At 
worst, he could surrender to the Janyards, 
make common cause with them. It really 
didn't matter who won this idiotic little 
war. He had other things to do. 

NIGHTMARE. John Laird crouched 
in a wind-worn cave and looked out 
over hills lit by icy moonlight. Through 
a stranger's eyes, he saw the Janyard ship 
landing near the down-glided wreck of 
his boat, saw the glitter of steel as they 
poured out and started hunting. Hunting 
him. 

Or was it him any longer, was he more 
than a prisoner in his own skull? He 
thought back to memories that were not 
his, memories of himself thinking thoughts 
that were not his own, himself escaping 
from the enemy while he, Laird, whirled 
in a black abyss of half-conscious madness. Beyond that, he recalled his own 
life, and he recalled another life which 
had endured a thousand years before it 
died. He looked out on the wilderness of 
rock and sand and blowing dust, and 
remembered it as it had been, green and 
fair, and remembered that he was Daryesh 
of Tollogh, who had ruled over whole 
planetary systems in the Empire of Vwyrdda. And at the same time he was John 
Laird of Earth, and two streams of 
thought flowed through the brain, listening 
to each other, shouting at each other in the 
darkness of his skull. 

A million years! Horror and loneliness 
and a wrenching sorrow were in the mind 
of Daryesh as he looked upon the ruin 
of Vwyrdda. A million years ago! 

Who are you? cried Laird. What have 
you done to me? And even as he asked, 
memories which were his own now rose to 



answer him. 

It had been the Erai who rebelled, the 
Erai whose fathers came from Vwyrdda 
the fair but who had been strangely altered 
by centuries of environment. They had revolted against the static rule of the Immortals, and in a century of warfare they 
had overrun half the Empire and rallied 
its populations under them. And the Immortals had unleashed their most terrible 
powers, the sun-smashing ultimate weapons which had lain forbidden in the vaults 
of Vwyrdda for ten million years. Only — 
the Erai had known about it. And they 
had had the weapons too. 

In the end, Vwyrdda went under, her 
fleets broken and her armies reeling in 
retreat over ten thousand scorched planets. 
The triumphant Erai had roared in to 
make an end of the mother world, and 
nothing in all the mighty Imperial arsenals 
could stop them now. 

Theirs was an unstable culture, it could 
not endure as that of Vwyrdda had. In 
ten thousand years or so, they would be 
gone, and the Galaxy would not have even 
a memory of that which had been. Which 
was small help to us, thought Laird grimly, and realized with an icy shock that it 
had been the thought of Daryesh. 

The Vwyrddan's mental tone was, suddenly, almost conversational, and Laird 
realized what an immensity of trained effort it must have taken to overcome that 
loneliness of a million years. "See here, 
Laird, we are apparently doomed to occupy the same body till one of us gets 
rid of the other, and it is a body which the 
Janyards seem to want. Rather than fight 
each other, which would leave the body 
helpless, we'd better cooperate." 

"But — Lord, man! What do you think 
I am ? Do you think I want a vampire like 
you up there in my brain V s 

The answer was fierce and cold. "What 
of me, Laird? I, who was Daryesh of 
Tollogh, lord of a thousand suns and lover 
of Uorna the Fair, immortalized noble of 
the greatest empire the universe has ever 
seen — I am now trapped in the half-evolved body of a hunted alien, a million years 
after the death of all which mattered. Better be glad I'm here, Laird. I can handle 









A^\y\y\yi^w^ 



LORD OF A THOUSAND SUNS 



93 



those weapons, you know." 

The eyes looked out over the bleak 
windy hillscape, and the double mind 
watched distance-dwarfed forms clambering in the rocks, searching for a trail. 
"A hell of a lot of good that does us 
now," said Laird. "Besides, I can hear 
you thinking, you know, and I can remember your own past thoughts. Sol or 
Janya, it's the same to you. How do I 
know you'll play ball with me?" 

The answer was instant, but dark with 
an unpleasant laughter. "Why — read my 
mind, Laird ! It's your mind too, isn't it ?" 
Then, more soberly: "Apparently history 
is repeating itself in the revolt of the barbarians against the mother planet, though 
on a smaller scale and with a less developed science. I do not expect the result 
to be any happier for civilization than before. So perhaps I may take a more effective hand than I did before." 

It was ghostly, lying here in the windgrieved remnants of a world, watching the 
hunters move through a bitter haze of 
moonlight, and having thoughts which 
were not one's own, thoughts over which 
there was no control. Laird clenched his 
fists, fighting for stability. 

"That's better," said Daryesh's sardonic 
mind. "But relax. Breathe slowly and 
deeply, concentrate only on the breathing 
for a while — and then search my mind 
which is also yours." 

"Shut up! Shut up!" 

"I am afraid that is impossible. We're 
in the same brain, you know, and we'll 
have to get used to each other's streams 
of consciousness. Relax, man, lie still; 
think over the thing which has happened 
to you and know it for the wonder it is." 

Man, they say, is a time-binding animal. But only the mighty will and yearning of Vwyrdda had ever leaped across 
the borders of death itself, waited a million years that that which was a world 
might not die out of all history. 

What is the personality? It is not a 
thing, discrete and material, it is a pattern 
and a process. The body starts with a 
certain genetic inheritance and meets all 
the manifold complexities of environment. 
The whole organism is a set of reactions 



between the two. The primarily mental 
component, sometimes called the ego, is 
not separable from the body but can in 
some ways be studied apart. 

The scientists had found a way to save 
something of that which was Daryesh. 
While the enemy was blazing and thundering at the gates of Vwyrdda, while all 
the planet waited for the last battle and 
the ultimate night, quiet men in laboratories 
had perfected the molecular scanner so that 
the pattern of synapses which made up 
all memory, habit, reflex, instinct, the continuity of the ego, could be recorded upon 
the electronic structure of certain crystals. 
They took the pattern of Daryesh and of 
none other, for only he of the remaining 
Immortals was willing. Who else would 
want a pattern to be repeated, ages after 
he himself was dead, ages after all the 
world and all history and meaning were 
lost? But Daryesh had always been reckless, and Ilorna was dead, and he didn't 
care much for what happened. 

Ilorna, Ilorna! Laird saw the unforgotten image rise in his memory, golden-eyed 
and laughing, the long dark hair flowing 
around the lovely suppleness of her. He remembered the sound of her voice and the 
sweetness of her lips, and he loved her. 
A million years, and she was dust blowing 
on the night wind, and he loved her with 
that part of him which was Daryesh and 
with more than a little of John Laird . . . 
O Ilorna . . . 

And Daryesh the man had gone to die 
with his planet, but the crystal pattern 
which reproduced the ego of Daryesh lay 
in the vault they had made, surrounded 
by all the mightiest works of Vwyrdda. 
Sooner or later, sometime in the infinite 
future of the universe, someone would 
come; someone or something would put 
the helmet on his head and activate it. And 
the pattern would be reproduced on the 
neurones, the mind of Daryesh would live 
again, and he would speak for dead Vwyrdda and seek to renew the tradition of 
fifty million years. It would be the will 
of Vwyrdda, reaching across time — But 
Vwyrdda is dead, thought Laird frantically. Vwyrdda is gone — this is a new history — you've got no business telling us 



94 



PLANET STORIES 



what to do! 

The reply was cold witH arrogance. "I 
shall do as I see fit. Meanwhile, I advise 
that you lie passive and do not attempt 
to interfere with me." 

"Cram it, Daryesh!" Laird's mouth 
drew back in a snarl. "I won't be dictated 
to by anyone, let alone a ghost." 

Persuasively, the answer came, "At the 
moment, neither of us has much choice. 
iWe are hunted, and if they have energy 
trackers — yes, I see they do — they'll find 
us by this body's thermal radiation alone. 
Best we surrender peaceably. Once aboard 
the ship, loaded with all the might of 
Vwyrdda, our chance should come." 

Laird lay quietly, watching the hunters 
move closer, and the sense of defeat came 
down on him like a falling world. What 
else could he do? What other chance was 
there ? 

^ "All right,* he said at last, audibly. "All 
right. But I'll be watching your every 
thought, understand ? I don't think you can 
stop me from committing suicide if I 
must." 

"I think I can. But opposing signals to 
the body will only neutralize each other, 
leave it helplessly fighting itself. Relax, 
Laird, lie back and let me handle this. I 
am Daryesh the warrior, and I have come 
through harder battles than this." 

They rose and began walking down the 
hillside with arms lifted. Daryesh's thought 
ran on, "Besides — that's a nice-looking 
wench in command. It could be interesting!" 

His laughter rang out under the moon, 
and it was not the laughter of a human 
being. 



«T CAN'T understand you, John Laird, 

X said Joana. 

"Sometimes," replied Daryesh lightly, 
"I don't understand myself very well — 
or you, my dear/' 

^She stiffened a little. "That will do. 
Lieutenant. Remember your position 
here." 

"Oh, the devil with our ranks and countries. Let's be live entities for a change." 

Her glance was quizzical. "That's an 



odd way for a Solman to phrase it." 

Mentally, Daryesh swore. Damn this 
body, anyway! The strength, the fineness 
of coordination and perception, half the 
sense? he had known, v/ere missing from 
it. The gross brain structure couldn't hold 
the reasoning powers he had once had. 
His thinking was dull and sluggish. He 
made blunders the old Daryesh would 
never have committed. And this young 
woman was quick to see them, and he was 
a prisoner of John Laird's deadly enemies, 
and the mind of Laird himself was tangled 
in thought and will and memory, ready to 
fight him if he gave the least sign of — 

The Solarian's ego chuckled nastily* 
Easy, Daryesh, easy! 

Shut up! his mind snapped back, and 
he knew drearily that his own trained 
nervous system would not have been guilty 
of such a childishly emotional response. 

"I may as well tell you the truth, Cap. 
tain Rostov," he said aloud. "I am not 
Laird at all. Not any more." 

She made no response, merely drooped 
the lids over her eyes and leaned back in 
her chair. He noticed abstractedly how 
long her lashes were — or was that Laird's 
appreciative mind, unhindered by too much 
remembrance of Ilorna? 

They sat alone, the two of them, in 
her small cabin aboard the Janyard cruiser. 
A guard stood outside the door, but it was 
closed. From time to time they would 
hear a dull thump or clang as the heavy 
machines of Vwyrdda were dragged aboard — otherwise they might have been 
the last two alive on the scarred old planet. 

The room was austerely furnished, but 
there were touches of the feminine here 
and there — curtains, a small pot of flowers, 
a formal dress hung in a half -open closet. 
And the woman who sat across the desk 
from him was very beautiful, with the 
loosened ruddy hair streaming to her 
shoulders and the brilliant eyes never wavering from his. But one slender hand 
rested on a pistol. 

She had told him frankly, "I want to 
talk privately with you. There is something I don't understand ... but IH be 
ready to shoot at the first suspicion of a 
false move. And even if you should some


LOHD OF A THOUSAND SUNS 



95 



how overpower me, I'd be no good as a 
hostage. We're Janyards here, and the 
ship is more than the life of any one of 
us." 

Now she waited for him to go on talking. 

He took a cigarette from the box on her 
desk — Laird's habits again — and lit it and 
took a slow drag of smoke into his lungs. 
All right, Daryesh, go ahead. I suppose 
your idea is the best, if anything can be 
made to work at all. But I'm listening, remember. 

"I am all that is left of this planet," 
he said tonelessly. "This is the ego of 
Daryesh of Tollogh, Immortal of Vwyrdda, and in one sense I died a million years 
ago." 

She remained quiet, but he saw how 
her hands clenched and he heard the sharp 
small hiss of breath sucked between the 
teeth. 

Briefly, then, he explained how his mental pattern had been preserved, and how 
it had entered the brain of John Laird. 

"You don't expect me to believe that 
story," she said contemptuously. 

"Do you have a lie detector aboard?" 

"I have one in this cabin, and I can operate it myself." She got up and fetched 
the machine from a cabinet. He watched 
her, noticing the grace of her movements. 
You died long ago, Ilotna — you died and 
the universe will never know another like 
you. But I go on, and she reminds me 
somehow of you. 



IT WAS a small black thing that hummed and glowed on the desk between 
them. He put the metal cap on his head, 
and took the knobs in his hands, and waited while she adjusted the controls. From 
Laird's memories, he recalled the principle of the thing, the measurement of activity in separate brain centers, the precise 
detection of the slight extra energy needed 
in the higher cerebral cortex to invent a 
falsehood. 

"I have to calibrate," she said, "Make 
up something I know to be a lie." 

"New Egypt has rings," he smiled, 
"which are made of Limburger cheese. 



However, the main body of the planet is 
a delicious Camembert — " 

"That will do. Now repeat your previous statements." 

Relax, Laird, damn it — blank yourself! 
I can't control this thing with you interfering. 

He told his story again in a firm voice, 
and meanwhile he was working within the 
brain of Laird, getting the feel of it, applying the lessons of nerve control which 
had been part of his Vwyrddan education. 
It should certainly be possible to fool a 
simple electronic gadget, to heighten activity in all centers to such an extent that 
the added effort of hi* creative cells could 
not be spotted. 

He went on without hesitation, wondering if the flickering needles would betray him and if her gun would spit death 
into his heart in the next moment : "Naturally, Laird's personality was completely 
lost, its fixed patterns obliterated by the 
superimposition of my own. I have his 
memories, but otherwise I am Daryesh of 
Vwyrdda, at your service." 

She bit her lip. "What service! You 
shot four of my men." 

"Consider my situation, woman. I came 
into instantaneous existence. I remember 
sitting in the laboratory under the scanner, 
a slight dizziness, and then immediately I 
was in an alien body. Its nervouse system 
was stunned by the shock of my entry, 
I couldn't think clearly. All I had to go 
on was Laird's remembered conviction that 
these were deadly foes surrounding me, 
murderous creatures bent on killing me 
and wiping out my planet. I acted halfinstinctively. Also, I wanted, in my own 
personality, to be a free agent, to get away 
and think this out for myself. So I did. I 
regret the death of your men, but I think 
they will be amply compensated for." 

"H'm — you surrendered when we all 
but had you anyway." 

"Yes, of course, but I had about decided to do so in all events." Her eyes never 
lifted from the dials that wavered life 
or death. "I was, after all, in your territory, with little or no hope of getting 
clear, and you were the winning side of 
this war, which meant nothing to me 



96 



PLANET STORIES 



emotionally. Insofar as I have any convictions in this matter, it is that the human 
race will best be served by a Janyard 
victory. History has shown that when the 
frontier cultures — which the old empire 
calls barbaric but which are actually new 
and better adapted civilizations — when 
they win out over the older and more 
conservative nations, the result is a synthesis and a period of unusual achievement." 

He saw her visibly relaxing, and inwardly he smiled. It was so easy, so easy. 
They were such children in this later age. 
All he had to do was hand her a smooth 
lie which fitted in with the propaganda 
that had been her mental environment 
from birth, and she could not seriously 
think of him as an enemy. 

The blue gaze lifted to his, and the lips 
were parted. "You will help us?" she 
whispered. 

Daryesh nodded. "I know the principles 
and construction and use of those engines, 
and in truth there is in them the force that 
molds planets. Your scientists would never 
work out the half of all that there is to 
be found. I will show you the proper operation of them all." He shrugged. " Naturally, I will expect commensurate rewards. But even altruistically speaking, 
this is the best thing I can do. Those energies should remain under the direction 
of one who understands them, and not 
be misused in ignorance. That could lead 
to unimaginable catastrophes." 

Suddenly she picked up her gun and 
shoved it back into its holster. She stood 
up, smiling, and held out her hand. 

He shook it vigorously, and then bent 
over and kissed it. When he looked up, 
she stood uncertain, half afraid and half 
glad. 

It's not fair! protested Laird. The poor 
girl has never known anything of this sort. 
She's never heard of coquetry. To her love 
isn't a game, it's something mysterious 
and earnest and decent — 

I told you to shut up, answered Daryesh 
coldly. Look, man, even if we do have an 
official safe-conduct, this is still a ship full 
of watchful hostility. We have to consolidate our position by every means at hand. 
Now relax and enjoy this. 



HE WALKED around the desk and 
took her hands again. "You know/' 
he said, and the crooked smile on his 
mouth reminded him that this was more 
than half a truth, "you make me think 
of the woman I loved, a million years ago 
on Vwyrdda." 

She shrank back a little. "I can't get 
over it," she whispered. "You — you're old, 
and you don't belong to this cycle of time 
at all, and what you must think and know 
makes me feel like a child — Daryesh, it 
frightens me." 

"Don't let it, Joana," he said gently. 
"My mind is young, and very lonely." He 
put a wistfulness in his voice. "Joana, I 
need someone to talk to. You can't imagine what it is to wake up a million years 
after all your world is dead, more alone 
than — oh, let me come in once in awhile 
and talk to you, as one friend to another. 
Let's forget time and death and loneliness. 
I need someone like you/' 

She lowered her eyes, and said with a 
stubborn honesty, "I think that would be 
good too, Daryesh. A ship's captain doesn't have friends, you know. They put me 
in this service because I had the aptitude, and that's really all I've ever had. 
Oh, comets!" She forced a laugh. "To 
space with all that self-pity. Certainly you 
may come in whenever you like. I hope 
it'll be often." 

They talked for quite a while longer, and 
when he kissed her goodnight it was the 
most natural thing in the universe. He 
walked to his bunk — transferred from the 
brig to a tiny unused compartment — with 
his mind in pleasant haze. 

Lying in the dark, he began the silent 
argument with Laird anew. "Now what?" 
demanded the Solarian. 

"We play it slow and easy," said Daryesh patiently — as if the fool couldn't read 
it directly in their common brain. "We 
watch our chance, but don't act for a while 
yet. Under the pretext of rigging the energy projectors for action, we'll arrange 
a setup which can destroy the ship at the 
flick of a switch. They won't know it. 
They haven't an inkling about subspatial 
flows. Then, when an opportunity to escape offers itself, we throw that switch 



LORD OF A THOUSAND SUNS 



97 



ana get away and try to return to Sol. 
With my knowledge of Vwyrddan science, 
we can turn the tide of the war. It's risky 
— sure — but it's the only chance I see. And 
for Heaven's sake let me handle matters. 
You're supposed to be dead." 

"And what happens when we finally 
settle this business? How can I get rid of 
you?" 

"Frankly, I don't see any way to do 
it. Our patterns have become too entangled. The scanners necessarily work on 
the whole nervous system. We'll just have 
to learn to live together." Persuasively: 
"It will be to your own advantage. Think, 
man ! We can do as we choose with Sol. 
With the Galaxy. And I'll set up a lifetank and make us a new body to which 
we'll transfer the pattern, a body with 
all the intelligence and abilities of a Vwyrddan, and I'll immortalize it. Man, you'll 
never die !" 

It wasn't too happy a prospect, thought 
Laird skeptically. His own chances of 
dominating that combination were small. 
In time, his own personality might be 
completely absorbed by Daryesh's greater 
one. 

Of course — a psychiatrist — narcosis, 
hypnosis — 

"No, you don't!" said Daryesh grimly. 
"I'm just as fond of my own individuality as you are." 

The mouth which was theirs twisted 
wryly in the dark. "Guess we'll just have 
to learn to love each other," thought Laird. 
The body dropped into slumber. Presently Laird's cells were asleep, his personality faded into a shadowland of 
dreams. Daryesh remained awake a while 
longer. Sleep — waste of time — the Immortals had never been plagued by fatigue — 
He chuckled to himself. What a web of 
lies and counterlies he had woven. If Joana and Laird both knew — 

THE MIND is an intricate thing. It 
can conceal facts from itself, make itself forget that which is painful to remember, persuade its own higher components 
of whatever the subconscious deems right. 
Rationalization, schizophrenia, autohypnosis, they are but pale indications of the 

7— Planet Stories— Sept. 



self-deception which the brain practices. 
And the training of the Immortals included full neural coordination ; they could 
consciously utilize the powers latent in 
themselves. They could by an act of conscious will stop the heart, or block off 
pain, or split their own personalities. 

Daryesh had known his ego would be 
fighting whatever host it found, and he 
had made preparations before he was 
scanned. Only a part of his mind was in 
full contact with laird's. Another section, 
split off from the main stream of consciousness by deliberate and controlled 
schizophrenia, was thinking its own 
thoughts and making its own plans. Selfhypnotized, he automatically reunited his 
ego at such times as Laird was not aware, 
otherwise there was only subconscious contact. In effect a private compartment of 
his mind, inaccessible to the Solarian, was 
making its own plans. 

That destructive switch would have to 
be installed to satisfy Laird's waking personality, he thought. But it would never 
be thrown. For he had been telling Joana 
that much of the truth — his own advantage 
lay with the Janyards, and he meant to 
see them through to final victory. 

It would be simple enough to get rid 
of Laird temporarily. Persuade him that 
for some reason it was advisable to get 
dead drunk. Daryesh's more controlled ego 
would remain conscious after Laird's had 
passed out. Then he could make all arrangements with Joana, who by that time should 
be ready to do whatever he wanted. 

Psychiatry — yes, Laird's brief idea had 
been the right one. The methods of treating schizophrenia could, with some modifications, be applied to suppressing Daryesh's extra personality. He'd blank out that 
Solarian . . . permanently. 

And after that would come his undying 
new body, and centuries and millennia in 
which he could do what he wanted with 
this young civilization. 

The demon exorcising the man — He 
grinned drowsily. Presently he slept. 

THE SHIP drove through a night of 
stars and distance. Time was meaningless, was the position of the hands on 



98 



PLANET STORIES 






a clock, was the succession of sleeps and 
meals, was the slow shift in the constellations as they gulped the light-years. 

On and on, the mighty* drone of the 
second-order drive filling their bones and 
their days, the round of work and food 
and sleep and Joana. Laird wondered if 
it would ever end. He wondered if he 
might not be the Flying Dutchman, outward bound for eternity, locked in his 
own skull with the thing that had possessed him. At such times the only comfort 
was in Joana's arms. He drew of the wild 
young strength of her, and he and Daryesh 
were one. But afterward — 

We're going to join the Grand Fleet 
You heard her, Daryesh. She's making a 
triumphal pilgrimage to the gathered power of Janya, bringing the invincible weapons of Vwyrdda to her admiral. 

Why not? She's young and ambitious, 
she wants glory as much as you do. What 
of it? 

We have to escape before she gets there. 
We have to steal a lifeboat and destroy 
this ship and all in it soon. 

All in it? Joana Rostov, too? 

Damn it, we'll kidnap her or something. 
You know I'm in love with the girl, you 
devil. But it's a matter of all Earth. This 
one cruiser has enough stuff in it now to 
wreck a planet. I have parents, brothers, 
friends — a civilization. We've got to act? 

All right, all right, Laird. But take it 
easy. We have to get the energy devices 
installed first. We'll have to give them 
enough of a demonstration to allay their 
suspicions. Joana's the only one aboard 
here who trusts us. None of her officers 
do. 

The body and the double mind labored 
as the slow days passed, directing Janyard 
technicians who could not understand 
what it was they built. Laird, drawing on 
Daryesh's memories, knew what a giant 
slept in those coils and tubes and invisible 
energy-fields. Here were forces to trigger 
the great creative powers of the universe 
and turn them to destruction — distorted 
space-time, atoms dissolving into pure energy, vibrations to upset the stability of 
force-fields which maintained order in the 
cosmos. Laird remembered the ruin of 



Vwyrdda, and shuddered. 

They got a projector mounted and operating, and Daryesh suggested that the 
cruiser halt somewhere that he could prove 
his words. They picked a barren planet 
in an uninhabited system and lay in an 
orbit fifty thousand miles out. In an hour 
Daryesh had turned the facing hemisphere 
into a sea of lava. 

"If the dis-fields were going/' he said 
absent-mindedly, "I'd pull the planet into 
chunks for you." 

Laird saw the pale taut faces around 
him. Sweat was shining on foreheads, and 
a couple of men looked sick. Joana forgot her position enough to come shivering into his arms. 

But the visage she lifted in a minute 
was exultant and eager, with the thoughtless cruelty of a swooping hawk. "There's 
an end of Earth, gentlemen!" 

"Nothing they have can stop us," murmured her exec dazedly. "Why, this one 
ship, protected by one of those space warp 
screens you spoke of, sir — this one little 
ship could sail in and lay the Solar System waste." 

DARYESH NODDED. It was entirely possible. Not much energy was required, since the generators of Vwyrdda 
served only as catalysts releasing fantastically greater forces. And Sol had none 
of the defensive science which had enabled 
his world to hold out for a while. Yes, it 
could be done. 

He stiffened with the sudden furious 
thought of Laird: That's it, Daryesh! 
That's the answer. 

The thought-stream was his own too, 
flowing through the same brain, and indeed it was simple. They could have the 
whole ship armed and armored beyond 
the touch of Janya. And since none of the 
technicians aboard understood the machines, and since they were now wholly 
trusted, they could install robotcontrols 
without anyone's knowing. 

Then — the massed Grand Fleet of Janya 
— a flick of the main switch — man-killing 
energies would flood the cruiser's interior, 
and only corpses would remain aboard. 
Dead men and the robots that would ogea 



LORD OF A THOUSAND SUMS 



99 



fire on the Fleet. This one ship could ruin 
all the barbarian hopes in a few bursts of 
incredible flame. And the robots could then 
be set to destroy her as well, lest by some 
chance the remaining Janyards manage to 
board her. 

And we — we can escape in the initial 
confusion, Daryesh. We can give orders to 
the robot to spare the captain's gig, and 
we can get Joana aboard and head for 
Sol! There'll be no one left to pursue! 

Slowly, the Vwyrddan's thought made 
reply: A good plan. Yes, a bold stroke. 
We'll do it! 

"What's the matter, Daryesh?" Joana's 
voice was suddenly anxious. "You look — " 

"Just thinking, that's all. Never think, 
Captain Rostov. Bad for the brain.'' 

Later, as he kissed her, Laird felt ill at 
thought of the treachery he planned. Her 
friends, her world, her cause — wiped out in 
a single shattering blow, and he would 
have struck it. He wondered if she would 
speak to him ever again, once it was over. 

Daryesh, the heartless devil, seemed only 
to find a sardonic amusement in the situation. 

And later, when Laird slept, Daryesh 
thought that the young man's scheme was 
good. Certainly he'd fall in with it. It 
would keep Laird busy till they were at 
the Grand Fleet rendezvous. And after 
that it would be too late. The Janyard 
victory would be sealed. All he, Daryesh, 
had to do when the time came was keep 
away from that master switch. If Laird 
tried to reach it their opposed wills would 
only result in nullity — which was victory 
for Janya. 

He liked this new civilization. It had a 
freshness, a vigor and hopefulness which 
he could not find in Laird's memories of 
Earth. It had a tough-minded purposefulness that would get it far. And being 
young and fluid, it would be amenable to 
such pressures of psychology and force as 
he chose to apply. 

Vwyrdda, his mind whispered. Vwyrdda, 
we'll make them over in your image. 
You'll live again ! 

'RAND FLEET! 

A million capital ships and their 



auxiliaries lay marshaled at a dim red 
dwarf of a sun, massed together and spinning in the same mighty orbit. Against 
the incandescent whiteness of stars and the 
blackness of the old deeps, armored flanks 
gleamed like flame as far as eyes could 
see, rank after rank, tier upon tier, of 
titanic sharks swimming through space — 
guns and armor and torpedoes and bombs 
and men to smash a planet and end a 
civilization. The sight was too big, imagination could not make the leap, and the 
human mind had only a dazed impression 
of vastness beyond vision. 

This was the great spearhead of Janya, 
a shining lance poised to drive through 
Sol's thin defense lines and roar out of the 
sky to rain hell on the seat of empire. 
They can't really be human any more, 
thought Laird sickly. Space and strangeness have changed them too much. No 
human being could think of destroying 
Man's home. Then, fiercely: All right 
Daryesh. This is our chance! 

Not yet, Laird. Wait a while. Wait till 
we have a legitimate excuse for leaving 
the ship. 

Well — come up to the control room with 
me. I want to stay near that switch. Lord, 
Lord, everything that is Man and me depends on us now ! 

Daryesh agreed with a certain reluctance that faintly puzzled the part of his 
mind open to Laird. The other half, crouched deep in his subconscious, knew the 
reason: It was waiting the posthypnotic 
signal, the key event which would trigger 
its emergence into the higher brain-centers. 

The ship bore a tangled and unfinished 
look. All its conventional armament had 
been ripped out and the machines of 
Vwyrdda installed in its place. A robot 
brain, half -alive in its complexity, was 
gunner and pilot and ruling intelligence of 
the vessel now, and only the double mind 
of one man knew what orders had really 
l)een given it. When the main switch is 
thrown, you will flood the ship with ten 
units of disrupting radiation. Then, when 
the captain's gig is well away, you will 
destroy this fleet, sparing only that one 
boat. When no more ships in operative 
condition are in range, you will activate 



100 



PLANET STORIES 



the disintegrators and dissolve this whole 
vessel and all its contents to basic energy. 

With a certain morbid fascination, Laird 
looked at that switch. An ordinary doublethrow knife type — Lord 6i space, could it 
be possible, was it logical that all history 
should depend on the angle it made with 
the control panel ? He pulled his eyes away, 
stared out at the swarming ships and the 
greater host of the stars, lit a cigaret with 
shaking hands, paced and sweated and 
waited. 

Joana came to him, a couple of crewmen 
marching solemnly behind. Her eyes shone 
and her cheeks were flushed and the turret light was like molten copper in her 
hair. No woman, thought Laird, had ever 
been so lovely, and he was going to destroy 
that to which she had given her life. 

"Daryesh!" Laughter danced in her 
voice. "Daryesh, the high admiral wants 
to see us in his flagship. He'll probably 
ask for a demonstration, and then I think 
the fleet will start for Sol at once with us 
in the van. Daryesh — oh, Daryesh, the war 
is almost over!" 

Now ! blazed the thought of Laird, and 
his hand reached for the main switch. 
Now — easily, causally, with a remark about 
letting the generators warm up — and then 
go with her, overpower those guardsmen 
in their surprise and head for home ! 

And Daryesh's mind reunited itself at 
that signal, and the hand froze . . . 

No! 

Wlmtf But— 

The memory of the suppressed half of 
Daryesh's mind was open to Laird, and 
the triumph of the whole of it, and Laird 
knew that his defeat was here. 

SO SIMPLE, so cruelly simple— Daryesh could stop him, lock the body in 
a conflict of wills, and that would be 
enough. For while Laird slept, while Daryesh's own major ego was unconscious, 
the trained subconscious of the Vwyrddan 
had-taken over. It had written, in its selfcreated somnambulism, a letter to Joana 
explaining the whole truth, and had put 
it where it would easily be found once 
they started looking through his effects in 
search of an explanation for his paralysis. 



And the letter directed, among other 
things, that Daryesh's body should be kept 
under restraint until certain specified methods known to Vwyrddan psychiatry — • 
drugs, electric waves, hypnosis — had been 
applied to eradicate the Laird half of his 
mind. 

Janyard victory was near. 

"Daryesh !" Joana's voice seemed to 
come from immensely far away; her face 
swam in a haze and a roar of fainting 
consciousness. "Daryesh, what's the matter? Oh, my dear, what's wrong?" 

Grimly, the Vwyrddan thought: Give 
up, Laird. Surrender to me, and you can 
keep your ego. I'll destroy that letter. 
See, my whole mind is open to you now — 
you can see that I mean it honestly this 
time. I'd rather avoid treatment if possible, and I do owe you something. But 
surrender now, or be wiped out of your 
own brain. 

Defeat and ruin — and nothing but slow 
distorting death as reward for resistance. 
Laird's will caved in, his mind too chaotic 
for clear thought. Only one dull impulse 
came: I give up. You win, Daryesh. 

The collapsed body picked itself off 
the floor. Joana was bending anxiously 
over him. "Oh, what is it, what's wrong?" 

Daryesh collected himself and smiled 
shakily. "Excitement will do this to me, 
now and then. I haven't fully mastered 
this alien nervous system yet. I'm all 
right now. Let's go." 

Laird's hand reached out and pulled 
the switch over. 

Daryesh shouted, an animal roar from 
the throat, and tried to recover it, and 
the body toppled again in a stasis of locked wills. 

It was like a deliverance from hell, and 
still it was but the inevitable logic of 
events, as Laird's own self reunited. Half 
of him still shaking with defeat, half 
realizing its own victory, he thought 
savagely : 

None of them noticed me do that. 
They were paying too much attention to 
my face. Or if they did, we've proved to 
them before that it's only a harmless 
regulating switch. And— the lethal radiations are already flooding us ! If you don't 



LORD OF A THOUSAND SUNS m 

ShS? Kh d^? esh ' r " hold us llere FT* was streamii * throt * h Wm - - d 

tin were both dead! death was coming with giant strides "No 

So «mpfc, so ample Because sharing -" He smashed a fist into the insistent 

Daryesh s memory Laird had shared his face, slammed the valve back, and 4,5 

knowledge of self-deception techniques, to the pilot's chair 

He had anticipated with the buried half The engines hummed, warming ut> 

of his mind, that the Vwyrddan might Fists and feet battered on the valve The 

pull some such trick, and had installed a sickness made him retch ' 

posthypnotic command, of his own. In a O Joana, if this kills you— 

situation hke this, when everything look- He threw the main-drive switch Ac 

ed hopeless, his conscious mind was to celeration jammed him back as the sie 

surrender, and then his subconscious leaped free 

would order that the switch be thrown. Staring 'out the ports, he saw fire 

Cooperae, Daryesh! You're as fond of blossom in space as the great guns of 

living as I. Cooperate, and let's get the Vwyrdda opened up 
hell out of here! 

Grudgingly, wrly: You win, Laird. Tt^Y GLASS was empty. I signalled 

The body rose again, and leaned on IVl for a refill and sat wondering just 

Joana s arm, and made its slow way to- how much of the yarn one could believe 

ward the boat blisters. The undetectable "I've read the histories," I said slowly' 

rays of death poured through them, piling "I do know that some mysterious' catas
up their cumulative effects. In three min- trophe annihilated the massed fleet of 



utes, a nervous system would be ruined 
Too slow, too slow. "Come on, Joana. 
Kun !" 

"Why — " She stopped, and a hard suspicion came into the faces of the two men 



Janya and turned the balance of the war. 
Sol speared in and won inside of a year. 
And you mean that you did it?" 

"In a way. Or Daryesh did. We were 
acting as one personality, you know. He 



behind her. "Daryesh— what do you was a thoroughgoing re^isC^d ThT m£ 

mean ? ^ What s come over you ?" ment he saw his defeat he switched wholeMa m . . . One of the crewmen step- heartedly to the other side " 
ped forward. "Ma'm, I wonder ... I saw "But— Lord, man! WhyVe we never 
him pull down the main switch. And now heard anything about this? You mean you 
hes in a hurry to leave the ship. And never told anyone, never rebuilt any of 
none of us really know how all that those machines, never did anything?" 
machinery ticks." lord's dark, worn face twisted 'in a 
Laird. pulled the gun out of Joana's bleak smile. "Certainly. This civilization 
holster and shot him. The other gasped, isn't ready for such things. Even Vwyrdreaching for his own side arm, and da wasn't, and it'll take us millions of 



Laird's weapon blazed again 

His fist leaped out, striking Joana on 
the angle of the jaw, and she sagged. He 
caught her up and started to run. 

A pair of crewmen stood in the corridor leading to the boats. "What's the 
matter, sir?" one asked. 

"Collapsed — radiation from the ma


years to reach their stage. Besides, it was 
part of the bargain." 

"Bargain?" 

"Just as certainly. Daryesh and I still 
had to live together, you know. Life under suspicion of mutual trickery, never 
trusting your own brain, would have been 
intolerable. We reached an argeement 



chines— got to get her to a hospital ship," during that long voyage back to Sol, and 

gasped Daryesh. _ used Vwyrddan methods of autohypnosis 

Ihey stood aside, wonderingly, and he to assure that it could not be broken" 
spun the dogs of the blister valve and He looked somberly out at the lunar 

stepped into the gig. "Shall we come, night. "That's why I said the genie in 

S «xT a S e< J °. n ! °l ! hC men> the bottle ki,,ed me - Inevitably, the two 

Mo! Laird felt a little dizzy. The personalities merged, became one. And 



102 PLANET 

that one was, of course, mostly Daryesh, 
with overtones of Laird. 

"Oh, it isn't so horrible. We retain the 
memories of our separate existences, and 
the continuity which is the most basic 
attribute of the ego. In fact, Laird's life 
was so limited, so blind to all the possibhties and wonder of the universe, that I 
don't regret him very often. Once in a 
while I still get nostalgic moments and 
have to talk to a human. But I always 
pick one who won't know whether or not 
to believe me, and won't be able to do 
much of anything about it if he should." 

"And why did you go into Survey?" I 
asked, very softly. 

"I want to get a good look at the 
universe before the change. Daryesh 
wants to orient himself, gather enough 
data for a sound basis of decision. When 
we — I — switch over to the new immortal body, there'll be work to do, a 



STORIES 

galaxy to remake in a newer and better 
pattern by Vwyrddan standards ! It'll take 
millennia, but we've got all time before 
us. Or I do — what do I mean, anyway?" 
He ran a hand through his gray-streaked 
hair. 

"But Laird's part of the bargain was 
that there should be as nearly normal a 
human life as possible until this body 
gets inconveniently old. So — " Hfe shrugged. "So that's how it worked out." 

We sat for a while longer, saying little, 
and then he got up. "Excuse me," he 
said. "There's my wife. Thanks for the 
talk." 

I saw him walk over to greet a tall, 
handsome red-haired woman. His voice 
drifted back: "Hello, Joana— " 

They walked out of the room together 
in perfectly ordinary and human fashion. 

I wonder what history has in store for 
us. 



(Continued 
with the bandage for my eyes away. I will take 
this between the eyes. 

The firing squad, twelve privates led by a 
lieutenant, line up twenty-six feet away. The 
lieutenant screams present arms! Right then 1 
confuse them. I bellow FIRE! The rifles go 
off as one. Now, a flock of pigeons were flying 
over at the time. The bullets missed, the 
pigeons didn't, and there was much confusion 
as I went over the wall. I can take it in the 
neck, too. ... ... 

First: Ed Sigler, the boy with the same 
racial and political ideas I have. 

Second: Ramon van Rensburg. Anybody that 
writes that far away from the states. . . . 

Third: J. W. Peake and that kid has it! 
Imagine, his mother tears the covers off of his 
Planets. What would happen to the poor 
kid if he was caught reading his oldmans' 
ESQUIRES. Also, he doesn't understand Science 
Fiction. Take a tip from me, Jim. Never try 
to understand it and develop it, because you'll 
get frustrated. At least wait until you're twelve. 
I'm only ten, myself, you see. I have to wait two 
years, myself! _ 

The pics-. The one for CAPTIVES OF 
THE THIEVE STAR is really swell. Vestal 
doesn't crud his pictures up. Nice perspective. 
Excellent 

OUT OF THE DARK NEBULA's pic— 
ooooooooh! Where' ve I seen that before! Tsk 
tsk tsk tsk. 

That fellow holding the gun on cartoonist Bill 
Garrigan looks like a typical mother-in-law. So 
does the mother-in-law climbing out the crater 
on page 63. 

The pic on 80-81 is a jewel. 

Ads : torrid book lovers line up for copies of 
P.S. in which ads in said book they will find the 
key to their reading enjoyment. 



from page 3) 

Why is it you plug every other mag in the 
Fie House group except the best one. WINGS. 

Get that, gang? WINGS! Get the latest issue. 
On the stands now! WINGS! Thrill to screaming fighters diving in the face of withering fire 
to down enemy bombers. 

The pre-dawn briefing. Mechanics cursing. 
Bombers and their escorts pounding through 
the cold light of dawn. Black rosettes of flak 
bursting in the formations. Here and there a 
bomber screams off on a wing, spilling her guts 
in a fiery trail across the heavens. The earth 
below rocking and erupting with the pummeling 
of many tons of high explosives. 

Buy WINGS, one of the leading Fiction House 
magazines today! A purchase you won't regret! 
A quarter takes you in the cockpit of a screaming jet, a thundering bomber, a pounding fighter. 

See the hottest battles in history in the 
safety of your pipe and slippers. You will not 
regret it! 

There is no use, absolutely no use in trying 
to tell which stories in the issue of Planet 
are good and which are bad. Maybe I'm stupid, 
maybe I'm easy to please. I liked all the stories. 
That is, none were too bad. Some were better 
than others. 

I seen better, but-— not bad, not bad. 

Don J. Lanoue 

A. A. CRAIG REPLIES 

Dear Ed, 

Mr. A. J. Budrys' comment in the current 
Planet as to "Witch of the Demon Seas" deserves an answer. He objects, you remember, 
to the use of a more or less Grecian nomenclature in a vaguely Minoan background, the 
implication being that it's a mere steal from 



THE VIZIGRAPH 

history. I'd like to defend myself and, by 
extension, every other writer who has ever 
done the same thing. It's common practice, you 
know. De Camp's Krishnan language — one of 
them, at least— is based on Persian Anderson's 
"Helping Hand" used Samoan and Old Norse as 
a basis for two languages, and "Tiger By the 
Tail" has a definitely Gothic ring. Asimov, 
especially in his Foundation yams, draws names 
and situations directly from history and geogra


103 
and I wish that you would gtt another artist 
because Anderson isn't any good except when 
he is and that's never ; he should stick to Jungle 
Stories at least I think he. does the covers for 
Jungle Stories. 

Naturally I love you madly because you 
were the one to print my 1st letter and you 
can get a loan off me the next time you see 
me anything up to 23*. 



Get some more stories from Chan Davis 1 Not 
phy wherever they are needed, and one might that his name is a good name or anything but 
multiply examples indefinitely. l - qma I just think that he's a good writer. I also like 

My point is that it's a perfectly legitimate his stories. 

What did Budrys say about Dionne-etics being greater than My Old Flame & the LeftHanded Monkey- Wrench ? It sounds fishy to 
me. There's nothing great about a left-handed 
skyhook. 

Won't vote for Lanoue because he don't like 
Bray Buryrad he shouldn't of said that or I 
would have voted he to third place but since he 
did then I won't. 

Sigler doesn't like the authors' science. I 
like the author's science. Q. E. D. Sigler is 
stupid. 

One thing mizzing thiz izh. No ztoriez by 
Izaac Azimov. He's one of my favorite writerz, 
so why not a ztory or zix? 

Blurp blurp blurp blurp blurp blurp blurp blurp 
blurp blurp blurp blurp blurp blurp! Vizi gone. 
Sneary good, maybe like Blish, no Sewell. Slavin, Van Rensburg, Mitchell so so now and 
then but good and bad otherwise. Why don't 
Al Leverertz write another letter because I like 
the way he wrote a letter to you (Bisquik) a 
long time ago and it was good and Beale is on 
his worple now. 



practice and does much to give certain stories a 
well -developed, convincing background. History 
does seem to follow general patterns — empires 
grow up and decay, civilizations evolve through 
cycles at least vaguely analogous to each other, 
situations of a given kind evoke corresponding 
responses in art, philosophy, technology, and 
overt action ; and so it goes. It seems at least 
plausible to suggest that similar cycles will 
recur in the future, or on other planets, whenever conditions are similar. If Mr. Budrys doesn't 
like the notion, he'd better take it up with 
Spengler, Toynbee, and company, not with me. 
As to languages, well, a language is not a 
collection of random elements, it has a character 
of its own and the looks and sounds of its 
words usually obey general laws of similarity. The 
typical Greek, German, or French word can 
hardly be mistaken for one in any of the other 
languages, to say nothing of such unrelated 
tongues as Finnish or Chinese. So your sciencefiction writer trying to construct a plausible, 
self-consistent system of words and names does 
well to take some past or present language of 
Earth, mix up and distort its elements, and 
produce his own result. I admit, the ideal solution 
would be to make up your own language from 
scratch, roots and syntax and everything else — 
but my God, we only have twenty- four hours 
in a day ! 

I make no apologies for using the word "thalassocracy," since that is what I meant and there 
is no equilvalent word in English. I could have 
said "ubglub" or something on that order, hut 
it would have necessitated tedious explanation 
of its meaning. I could not have called the ruler of 
Achaera a "sea king," because that phrase in English has come to be the standard translation of the 
Old Norse saekoningr, meaning a viking chief of 
royal blood and not the king of any land area. Will 
it make Mr. Budrys happier to pretend I called 
it an ubglub? All right, assume I did. 

In conclusion, I would like to thank Mr. Budrys 
for bringing up an issue of some small importance to science-fiction. Thanks too for his 
saying he liked the yarn, and for calling me 
"erudite." 'Tain't so, but undeserved flattery is 
all the sweeter. 

Sincerely, 

A. A. Craig 
NO GOOD EXCEPT . . . 



Dear Mr.


91 East Navajo Road 
Tucson, Ariz, 



I think that the May issue stunk because ft 
wasn't any good except where it was and besides 
the stories werent' any good except for those 
that were good but the cover was horrible 



I HAVE A COMPLAINT TO MAKE. TOP 
RIGHT COLUMN, PAGE 111! SINCE 
WHEN DO THE GIRLS AND WOMEN 
AND THINGS IN THAT PIC WEAR 
CLOTHES? IT'S INDECENT! And besides, 
it don't look so purdy did the PO get after you 
or what you don't have that trouble in a fanzine except when you do. 

You are hereby an honorary member of the 
S. F. T. P. O. J. B. A. E. O. P. S. A. A. A. 
T. C. A. B. A. A. N. G. A. N. I. B. E. W. T. 
A. B. A. A. N. G. A. B. H. B. F. E. N. A. T. 
Which, spelled out, means the SOCIETY FOR 
THE PREVENTION OF JEROME BIXBY 
AS EDITOR OF PLANET STORIES AND 
ANDERSON AS THE COVER ARTIST 
BECAUSE ANDERSON AIN'T NO GOOD 
AND NEITHER IS BIXBY EXCEPT WHEN 
THEY ARE, BUT ANDERSON AIN'T NO 
GOOD AND BIXBY HAS BRILLIANT 
FLASHES EVERY NOW AND THEN. 

Whew ! 

I'll say one thing, PS has sure dumb up the 
old ladder since you took over at the helm but 
it can improve a lot and keep up the ole, as Bob 
Silverberg sez it, blood and gore, because you're 
the only mag with good blood and gore but I 
said that wrong, he said, thud and gore which 
I think is more descriptive but less interesting. 

Pics to Sneary, Don Hutchison, — human, who 
for third ? OK, a tie between Mrs. Mitz Schwartz 
and William F. Nolan. Liked very much this 
dissertashun on Yad Bradbury. 

Er, buy the weigh, Rensburg, how did you 
find out that Linid Carter was a him? And are 



104 1HE VIZtGRAPH 

vou sure? Have you had it proven with photo- the hair-braioed people go just so they can i pick 

Ink 'With certified proof by a doctor? Have out the mistakes. I have what you would call a 

yS seernim/her in ^n? D Well, how do you braiu job. When I pick up a copy of Planet 

Cw S &Xb a he? OK, OK, so he is! Are Iwantto ^ »* »^ j*«£ out tryu, to 

y °Gla7you'got a Cartier and whatinell's so un- the letters I think that they were tops. They 

rraiimun about a Timmins fan? I'm one meself should write for Planet. 

"° J Id "it, tho Hike Finlay better. Third : The Stories, in the order of my prefer
Oooooroooogaaauurrrpppogaaalkippoorrrrrrrk! 2 ence. 

man-e Bea-ns. j 0ut of the Dark Nebule. 

Goombye— f^wwWPTAF^ First P lace h ? a {otl % way * Let ' s have m .? r ? 

John Davis (Member of the W.H.M.F.r.A.F.) of tK J guy ^ {{ed q^ a sister story ca iied 

Xantu to You Too or I Lost my Little 

S.A. . Space Ship Can I Use Your Life Jacket? 

4 Rochester Mansions, would be nice. 

Hinb S row rCet ' 2. Second place by a hair. I liked the ending 

Johannesburg, South Africa so much I went hack and looked at the 

The Editor, start The llame » Blmd Play ' of course ' 

Planet Stories, 3. Third place goes to Garrigan's BEMS. 

130 W 42 St., I knew how it was going to end but 1 liked. 

New York 18,' New York it very much. 

Dear Ed, 4. Fourth place is shared by Dateline: Mars 

This is my first letter to La Vizi and because and Exile From Venus. There was no 

of this I'm kind of nervous. I've been reading choosing between these two. 

P.S. for years (if and when I could get them) 5 Fifth place ig ^^ up by q I nv itation. 

and I think they are super. There is no comment otherwise. 

I was quite lucky to get a recent issue of P.b. *«.... ^ 

and that of January 1951 and give my opinion 6. Sixth place is the poor section 

of the stories as follows :-- A The Byrd 

WITCH OF THE DEMON SEAS * 

O.K. for adventure Mag. B. Lake of Fire. 

TIGER BY THE TAIL Liked this one. Q h { d s . { t pkase 

MARTIAN NIGHTMARE Not too bad. ^ , ^ one Hke c tives 0f 

TASK TO LUNA. No comment. The ^ hieve Staf {n ^ front of your 

POISON PLANET. ........ ^.. Quite ^od. ^ k T ^ t(X>k ^ Stinker 

GUEST EXPERT & SAFETY MARGIN prfze fof ^ ^ 

The covers meet with my approval. It seems I gU ess that I should vote for the letter that 

to me P S is going to lose a reader much to the I think was best in the May Ish, the vote goes 

readers regret, as I have a hard task trying to Donald J. Lanoue ESQ. And not because ho 

to get hold of P.S. in this city. Perhaps you can i s from Washington either, 

help me in some way or maybe other readers I have no more gripes, 

of P.S. have back issues to sell. Could you also G B 

tell me how to get hold of some Science-Adven- '•" 

ture books? A Jack R. Hopkins 

Hoping to hear from you and your readers. 

Sincerely yours, MQRE COMPETITION ♦ . . 

^Au-r.i t« voil J * H ' GR0BLER Ste. 11-406 Notre Dame Ave., 

XANTU TO YOU Wpg Ma n., Canada. 

9500-21st Ave N.W. MlSTER ^^ 

n > p,™. ^^ ' Washmgt0n Well here I am again with another so called 

Dear Editor. lettcr There are a few beefs that T have> 0ne is 

Sharpen up your pencils and sizors and pre- ^ simple f act tnat you a i way s have one adven
pare to cut up this masterpiece of misspelled ture type yarn in the ish w hi cn constituted the 

words and improperly construced sentences. lead noyel Nqw why ^ Hades do you always 

First off, The Cover, if you can call tnat do th&t? Msq why ^ rather ^^ parts in ^ 
flimsy bit of paper a cover was good. }^ art ^^ thi ?? 0utside of that okay . 
work was good but I can't figure out what story Nove l_Pretty good. Even though it is the adit was telling about. The gal was cute ana j ventU re type. On seeing that blurb for your cover 
don't mean bow-legged either Yep, I am oa wondering if I should wear asbestos gloves 
enough to like the women on the cover At east ^ ^plck up the next ish. Slave Ship to AndI think that 22 is the age where a male starts to ^Jri^ fairly boring piece to me. Venus 
think about gins . Mission— Ah, that's miboy. Like but def. Sign 

Second: The Vizigraph Okay. Bu : . . .This ^^pj^ \ story f ? Monster-Are you 

guy Edwin Sigler, who the bloody blue blazes °* re Ll ^^ in somewhere here? 

is he mad at anyway? He sounded like a top ^e ^ ^ Ones-Kind of good. Kind of?? 

sergeant. This guy thinks that people read S.F. £hc 1 imetes lues | ^ ^ 

because they like to think Humm. I read SJF. ^ et Jf e r J^onR: titled Temple of Han-Pretty good 

5 a^»^%*?4 SST'S^S Met WKSl Dea P r old Mack. Blackout * 



Cygm--Why couldn't this have been the lead 
novel ? ? It may be that after two years of reading stf my ability to judge stories has atrophied 
but I can t find one story that rates very high in 
my esteem. So??? 

(One hour later) 

That danged Myllotz always keeps bothering 
me. Keeps trying to destroy me and my laboratory. Never seems to get it through his thick 
synthetic skull that he can't get (Yikes). He hit 
me with his whollo ray where it hurts. Must 
fix those screens. He's trying to destroy the 
earth but with the helpful aid of my trusted 
friend Gragg as well as my own ingenious mind 
(who else but Otho?). We're able to keep him 
from doing this. His plans are getting trickier 
every day. Now he's mass producing robots 
which amazingly look like him to foil us and 
leave him alone. EvenGragg's helper Xrpllz can't 
detect him from a robot. Oh well. 

When do we get a Bradbury epic?? 

I want to start a quarrel. Dennis Strong is 
a ^ood guy. He's always right. He knows what 
hes doing. Everyone else is wrong. He knows 
everything about Bradbury. All stf fen don't know 
what we're talking about. 

I leave you with this famous quote which I 
stole from a friend of mine : Gnothi seaton, gnothi 
kudos. Bill. Are you there? 

Hey. What does S.O.P. mean? Does J. Blish 
know? 

Hey. Ken. If you see this do you want to 
correspond ? ? 

Not the waste basket. Please!! 

What are those golf balls doing on the cover? 
Oh. Moons?? You're kidding. How's the hero 
and heroine flying?? A "tawdy" bawd Tsk. Tsk. 
Watch your language. 

Yours stf anatically, 

Douglas Mitchell. 
P. S. I'm ashamed to say it but I'm the Vice 
President. Anybody able to mend broken arms?? 

JUST A PINCH OF POISON 

Box 666, 
^ _ Camrose, Alberta 

Dear Editor: 

Howdy! Mind a beginner in this letter-writing 
business? I've been reading Planet Stories 
(plug) for nigh onto — let's see now, how long 
have I been reading them? Oh well. Let's say 
I've been reading them. Now for some belated 
opinions; I've just completed a trip back to March 
in my tjme machine and read that issue. Fraid 
my opinions will take up too much precious space, 
so I'll just give you one on BLACK AMAZON 
OF MARS by Leigh Brackett— Very good! Miss 
Brackett is an author (ess) to beat all authors. 
(Don't let Poul Anderson see this. I like him 
too.) That adventure style of her's is captivating. 

Now for the January issue: 

1. WITCH OF THE DEMON SEAS by 
A. A. Craig— Velly delightful. One of the author's best. Liked the way the tale ended too. 

2. TIGER BY THE TAIL by Poul Anderson 
—That's my boy! Good tale. Man yeah! Congrats Poul. 

3. MARTIAN NIGHTMARE by Bryce Walton r^ air » and a we e bit boring. (Pardonnezmoi Bryce.) 



THE VIZWRAPB 



105 

t! T v, AS ^ T0 L £ NA b y A. Coppel-Uh-uh! 

5 POtVom ^^ 1 ^^^ v ^le on Coppel 
5. POISON PLANET by W. OberfieM 

w^ hy t keen l Ki "^ grb 'y thou ^ Offends m 7 
Sfces ' y ° U W " " this boy wi " SO 

6 GUEST EXPERT by A. Lang-Nonononononononono! (And no other comment ) ° n ° n0n 
this one the old "heave-ho." 

Well there you are. If the forementioned stuff 
makes the letter too long, chuck it out. Here are 
my favorite authors : Leigh Brackett, Poul An
Pav°£V £ A * °7 ig ' A Coppd (sometimes), 
Ka y Bradbury, and various others. 

Oh yes—I liked that January cover. Who's the 
artist? Is he too shy to put his name on the drawing or do I just need glasses? Hah? I probably 
need glasses. J 

By the way. I really like your mag, and think 
you do excellent work. Keep on with the good 
jot). (And quit looking so smug.) I might even 
become a steady reader if you publish this letter. 
1 m the kind of goon who likes to see his (her) 
name in print. (Thrill, thrill.) 

My typewriter is starting to collapse from all 
this typing, so 1 11 remove my decrepit body (my 
18 years are beginning to tell), and leave you in 
peace or pieces. 

One more thing before I drag myself off to 
die— You do a very good job of hiding your address. I found it (I think) only after looking in 
a Two Science Adventures" mag. You gave 
yourself away by talking about your "new address." Score one for M. Hartman. Hope the 
address is correct and I'm not writing to the 
wrong magazine. If you're gorma send poison 
through the mail, make mine strong with a little 
ice and a straw in it. I hear ground glass is in 
season too. Take your pick. 

A Flying Saucer just landed in my front yard 
so I guess I'll have to go out and greet the aliens. 
Dont start heaving a sigh of relief, you'll hear 
from me again, never fear. See you on Pluto. 

Astronomically yours, 
(Miss) Mavis Hartman. 
P. S. If one Dennis Strong is reading this (if 
he can read), hope he enjoys all the "sly parenthetical inserts" that I'm in the habit of inserting. 
He probably isn't enjoying the "nauseous comments of this "driveling adolescent" but the 
feelings mutual. I really feel sorry for poor, bitter 
Dennis. Guess he's an adolescent-hater. Am I 
right, Strong old boy? 

VIRGIN, WHAT HO! T 

« _ . Lansdowne, Ontario. 

Editor Darlin : 

I have just read the Virgin of Valkarion—' 
which I enjoyed immensely, though perhaps not 
quite as thoroughly as the hero did. Good yarn 
in a nostalgic setting. But— what a TITLE! 
Did Poul make it up all by himself, or did you 
help him? And what does it mean? You have 
an idea there, you could offer a prize for the best 
answer. 

The obvious explanation is that the word Virgin was chosen for alliteration's artful sake. But, 
as usual, the obvious does not stand up well when 
more subtly scanned. For Valkarion is a word 
of the author's own coinage, and he could jolly 
well make it alliterate with any word in the dictionary, from Aa (a sort of lava), to Zzz (a 



106 



THE VIZIGR.4PB 






variety of snore.) Thus he could have named 
the yarn "The Swordsman of Swalkarion" in 
honor of the Hero, or "The Priest of Pralkanon 
in honor of the Villain, or he might even have 
altered the name of the Imperial city to Whal
kerion. __ _, _. 

E. M. Johnston. 

J fear we gave Pout a helping hoof zuith this 
one. Authors are so unimaginative.— Ed. 



THE LISSOME MINK 

1734 Newark St., So., 
St. Petersburg, Fla. 
Dear Bix: 

For some reason or another, it seems to be a 
long time between letters. Not that deah ole PS 
doesn't deserve 'em, y 'under stand. The Link (as 
my friends, and a few of my enemies call your 
'Umble Correspondent) enjoys nothing better 
than sweating an afternoon away over his battered Corona, when he could be out slaking his 
Saharan thirst at the corner beer emporium. Then 
again, these Link letters take an enormous 
amount of concentration, to measure out the 
correct amount of ingratiation and subtle compliments so their seeing print is assured. Yea 
and verily, the art of Link letters is a difficult 
one (Get it? Art Linkletter? O Carter, you are 
a clever dog!) And if I may be permitted another pun, I have been missing so long from the 
Vizi, that you might call me The Missing Link 
(O Carter you did it again! O you are the gay 
fool!). 

Okay, I'll stop! 

Y'know Bixby, that wasn't a half bad cover 
on the March issue. Not half bad, it wasn't. 
Kinda nice (this is the ingratiation and subtle 
compliment I mentioned above. Heh heh.) in 
fact. And if you improve your covers as you've 
improved the inside pix, it would be sumpin! 
CARTIER! Yes, you managed to get Cartier, 
and ORBAN ! Bix, that is really something. 
Cartier is about my favorite artist, at least he's 
as good as Bok and Finlay. Now, uh, Jerry me 
old buddy, you couldn't manage to rope in 
Hannes and Virgil, too, could you, heh? Just a 
hint. 

Well, on to the meat of the mag, yclept BLACK 
AMAZON OF MARS, or STARK RIDES 
AGAIN ! This was a good, rousing bradswordsand-atom-blasters sort of science-fantasy, in the 
reliable Planet style. This sort of yarn has 
been appearing m PS ever since VASSALS OF 
THE MASTER WORLD, BLACK FRIAR 
OF THE FLAME, and RED WITCTI OF 
MERCURY, and will undoubtedly keep right 
on appearing in PS as long as that magazine continues to grace the newsstands. Not that I have 
anything against this sort of story, but after seeing it so often it becomes tiresome. The story is 
always the same; hero is bronzed Earthman, 
heroine is proud Martian princess (or proud 
Veneusian sorceress, or proud Saturnian warriorqueen, etc cetera), villain who is a ruthless and 
ambitious fellow Martian or Venusian or Saturnian, who resents the Earthman, having a crush 
on said proud MP (or PVS, or PSWQ etc.). 
Repetition does not endear this sort of thing, it 
just becomes silly. 

Now, the only thing that saves BLACK AMA


ZON from being dull, boring and silly, is that 
it was written by Leigh Brackett, a talented and 
imaginative authoress. She took this weary old 
plot, that would have been limp, uninspired and 
unreadable hack in the hands of an Erik Fennel 
or an Emmett McDowell, and turned it into 
poetry. 'The great tower of stone rose up monstrous to the sky. It was whole and there were 
pallid lights within that stirred and flickered, 
and it was crowned with a shimmering darkness." She knows the secret of fusing poignant 
emotion, rich description, convincing action, and 
above all, a tremendous sense of atmosphere and 
lavish, excellent use of the English language, 
to her bare plot and turning it into something 
damn readable, BLACK AMAZON was a good 
story, colorful, poetic, and exciting. Let's have 
more from Brackett. 

Next most surprising thing to your acquisition 
of Cartier, was the Van Vogt story. VV is one 
of the Aristocrats of stfiction. While his STAR 
SAINT wasn't much, still you've got Van Vogt 
and may be able to get something really worthwhile out of him. Poul Anderson, too, is a fine 
writer whose first few stories for you show absolutely none of the rare unconventional imagination that has made him so popular elsewhere. 
The rest of the stories in this issue were mostly 
rather good. HB Fyfe takes the cake with the 
poorest title in years. 

Letters were good this time, too. Joe Gibson, 
who is rapidly becoming this fan's favorite letterhack, had a good 'un as usual. This bloke has a 
lot on the ball — to coin a phrase — and knows 
how to express it. My pal Shelby Vick had a 
goood 'un too. 

u Shelby Vick, he hits the spot. 
Six-feet-two, and that's a lot! 
He's so tall, when he comes to doors 
He has to crawl through them on all fours!" 

Now, this Strong gink, who is deriding the 
Sneary's, Bogg^s, Stewart's, and Carter's, don't 
lef s pay too much attention to him. If he doesn't 
like the Vizi, nobody's forcin him to read it at 
the end of a proton gun. He knows his letters will 
do no good, since the editor obviously likes letters 
of this sort or he wouldn't print them. My guess 
is that his letter is prompted by a desire for attention just as childish as the ones he accuses 
me, and others, of writing to satisfy. He simply 
wants to be the center of a raging controversy, 
see his name in print in several letters, and be 
in the limelight of a violent discussion for a 
while. Otherwise he wouldn't write, knowing his 
opinions have little chance of changing La Vizi's 
policy. Just ignore him, is my advice. He'll go 
away once he sees nobody is listening to his 
childish outburst. 

And on this happy note, I take my leave. And 
before I forget it, letter prizes 1) Shelby Vick 
2) Joe Gibson 3) Ken Beale. 
Sincerely, 

Lin Carter, the Sage of St. Pete 
The One, the Only, the Original Sage! 
"Look for the Big Red Letters on The Forehead !" 

BAH! 

Lyon Falls, N. Y. 
Dear Censored: 

Limited to three pages at the outside? Good. 
Now is the time for me to put in that order for 
three-foot long pages. Any objections? After all, 



■ 



you didn't place a limit to Hie length, just the 
number. 

The usual cover, altho the gal is dressed, for 
once. And it illustrates the story! This is an extremely rare occurence, having happened only 
once or twice before on Planet. The dawn of 
a new era is at hand ! Not only do you get some 
of the top authors, including van Vogt, Fyfe, 
and. Anderson, but you get Leigh Brackett back 
after an absence of too long a time. If I'm 
right, you haven't had one of her Mars stories 
since 1949. Too lazy to check, but that seems 
about right. And you are also getting some of 
S* the top artists. Keep it up boy, keep it up. 

Stories all good. The van Vogtale is a little 
off PS's usual run of tales, is it not? Perhaps 
it is a good omen. Maybe you'uns is gonna give 
us uns the surprise of our lives by reforming into 
a pulp, format Galaxy. 

Reprints-! Bah! If you gotta have them, put 
them into a mag by themselves. But I don't think 
PS has published enough noteworthy tales to 
make a reprint zine in itself pay. Let this be the 
last of them, Censored, old chappie. Even though 
it is a good story. 

On to La Viz: Hey, Censored, why not print 
the number of votes each of the top three letters 
gets? Just to make it more interesting. Pic winners, in my own not-so-humble opinion: 1) 
Gibson; 2) Beale; 3) Hapke. Wonder who'll 
pull down the Cartier pic? Something I'd love 
to own. 

Best pic of the ish by Cartier on page 62. 
Next comes Orban first with the double-spread 
on 16-17 and then on page 31. Who did the pic 
of DUEL ON SYRTIS? Looks like Vestal to 
me. At any rate it stunk. 

You're not alone in being a Timmins fan, 
Censored. You have a brethren in me. He may 
not be the best artist (that honor goes to Bok), 
but he is one of the top ten in my estimation. 
Veddy good on spaceships. 

Speaking of Bok, when are we gonna get a 
cover by him? (You mad, wild dreamer, you!) 
I presume the one for this ish was done by Anderson, as usual. Please, Censored, lets have a 
little variety. You,ve been stuck with Anderson 
as long as SS and TWS have been stuck with 
Bergey and AS and FA have been stuck with 
Robert Gibson Jones ! A change ! If not in artist, 
at least in subject. 

About hers I should stick in a poem but I ain't 
gonna. I want to have at least a slight chance 
of getting this thing published! So I'll just 
say . . , 

Goombye, Censored — 

Bob Hoskins 

A MATURE FAN SPEAKS . . . 

7312 Blvd. East, 
North Bergen, New Jersey, 
Apt. 2-C. 
Dear Jerry: 

I cast a rather doubtful eye on the March ish 
of P.S. — the other eye was doing a doublewhammy meanwhile — and the doubtful orb grew 
even more apprehensive when it noted the extra 
shekel we 'uns now must fork over for an ish 
of P.S. I mumbled, as is my want, "This is the 
same P.S., same cover, or uncover, same untrimmed edges, etc." — On taking a peek in the 



THE VIZIGRAPn 



107 

interior, however, all doubts ceased. Man! What 
are you-all trying to do— make P.S. the best SF 
mag on the market? Brackett, Van V., Gallun 
Anderson, Fyfe, and Rocklynne-if this isn't 
a 5!Tu P J., w^n't k "°w what a better one 
would be like O.K., O.K., so I and a courfe 
other readers I know that the Ray of Bradbury 
wasnt evident and don't do dat again unless 

y° u ™™* get 'audited' . . . the fair-haired-boy 
of STFantasy does make a rather fair issue of 
any mag when he s around, rest assured. 

Albeit, since the P.S. budget now seems to 
allow room for the presentation of some of the 
better writers m the field, why not engage Lilith 
Lorraine for her inimitable fantasy verse Willy 
Ley for his engaging articles, Will Jenkins, Doc 
Keller and Bob Hemlein for science-fantasy fiction, Seabury Quinn master of the weird tale, 
c™ prague , de Cam I>. exponent of humorous STFantasy ! As for illos, this was by far 
tne best illustrated issue in some eight years 
but-Heeekl! Your covers-why is it that they 
all look alike? Orban was never better, and Cartier seems expressly cut out for this 'zine ; however sprinkle in some Finlay, Bok and Stevens, 
blend in Paul, and follow up with Orban as a 
chaser, and you can't go wrong with future issues. 

The round-up of letters too was far from lamentable in the March Viz, and ample credit in 
particular goes to Dennis Strong's epistle. It 
takes much intestinal fortitude for a mature fan 
to give out with a wholesale lambasting against 
the immature fans, prevalant in that segment of 
fandom known as FAN DUMB; and immaturity 
in fandom doesn't necessarily apply to those 
under twenty-one. All one has to do is take a 
look in the average SF mag's letter column, and 
therein is evident a jumble of indistinguishable 
epistles representing a constipation of thought 
and a diarrhea of words. Running through the 
gamut^ of all the stories in a previous issue of 
some zine and bringing out the highlights and 
lowlights of each yarn in boring detail does not 
represent intelligence; on the contrary, any fan 
thinking that what he has to say anent some 
author or story will affect the policy and /or circulation of a 'zine had better take up butterfly 
collecting as an occupation. Even if these idle 
ravings had some concrete bearing, I don't know 
of anyone, outside of some sub-moronic fans, 
who'd give a pile of dung for what a Sneary or 
Boggs thinks of Bradbury's, Hamilton's or 
Shavers literary style ... as if some of these 
confirmed illiterates ever knew what "literary" 
and style really mean. For instance, take Ken 
Beale's overlong and doubly insincere missive— 
and tho' I've no argument with the chap, you'd 
have to take a double-dose of Serutan to go 
through half of that "awe-inspiring" letter, and 
one or two others of similar ilk in the same ish 
—I wish that it were emphasized more strongly 
that a fellow doesn't necessarily disseminate a 
pro-zine word for word in order to see his name 
in print. (Okay, you've emphasised it . . . now 
what does it mean?— Ed.) A letter column 
should be more restricted to missives where people wish to air their views, beefs or ideas, and 
not to letters that bore the editor and likewise 
the readers into submission. 

However, I disagree with Dennis' single statement that most of these addlepated jelly-brains 
come from the . . . slightly lower middle-class 



108 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



.—The majority of them belong to no class, 
knowing neither the meaning of country, home 
nor religion. Some are even veritable tramps— 
and I have heard that many are so slothful that 
their homes, if you can call 'em that, are veritable pig-styes and it would take a bull-dozer 
to clean some of their floors from the accumulated trash of years— is there an Air-Wick in 
the house? 

In short, thank the Almighty that not all of 
STFantasy fandom is in such a shape . . . and 
to any outsider viewing these brickbats with 
goose pimples, let me reassure them that there 
are several hundred splendid people who are 
active-fans who are a credit to their communities and country, and who are responsible for 
keening fandom together. 

Ere I depart I shall cast a vote or two for 
the best epistles : Dennis Strong, First ... Joe 
Gibson, Second . . . Mike Wigodsky, Thoid— 
and by the way, Mike, since when do you consider Milton's Paradise Lost, and, Paradise Reoained, as . . . high aesthetic nonsense . . . 
when most, if not all, U. S. and English-speaking colleges would disagree vehemently against 



your 



Planetically yours, 
Calvin Thos. Beck 



THE WORD. ESCHUM, IS— 

1455 Townsend Ave. 
New York 52, 1950 
Dear Jerome: 

Dennis Strong's letter in the March Planet 
will probably result in mountains of letters — 
maybe even twenty of 'em — denouncing said Mr. 
Strong. But I, for one, feel there is much merit 
in what he says. Many^ of the letters in La Vizi 
are prime examples of juvenile egoboosting. Consider this excerpt, for instance : 

"As a good friend of Izaac Asimof, T am a 
little distressed that you continue to spell Izimov's name incorrectly ... it should be spelled 
Izak Isamoff and no other way." Etc. 

Now this is obviously a specimen of the "detestable childswarm" of which the obviously mature and intelligent writer speaks. The^ fellow 
who wrote that piece of puerile trash is quite 
apparently a "flabby pseudo-intellectual," as Mr. 
Strong terms it By utilizing this bit of low humor he intends to show that he personally knows 
the great Isaac Asimov, and will condescend to 
let the whole world know it. I sincerely hope 
you will endeavor to keep this sort of drivel out 
of the august pages of the Vizigraph. 

Seriously, I don't think the letter-column is 
a place for name-calling, which is an abuse of 
the privilege to sound off in print. Strong has a 
right to his opinions, but he should save epithets 
like "pimply-faced adolescent" and "leech" for 
the fanzines, if they'll have them (which I 
doubt). 

It seems to be in vogue to praise DESTINATION MOON and knock ROCKET SHIP 
X-M. While I certainly would not condone the 
scientific errors of the latter, I would like to 
point out that it had a constructive theme and 
tolerable acting, which the more polished production did not. DESTINATION MOON was 
a superb job of production, but it had no plot 
(which is excusable), and a war-mongering 



theme (which is not). Maybe I'm a crazy sentimentalist, but I like to think that man's first 
jump into space will be for peaceful reasons, 
and not another step towards Atomigeddon. 

Anent Joe Gibson's remarks re porn — oh let's 
be blunt and call it sexy covers — When I first entered fandom, which was not untold ages ago, I 
held a fiery contempt for the PLANET-type cover. 
I wanted space ships, nebulae, etc., and lots of 
'em. But now that a few years have passed by, 
my opinions seem to have done a semi-aboutface. Certainly, I still prefer Bonestell to Anderson, and I do not lecherously eschew the cover 
girls on stfmags (that didn't quite come out 
right, did it?); but I can appreciate a good 
piece of cheesecake (now, now Bixby — let's not 
make sly comments) when I see it, and Anderson can be rather good at it. 

Now for the stories, which some, I hear, consider the backbone of your magazine: 

BLACK AMAZON OF MARS— Either you're 
a Brackett fan, or you ain't. I am, lucky ^ me. 
This was quite a relief from the Coppell junk 
you'd be running. By the way, I got a laugh out 
of the Western movie, "Singing Guns." Vaughan 
Monroe plays an outlaw named Rhiannon! 

THE STAR-SAINT— Interesting, though not 
very well-written. 

ASTEROID OF FEAR— Worple-manure ! 

DUEL ON SYRTIS— Good! Good! I've always regarded hunting as a moral crime, myself. 
Murdering wild animals isn't too much beyond 
murdering people. The fellow who says he likes 
to get out in the Great Outdoors and feel the 
dangers of the hunt is rationalizing so hard 
it's comin out of his nostrils. Hunting is indicative that man is still an emotional infant, needing something like needless slaughter with the 
trappings of a two-sided battle to keep himself 
convinced of his superiority. 

THE ENVOY, HER— Lousy! 

THE DIVERSIFAI^-Pretty good, but why 
a reprint? Surely you're not emulating a competitor which recently carried a feature called, as I 
recall, The Corridor of Putrescence. And let's 
not start sounding off about Planet's great and 
glorious past ! 

Give Beale's worple the Cartier; 2 to Kyne 
(what is this character, a traveling salesman?), 
and 3 to Wigodsky for taking the most space 
to say nothing. 

Sincerely yours, 

Morton D. Paley 

P.S. Ghu's shmoos, Kyne's letter was in scienceadventure not Planet. Well, if you've nothing 
to do with the third original, you can always give 
it to me. 

And mho perpetrated that "Strange Adventures 
on Other Worlds" cognomen ? 'Bye . . . 

TSK 

760 Montgomery Street 
Brooklyn 13, New York 

Dear Jerry: 

Couple of minutes ago, I made a rather redfaced discovery ... I wrote a letter on the January issue to you . . . and then forgot to mail it. 
It's still here, on my table. Want it? 

The March issue came out today ... I zoomed 
through it quickly— all except the Brackett yarn, 



which I was absolutely unable to read— and III 
get this in the mails tonight so it'll make the 
next issue, 

Leigh Bracket* is a well-liked author, apparently, but in the last five years she's turned 
out just one story that I was able to like. That 
was "Sea Kings of Mars," in Slim Sam's mag. 
Otherwise, Mr. B., you put together a mighty 
pleasing assortment of yarns. 

The best of the bunch was vV, with a yarn 
surprisingly smooth for him. (Hell, such repetition! If I say "yarn" once more in this letter, 
don't print it) The Rocklynne story was as good 
as when I first read it — yet, I'm wholeheartedly 
OPPOSED to the reprint idea. 

You won't find too many stories worth reprinting when you rummage around in those 
unholy war-time Planets; furthermore, there's 
quite enuf reprint material now without your 
starting in. No more? 

Ah, the Vizigraph. Pics go to Gibson, Beale 
(Hi, Ken! some good old-fashioned log-rollin, 
eh what?) and — horrors — Wigodsky. 

Dennis Strong's letter . . . whew ! "Tight Clique 
of bully boys . . . sniffling, pimply-faced . . ." 
Ackerman, Mr. Strong, is but an honest tradesman trying to earn a living, selling merchandise. 
Of course, he is a leech, as Strong gently suggests, but why advertise it? Someone's gotta be 
a story agent! 

The criticism of Sneary is wholly unwarranted. 
Rick's got his troubles, but I believe he's genuinely interested in fandom and so on. And I 
can't think of a more serious-minded fan than 
Boggs. Banister, are ya listening? 

On the other hand, I'd rather read such a 
letter, by Strong, than one of the type Edwin 
Sigler is noted for . . . this is because I'm so 
biased, so prejudiced, and so narrow-minded as 
to think people like Sigler should be shot. 

By a firing squad, preferably. 

The present state of the Vizigraph is most distressing. Instead of real old-fashioned feuds and 
jokes (Pynth feathers . . . Bond's Martians . . . 
Conway . . . Asimov's pic-winning), we get 
ignorant people trying to spread race superiority, 
and deluded people calling some of the nicest 
guys in fandom big words. Tsk. 

Hell, Jerry, I missed the Cartier the first time 
through. Second time around it looked like 
Kramer, only vastly improved. Third time around 
I noticed the signature. 

We'd like Rogers and Finlay, too. 

Never satisfied, are we? 

The backstrip was very nice . . . the best color 
arrangement you've ever used. Keep it that way 
— only get rid of the idiotic and childish quotes 
around "Strange Adventures on Other Worlds." 
Who are you quoting, anyhow? 

Tsk again. Reminds me of the time Palmer 
split an infiinitive. 

Ah, yes, let's put two staples in each copy, or 
else use no staples and replace the staples with 
chewing-gum. (Shades of the SFTPPWSSTFM). 
It makes for darned lopsided reading with no 
upper staple. 

Hmmm — what an unsual switch on the cover. 
The HERO is wearing the sun-suit, and the girl 
is clad up to her neck. No . . . Bug-Eyed Monsters, also. For shame, Bix, for shame! 

Sincerely, 

Bob Silverberg 



THE VIZI GRAPH 

WE HAVE A BROKEN SPIRIT 



109 



4070 Georgia 
San Diego, California 
Dear Mr. Bixby, 

Well, here it Is time for another issue of 
Planet and I am all enthused— (here I rush 
down stage, grab up issue of Planet and hastily 
read— well, well, well! I was sure right. Yep 
(spits in spittoon) it is a grand issue. Let me 
compliment you on a great issue (he laughs 
under his breath to himself)— why can't every 
issue be as great as this one ! Why I love Himpofibeer, him being my favorite author of bloody 
space-romances. And Torusiheer is great at making the back of my neck stand up with his stories 
of the Martian Burhstetbrisytyuerasfter. Why, 
how did you know I wanted to read more of his 
stones? Smack— I just love editors that can read 
the readers mind. 

Sady Jiuotprashy. Editor of the Lovely Martian, 
the best Fan-zine for "Ladies" only. 

Yes, this is one of the, types of letters you receive after every issue. And then there is the 
letter that goes like this: 

Dear Mr. Bixby, 

Why, you old coot, why don't you just drop 
deader than a Shaver fan? You ought to go fly 
a beat-up spaceship around Regel IV for a million 
years if you think I will ever buy one of your 
Ole Beat-up Mags. I think that the last issue 
was pure tripe. I am sure that my eminent 
friend Mr. Morton Percivel Fyveandhammer will 
heartily agree with me. I ought to know. I am 
editor of the Intergalactic Scandal Sheet and 
have held this post for nearly three months. T 
am proud of our record of digging up all the scandal in fandom and pro-mags and bringing it to 
the attention of the fans. Now you'd just better 
straighten up and fly right if you want a good 
review. Or do you want that affair with the 
Fertasyuniher story brought out? Please cancel my 
subscription and send it to the Burteyafher Publishing House. They at least publish a decent 
mag. Interplanetary Love has always been my 
favorite (here the writer makes a few remarks 
that any editor would have the sense to cut out.) 
Now I don't give a Martian Dam if I never read 
another issue of Planet! 

Roland P. B. V. X. Reafysreiug, 

President of the S.TU.F.S.F. and F. S. of 
D.E.T.U. Dues are just $15.00 a month. Send 
them to me in care of the address above. 

It is no wonder that the poor editors suffer 
from broken spirit. You can please some of the 
people all of the time and all of the people some 
of the time, but you cannot fool all the people all 
of the time. I will not try to copy any of my two 
examples. Guess you know how I feel. If a person takes time and energy out to write to a promag, why in Billy Blue Blazes hasn't he the 
brains to write a fair letter! There is very little 
sense in all this "I like— did not like" business 
. . .an editor has had far more experience in 
the field than all the many co-editors that he 
has. Now, I am not saying that I want all letters 
disbanded. (As long as they don't disseminate, 
that is — Ed.) would I be writing you this if 
that was the case? By no means. All I am saying is: "Fans, when you write an editor, don't 






110 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



try to play God and tell him what to do. Remember, we are all human. We all make mistakes. 
Write him and tell him. But do not raise the 
heavens doing it. If you do not like Bradbury, 
or Brackett, or some other, tell him. There is 
always a good and a bad way of doing things." 
I say to you, Mr. Bixby, with all sincerity, 
thanks for the change. You have given us better 
illos and a neater looking magazine, but (here 
I go) how about the cover? How about giving 
Anderson a rest, which by the way he needs very 
badly, and letting some other duck take it a few 
times? And I shall not comment about the girls, 
for being a strong liker of females, I enjoy them. 
But I do not think that the cover of such a high 
and rising magzine of Planet's quality should 
be draped with one ever issue. I know Esquire is 
a fast seller, but so is National Geographic. So 
give us some swell Star Maps on the cover, heh? 

Fantastically, 
Roger Nelson— The Screwball 

TRIPLE-TRACK MIND 

164 Geneva Place 
Covina, Calif. 

Dear Mr. Bixby: 

Just finished the March Planet. Well sir, you 
really have a magazine this time. ALL of the 
stories are good — not a stinker in the lot May 
I go ahead and give my inconsequential opinion? 
Thanks. 

Being dumb about mathematical ratings and 
the point system, I shall stick to my own method 
of grading, which is presently illegal in these 
United States. 

DUEL ON SYRTIS. This one in my estimation is far and above all the rest in the issue. How 
that young Poul Anderson can write! He not 
only tells a good story, but he creates an atmosphere as well. His Mars is not only probableit is also possibly correct astronomically. The 
mood he creates— pity, terror and compassion 
for a dying race — is well expressed and well sustained. I rate this one— three cherries. 

THE STAR SAINT. Is this the old Van 
Vogt or the post-dianetic Van Vogt? Probably 
the latter, as the Hubbard influence shows in the 
main character— a sort of pale reflection of Ole 
Doc Methuselah, the super-fixer. This does not 
come to life as his former things have done. 
Rating — two lemons and one plum. 

THE ENVOY, HER. Be he the Fyfe or be he 
the Piper, this gentleman writes good stories. I 
like the idea in this one. Ideals and dreams are 
always more satisfactory than the realization. 
The woman who can be a perfect mate, companion, friend, was never born, except in a man's 
wistful brain. Rating — one cherry and two plums. 

ASTEROID OF FEAR. This is a swell story, 
in spite of the fact tha<Jt would be equally plausible, equally dramatic, if the setting were any 
pioneer country on earth, with today's date-line. 
In this case the plot and the psychology are the 
thing, not the science-fiction. It is good enough 
to rate — two cherries, one plum. 

THE DIVERSIFAL. My personal reaction 
to this story is the usual one of confusion which 
always overtakes me when I run up against a 
time-tarvel paradox. I can't take 'em— just don't 
have that sort of a brain, Bud I I like Rocklynne s 



bird stories better. If I could judge this one objectively I would probably rate it higher; as it 
is, I give it two plums and one lemon. 

BLACK AMAZON OF MARS. I came near 
not reading this one at all. The title blurb put 
me off— it sounded as if the story would be a 
bang-bang space opera strictly for kids, and the 
cover, with that over-developed wench in the 
black longies— (to save washing, yet?)— did 
nothing to correct this impression. But I soon 
found out it was a John Stark story. Now I like 
Stark. He and C. L. Moore's "Northwest Smith" 
are two of the three Musketeers of space, and 
fitting comrades for an evening's entertainment. 
I can't think of a third one, unless it is the 
afore-mentioned . Ole Doc. All three are men 
after my own heart — they love 'em and leave 
'em! This epic gets three plums. TILT! 

I see two of your competitors are using planets instead of babes on their covers. All to the 
good. I have heard the argument that the sexy 
covers draw purchasers who think they are geting something in a little snappy pornography. 
However, if that is what they want, they never 
buy another issue, while many a reader who 
would be delighted with the high class sciencefiction m your pages may likely be put off by 
those horrible covers. If I did not have the habit 
of lying on my stomach on the drug- store floor 
among the kids reading the comics whilst I look 
over the contents page, I would doubtless pass up 
a lot of good reading myself. 

As for the Vizigraph: Beale, Vick, Wigodsky, 
in that order. Who is this Dennis Strong who is 
so severe on the adolescents? I did not care for 
the tone of his letter. Bet he was or still is an 
insufferable brat himself. How can he tell what 
genius lurks in the brains of these kids he condemns so unkindly? I have the honor of being a 
friend of Ray Bradbury's, and I have heard it 
bruited about Los Angeles fandom that Ray himself was a horrible problem child when in his early 
teens. And look at him now, on top of the heap 1 
And Ray does not put on that superior tone Mr. 
Strong affects — he is one of the kindest, most 
friendly fellows that ever stepped. So there ! 

If this letter strikes you as slightly incoherent, 
it may be because I am baby-sitting with three 
of my 13 grandchildren, listening to "The Fat 
Man" on the table radio, and cutting an eye at 
the television across the room all the while I am 
writing this. Who says I have a single-track 
mind? So overlook the parts that don't make 
sense, and just accept the congratulations on a 
good job of putting out this issue. (As co-editor 
of the latest "Shangri-la," the LASFS fanzine, 
I have come to feel sympathy for your profession!) 

Most sincerely, 
(Mrs.) Rory M. Faulkner 

BIG EXPOSE! 

Carthage, Mo. 
Dear Editor: 

b I have landed quite a few letters in other magazines, mainly because I preferred the various 
policies of these other publications. I admit, I 
have considered your Planet Stories a bit juvenile as compared with a few others. But I want 
to comment a bit on Planet. After all, I have 
been reading Science-Fiction (capitalized in 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



honor of the few really good stories I have 
come across) since 1935. 

In 1939 I met a fellow in school whom, I realized shortly, was to become a good writer in 
this line someday. He has. I refer to Kris Neville. 
I mention this because it is indirectly thru* Kris 
that I bought this March copy of Flanet. Although Kris has been in Santa Monica for over 
three years, we have corresponded. He has told 
me of how dianetics has swept some of the writers out on the Coast. A. E. van Vogt has not 
proved immune and he is the "Moses," I gather, 
of dianetics out there. So I thought that I might 
try out van Vogt's THE STAR SAINT to 
see if it was anything like his usual work. 

I now place THE STAR SAINT at the 
lower end of the board 1 van Vogt was unable 
to give any character to any of his characters. 
There was no real plot to the story, none of the 
usual explanation of how anything unusual 
worked. I have read less interesting stories in 
the past six weeks, but THIS is not the old 
van Vogt ! I place Anderson's DUEL ON SYRTIS as much better. Is "Syrtis" the Martian 
name for Mars? ASTEROID OF FEAR, by 
Raymond Z. Gallun had more real characters 
than anything I have read this issue. Really 
good. And Vestal is a fine artist too. His work 
on these two just mentioned, and his drawing 
for BLACK AMAZON OF MARS by Leigh 
Brackett, went a long way toward my placing 
them as the top three. Brackett wrote a fine adventure but seemed to have borrowed a lot from 
hither and yon. 

Dennis Strong is a fellow who writes a sensible letter. I want to see more letters of this type 
Maybe we can organize a private war between 
the teen-agers, with their yatter-yatter and us old 
timers over the relative merits of our very different 
ways of expressing ourselves. Strong and I will 
be a focal point for old timers to gather round. 
Proponents of either side would do well to train 
with weights, the barbell way, as advertised by 
one company. Seriously, if a number of readers 
would use the system advertised on page three, 
or any system of scientific weight training they 
would be better off. Why must so many of you 
remain a "sniffling pipmply-faced adolescent?" 

Sincerely, 

Bob Barnett, 
1107 Lyon, 
Carthage, Mo. (pronounced "Misery") 

TOO STRONG . . . IMPOSSIBLE 

50 Plaza Street, 
Brooklyn 17, N. Y. 
Dear Pencil-Pusher : 

It was a cold night, and the wind beat against 
my frail body in gales. But I stumbled on, rushing down the street towards my distant destination. Up ahead shapes loomed up suddenly, and 
I knew that I was doomed. But I would die like 
a BEM, fighting to the last. The shapes grew 
loser and a dank odor of long-decaying flesh 
assailed my nostrils. Then I met the shapes head 
on and felt shaggy arms tearing at my body. I 
pulled a dagger from my pocket and stabbed at 
the thing closest to me. I felt the dagger dig 
-^^•teep into a mass of slimy flesh. As I withdrew 
my weapon, the monster spewed forth a stream 
of Bergey covers and died. 



Ill 



, } stabbed again wildly. Three of the creatures 
fell, the one remaining thing running for a doctor 
to heal a minor wound in his shoulder which 
was merely giving forth one-page illustrations. 
Encouraged by this victory I ran on, the cold 
steel of the dagger glinting brightly in my hand. 
The wind hit me in a sudden gust and my body 
was thrown head-over-heels. I lay groveling in 
the dust However I managed to pick myself 
up and soon I arrived at the goal I had fought 
so hardily for. I had come to a large manhole 
which I quickly opened and slipped into the 
sewer below. I waded knee-deep thru the rush^ 
ing water till I came to a place where the water 
formed a pool. I dove deep into this pool, and 
under the formation and found myself in a large, 
dimmly-lighted cavern. In the middle of this 
vast room stood a rock pedestal on which stood 
three black-robed fans, the elite of fandom. 
They were flogging Dennis Strong who was 
spiked to a wooden pole. 

Under the pedestal and around it were scores 
of science-fiction magazines such as Sexy Science 
Stories, Gory Gruesome Garish Horror Stories, 
etc., and around the pedestal itself were hundreds 
of fans chanting and occasionally dripping green. 
I joined this group. When the flogging of Dennis 
Strong was over, and we had tossed him into 
the den of the baby fans where he would soon 
be devoured, we all took our turn in walking to 
the pedestal where Bixby The Blue-Eyed BEM, 
was handing out magazines. I got an issue of 
Planet and feeling slightly cheated because of 
this went home immediately after a thoroughly 
enjoyable night. 

All kidding aside, Ed, the July ish of Planet 
was really a fine one. The cover was wonderful 
but most of your covers have run in the same 
line, man with pretty girl slashing away at 
enemies with sword, etc However if not unusual, 
very well done. The stories were all very good 
especially "The Timeless Ones" by Frank Belknap Long which gave forth a new idea, and 
something which science-fiction really needs are 
new ideas. "The Virgin of Valkarion" by Anderson was also very good and your other story 
"Slave Ship To Andrigo" by Ross Rocklyne 
was equally superb. "Monster" by Morrison was 
one of the best shorts in the mag. "Temple Of 
Han" was also very good. All the other stories 
were good making up an issue the likes of 
which you have not had since that wonderful 
September issue. 

I see that the Dennis Strong controversy is 
raging hard even though, as the above paragraph 
states, there is no longer anything left of Dennis 
Strong. However, every person has a right to 
his own opinion, and I'm afraid that the fen answering him have been almost as insulting as 
Strong was in parts of his now famous tome. 
They could have made a better showing of themselves. I myself think that Mr. Strong is all mixed 
up. Take a look at it this way. Dennis — (my 
middle name is Dennis too, so I can't be too 
hard on the fellow) — many fen write letters, 
and many fen read them. So don't you think it 
would be a little bit boring if all those letters 
were all serious? I get a big kick out of reading 
some of these letters and so do many others. 
Many fans say that Dennis is a snob and should 
start reading something else. However it is my 
opinion that he really likes science-fiction and is 
just blowing off some steam at a situation which 






112 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



has gotten a little out of hand. But in this tough 
world people should be a little funny, not dead 
serious. God knows there's enough seriousness 
m the world today. As for Mr. Strong's statement about him being the only person in fandom 
who could understand Ray Bradbury that's plain 
silly. I have a complete collection of Bradbury's 
works and I think I understand him very well. 
As for Asimov I too get a little sick of seeing 
him sending in letter after letter about the misspelling of his name. My name is McNamara 
and you can just imagine how some people spell 
it but I don't waste valuable magazine space 
even if I were one of the greatest s-f writers in 
the world. I think that Strong just got a little 
upset at a thing that has been a cause of frustration for many people and sat down and wrote 
a letter which was a little too Strong for even 
Strong! Don't let's take this too serious, fella's! 

Very truly yours, 

Robert Dennis McNamara 



NO MORE DOGIES LIKE MONSTER 

52 Columbia St. 
Newark, Ohio 
Dear Editor, 

Your July issue contains a truly horrifying story 
"Monster." After cleaning up behind fox terriers, beagles and one police dog it seems to me 
the human mind would quail before the task of 
playing stable orderly to a critter the size of a 
dehorned moose. Oh woe, oh sorrow 1 Still, in 
the future most people outline, all the upholstery 
would be plastic. All the housewife would have 
to do is hook up a couple of 2]/ 2 " hose line to a 
deluge nozzle and then proceed to do takeoffs 
of Hercules in the Augean stables. 

Anderson's name for the beast of burden in 
his yarn sounds a bit funny. Why didn't he use 
the other invader of Britain? Or would "Horsa" 
sound more familiar and less otherworldly than 
"Hengist?" 

§ To return to the story first mentioned, if the 
idea of taking the familiar and giving you the 
ie jeebies with it. is a main line with this 
Morrison here's hoping there is more from him 
in the future. 

Yours truly, 

John P. Conlon 
FREE SPEECH EVEN FOR STRONG 

84 West 176 Street 
Bronx 53, N. Y. 
Dear Editor, 

I have just finished the July issue of Planet. 
As usual I liked most the stories about the same 
with perhaps a slight leaning towards Poul Anderson's opus. "The Timeless Ones" was a very 
good short indeed. I was quite surprised to see 
my name up there for a mention. For a pleasant 
surprise for you this time, read further. This 
month's cover was the closest you have ever 
gotten to my ideal and I was happy to see it. 



Could it be that my words have not all been hi 
vain ? 

I don't remember Strong's letter at all and I 
refuse to go looking for it. However I think 
I can say my piece without referring to it thanks 
to the letters he drew in return. 

I feel that anybody interested enough to write 
a letter must be allowed their say no matter 
how they say it. I draw the line at some of Sigler's diatribes but this is still, I hope, a free 
country and he has the right to blow off steam 
if he wishes. There is one qualification to all 
this, however, and that is my right to ignore 
that sort of stuff. Campbell's letter was a masterpiece of analysis. I give him a medal. His letter, 
appearing just ahead of Mr. Zelitch's is a wonderful refutation of the latter 's premises. 

I'm looking forward to the next issue and its 
cover. 

Regards, 

Larry Roth stein 
THE HOLLYWOOD SLANT— 

4009 Melrose Ave. 
Los Angeles, Cal. 
Dear Old Editor, 

OK . . . that does it! Dennis Strong has got 
me Irish up and I'm about to lower the boom. 

I want to go down in the books on the side 
of Sneary, Boggs, etc., the "adolescents." Sure 
some the time they are a little over the line of 
good taste and good humor but occasionally they 
come up with a gem of a remark that makes up 
for the rest of the creerzap they put on paper. 

And as for Mr. Strong's contention that they, 
along with others, do not ^understand' the likes 
of Bradbury — I say who cares? Least of all Mr. 
Bradbury I should amagine. Mr. Strong strikes 
me as the type who goes around feeling superior 
when they discover that "wherefore-art-thouRomeo" means "why" and not "where.'* 

Sneary, etc., are what in theatrical terminology 
we call "fringe" which means they like the field 
(sf or theatre) — know quite a lot about it — i 
follow it regularly and most important pay cold 
hard cash for the privilege! If it wasn't for the 
likes of them there wouldn't be the likes of us! 

Maybe they are self-styled-critics. I have yet 
to meet the critic who wasn't. Including myself, 
Mr. Strong, and all editors and producers. 

Well. I feel better now. 

Sorry this letter doesn't quite reach the 800word minimum. Also sorry to be so latish in piling into the fight — if there is or was one. But 
working days in an advertising firm, working 
nights in rehearsals and performances and trying 
to sandwich in a few more college credits towards 
my degree (only 8 more units to go! Hot Ziggity!) doesn't leave much time for sf reading. 
The mags pile up on my desk until such times 
when I can tack a "gone-to-Mars-for-weekend" 
on the door and I can wander ? r ound with a mag 
in one hand and a dust cloth in the other, catching up on both luxuries of life. 

"fan"atically yours, 

Jeanne Morgan 




11 Why don+ you try +o put 
oome weight on: 



'Aw, I guess I was justj 
'naturally-born skinnyQ 



NOBODY IS JUST "Naturally" 




Give Me 15 Minutes A Day And I'll 
Give YOU A NEW BODY 

OULD you believe it? / "Dynamic Tension" is (he easy, 
was once a skinny 97-pound NATURAL method that you can 

_ - . . nrartirp in the orivaCV OI 



weakling. People used to 
lough at my spindly build, 
.shamed to strip 
.rts or for a swim, 
snickered at me 
behind my back. Folks 
said I was just "naturally-born skinny!" 

Then I discovered my 

i lous new muscle
ng system— "Dyna
Tension." And it 

into such a 

complete specimen of 

M\nhcOD that today I 

hold «'ne title, "THE 

WORLD'S MOST PERFECT
EVELOPED MAN. M 



ARE YOU 

Skinny and 
run down? 
Always tired? 
Nervous? 
Lacking in 
Confidence? 
Constipated? 
Suffering 
from bad 
breath? 
Do you want 
to gain weight? 
WHAT TO 
DO ABOUT 
IT is told on 
this page! 



WHAT'S MY SECRET? you no gadgets or contraptions 

When you look in the mirror and to fool with. You simply utilize 

see a healthy, husky, strapping the dormant muscle-power in 

Mlow smiling back at you - then your own body. In a very short 

leu? be astonished at how fast time, you'll watch it grow and 

''Dynamic Tension" GETS RE- multiply into real, solid, rippling. 

5ULTS! LIVB MUSCLE. 



Mail coupon 




I 



practice in the privacy of 
your own room— JUST 15 
MINUTES EACH DAY — 
while your scrawny chest 
and shoulder muscles begin to swell . . • those 
spindly arms and legs of 
yours bulge . . . and your 
whole body starts to feel 
full of zip, ambition, selfconfidence, and new 
energy! 

"Dynamic Tension" 
Builds You NATURALLY 

Thousands of other 
fellows are becoming 
marvelous physical specimens — my way. I give 



Awarded 
the title 
of "The 
World's 
Most 
Perfectly 
Developed 
Man" in 
an international 
contest. 



I CHARLES ATLAS, Dept. 1 50H, ' 

1115 East 23rd Street, New York 10, N. Y. 
I want the proof that your system of "Dynamic 
Tension" will help make a New Man of me-give me 
I a healthy, husky body and big muscular development. Send me your free book, "EverlasUng Health 
and Strength." 



REE BOOK 

trated book, "Everlasting Health and 
Strength." Tells about my "Dynamic Tenmethod. Shows photos of men I ve made 
into Atlas Champions. It's a valuable book! 
And it's FREE. Mail coupon to me personally. Charles Atlas, Dept. 150H. 115 East 
23rd Street, New York 10, N. Y. 




(Please print or write plainly) 



Address 



City. 



I 
J 



THOUSANDS NOW PLAT 

who never thought they could! 




After Ten Months Plays in Band 



m,!Sinv i<ie ?J WouI , d acco - m P'ish so much 
musically. After only ten months I was 
Plajing in hands. I now am employed in a 
music store as an instructor. This I owe to 
your marvelously simple lessons. 

H C.i Paterson. New Jersey 




Wouldn't Take $1000 for Course 

The le.NSons are so simple that anyone can 
understand them. I have learned to play 
by note in a little more than a month. I 
wouldn't take a thousand dollars for my 
course. *S. E. A.. Kansas city. Mo 



Shares Course With Sister 

The teaching is so interesting and the 
pieces so beautiful I couldn't aok for anything better. I recommend your course 

er shares it with me and feels the 
same way. *D. E. G.. Wausau. Wise. 



You, too, can play any instrument 
By this EASY A-B-C Method 



Lots of Fun 

The progress I have made is thrilling. I'm on Lesson Seven and 
tossing off "Little Buttercup" like 
a maestro. The course is easy and 
what is most important — lots of fun. 
•B. B.. Jr.. Hartford, Connecticut 



JBk^ 



Y9 U o& ink its difficult to learn mu/■ sic ? That s what thousands of others 
have thought! Just like you, they 
long to play some instrument— the 
piano, violin, guitar, saxophone or 
other favorites. But they denied themselves the pleasure — because thev 
thought it took months and years of 
tedious study to learn. 

Learn in Spare Time at Home 

And then they made an amazing 
discovery! They learned about a wonderful way to learn music at homewithout a private teacher — without 
tedious study^— and in a surprisingly 



time at home for only a few cents 

™.,«* y, i f* evei i mind " y° u have n <> 
musical knowledge, training or talent. 
Just read the fascinating booklet and 
Print and Picture sample that fully 
explain all about the famous U S. 
bcnool method. Instruments supplied 
whe ? » eed ed. cash or credit. If interested tear out the coupon now, before 
you turn the 
page. U.S. School 
of Music. Dept. 
2766, Port Washington, Ll. I., 
N.Y. (5 3rd year) 



Plays After 2 Months 

I hesitated before sending for your 
course because of an earlier experience I had with a course by 
ear from another company. I am 
playing pieces now I never dreamed 
I would play after only two months. 
•E. T.. Prichard, Ala. 

"Actual pupils' names on request. 
Pictures by professional models. 



short time. They wrote to the u 
School of Music for the facts about 
V 11 ^ Remarkable short-cut method. 
And the facts opened 
their eyes! They were 
amazed to find how easy 
it was to learn. 

The result? Over 850,000 men and women have 
studied music at home 
this simple, A-B-C way. 
Now, all over the world, 
enthusiastic music-lovers 
are enjoying the thrilling 
satisfaction of creating 
their own music. They 
have found the key to 
good time, popularity 
and profit. 



FREE! 



Print and Picture 
Sample 

— <2: 



NOTICE 

our method with any 
systems claiming to 
teach "without mu
We teach you 
and Quickly to play 
iny music by standai I 

>y any trick or 
number 



Costs Only Few Cents 
a Day 

And that's what you 
can do, right now. Get 
the proof that you, .too 
can learn to play your 
favorite instrument — 
quickly, easily, in spare 



L*^ ^rested in music study, particularly in the Instrument 
"Howto Learn fift? ^ ^ y< T free '""""ted b3 
ture Vmple Home," and your free Print and Pic 



Piano 
Guitar 
Hawaiian 
Guitar 
Violin 
Piano Actordion 



Saxophone 
Trumpet. Cornet 
Reed Organ 
Tenor Banjo 
Ukulele 



Clarinet 

Trombone 

Flute 

Modern 
Elementary 
Harmony 



Practical 
Finger 
Control 

Piccolo . 

Mandolin 



Mr 

Mrs. ■ 
Miss 



Address . 



(Please print) 



Have you 
• Instrument? 



• ~ ; Stat* I 

NOTE: If you are under 16 years of age. parent must sign coupon. | 
SAVE 2^t1cFc7uToTTn~e7!nTTo1tcaRo"" 






9 

1 1 1 



