
THE UNIVERSE 

A COMPLETE NOVEL 

by RAY CUMMINGS 

(Author of "Man on the Meteor," "Turrano the Conqueror," titc.) 



CHAPTER I 

£^P*M^HAT ain't so," Tubby spoke up 
; I suddenly from the seclusion of 
-km. his seat across the room. He 
glanced at the three men who sat around 
Ihe little table under the circle of light, 
their poker game temporarily suspended, 
the cards and chips pushed tc one side. 
"That ain't so nohow. Don't you tell me 
it is!" 

"He ain't tellin' you," responded one of 
(he men caustically. 

"I ain't sayin' what / think," the first 
man defended. "I'm tellin r you what be 
said. The Stars goes right on past the Sun 
— right to the edge of Space — only there 
ain't no edge of Space. Thai's what he 
said." 

"You're right, Jake,*' agreed the second 
man. "That's what he said." 

Tubby glared belligerently, and brought 
his pudgy fist down upon the flimsy arm 
of the camp chair into which he was 
wedged. "That ain't sc. There must b* 
an edge to Space," he snorted. "How can 
Space go on forever? That ain't got no 
sense to it." 

The first man continued patiently: 

"He said if you could imagine the edge 



of Space with nothin' on beyond, that 
would just be more Space, wouldn't it?" 

This question addressed directly to Tubby, confused him momentarily. The place 
where Space stopped with nothing on beyond! Sure that would just be more Space. 
Then, quite suddenly, the flaw in the argument struck him. 

"You got the wrong idea," he declared 
condescendingly. "2 ain't never said there 
was nothin' on beyond the edge of Space." 

"He'r right, Jake," the second man put 
in. "He ain't never said that." 

The first man stared. 



1 



II 



12 A + * Future Fiction 



"You're assumin' somethin' you ain't got 
no right to assume," Tubby went on metcilessly. 

The first man collected his scattered wits. 
"Well, what did you say?" he demanded. 

"I didn't say nothin'," Tubby responded. 
Then to change the subject he added abruptly: 

"Who was he — said all this?" 

"A Per lessor— an — an Astronomer," replied the first man. "Us heard him give 
a lecture last week." 

"Did he say the moon had people on it?" 
Tubby persisted. 

The first man, contused by the sudden 
introduction of this new topic, answered 
sullenly: 

"No, he didn't say nothing about no people in the moon." 

"What are you gettifl' at, Tubby?" the 
third man put in. "We're talkin' about 
Space, not no men in the moon." 

Tubby smiled genially, "I'm talkin' 
about the moon. I read a book by a guy 
named Wells. Now he says — " 

"He ain't no Astronomer," the first man 
objected. "What's he know about it?" 

The third man continued the attack. 

"Stick to what you were sayin'. Tubby. 
You said there would be somethin" at the 
edge of Space — not just more Space." 

"I didn't say nothin' about it," Tubby repeated. "But 1 it-jll say .... There /s an 
edge to Space because when you get there 
you wouldn't find more Space, you'd 
find " 

"What?" demanded the first mm aggressively when Tubby hesitated. 

"Why-— why, more Land — that's what 
you'd find." Tubby glared through the 
blue haze of the tobacco smoke that hung 
like a pall about the unventilaled room. 
"More Land," he repeated triumphantly. 
"Ain't that argument enough? Don't that 
show Space can't go on forever?" 

The third man was gathering up the 
cards and chips. "Let's go ahead with the 
game," he suggested. "This here argument ain't got no sense. You shut up, 
Tubby — you ain't in this." 

"Right," said Tubby, with the magnanimous air of a victor. He shifted his feet 
more comfortably on the second camp chair 
and leaned back contentedly. "You don't 
want me talkin'. I can shoot your argument full o' holes in no time." 

The first man insisted on proceeding with 
his astronomical narration, while Tubby 



listened idly. It was then — as he sat there 

vaguely sorting out in his mind the miscellaneous statements regarding stats, planets and comets which his friend was making — that his great gift was revealed to 
him. The revelation came unobtrusively— 
so unobtrusively in fact, that at first Tubby 
did not grasp its real significance. 

"I wish they'd quit that talkin' an' go on 
with the game," he murmured to himself 
with annoyance. 

It seemed quite logical that at that instant Jake should decide he wanted to resume the poker game. At all events, in 
another moment the chips were clicking on 
the board table— science was forgotten for 
the more absorbing intricacies of poker. 

Tubby, even then not realizing his marvelous gift, was left alone with his thoughts. 
Enormously large numbers whirled in his 
head— strange words — orbits, suns, planets, 
comets, stars. .. .Stars! He seized upon 
that, as one word at least, that was really 
familiar. It was a beautiful night out. he 
remembered ; and as he gazed upward to 
the dim, smoky rafters of the room he was 
sorry he was not outdoors. 

<<W WISH I could see them stars now," 
Ml he murmured. 

And quite naturally, there were the stars, 
brilliant and glittering, spread out above 
him like millions of diamonds on a huge 
blue-velvet cloth. The moon hung over a 
clump of trees, above Bill Hawkins' apple 
orchard. 

There are some very surprising things 
that occur so naturally they do not cause 
surprise. The revelation of Tubby's maivelous gift was one of them. He was not 
surprised to see the stars, only pleased. 

"I whh I knew somethin' really true 
about them stars," he mutteied thoughtfully. And then with sudden vehemence: 

"I wish I knew all about them stars. I 
wish I knew all about Astronomy — I wish 
I could see it all for myself." 

He lelt fingers plucking at his sleeve, 
and turning, faced the dim figure of a man 
who was standing by his side. 

"I came," said the man softly, "because 
you sent for me." He stepped forward a 
little, out of the shadow to a place where 
the moonlight fell on his face. Tubby 
thought he had never seen so sad a face 
before. It was long and very thin. It 
needed a shave, Tubby thought; and its 
eyes were unnaturally bright. A thin wisp 



Around the Universe * * * 13 



of scraggly brown-white hair was above the 
face; and below, just above the collar of a 
soft white shirt, protruded a perfectly enormous Adam's apple. 

Tubby's gaze swept the man's thin, but 
somehow muscular- looking figure — bareheaded, toatless, the white negligee shirt 
with loose, soft collar and a flowing black 
bow tie; and very baggy tweed trousers that 
flapped on bony legs. 

"1m here because you wanted me," the 
man repeated. His voice was deep and 
throaty, and inexpressively sad. 

Tubby felt immediately sympathetic. 
"I'm sorry you're so sorry about somethin'," 
he said consolingly. "I didn't mean to send 
for you. I " 

The man smiled gently, pathetically. 
Tubby stared at his Adam's apple, fascinated, for it was bobbing up and down as 
though its owner were swallowing rapidly. 

"Oh, I don't mind," the man said patiently. "You couldn't help it. You wished 
you knew all there was to know about Astronomy " He paused, his voice trailing away. 

"Right," said Tubby encouragingly. He 
felt somehow tremendously sad, but determined not to show it. "That's what I 
wished. And so you " 

"So, of course, because you have the power to make all your wishes come true, I had 
to hurry here to tell you everything you — 
wanted to know." 

His voice broke; and Tubby saw, even 
in the dim moonlight, that his eyes were 
filling with tears. 

"I'll tell you all about Astronomy," the 
man went on in his dull monotone. "But 
you won't believe me." 

His utterly hopeless depression was contagious. Tubby swallowed the lump in his 
throat. He put out his hand and touched 
the man's elbow — a round, bony knob underneath the thin sleeve of his shirt. 

"Yes, I will believe you," he said kindly. "I wouldn't never think you was a liar." 

The man brightened perceptibly. 

"Let's get acquainted," Tubby added. 
"Then you can tell me why you're so sad." 

UmjTY NAME is Isaac Wells- Verne," 
i-T M. said the man. "Sir Isaac Swift 

DeFoe Wells- Verne, but my friends call me 

Professor." 

"Mine's Tubby — pleased to meet you, 

perfessor." 

They shook hands. 



"What are you perfessor of?" Tubby 
asked, after an awkward silence. 

Sir Isaac's expression, which had cheered 
somewhat at fhc introduction, clouded over 
again. 

"Professor of Knowledge," he said sadly. "It is my business to know everything 
and to tell people about it — in writing." 

"Oh," said Tubby. 

"I do tell them — " Sir Isaac sighed heavily, and a tear slipped from one of his eyes 
and rolled down his lined face — lines of 
care, and of emaciation rather than age, for 
the man was not really old. "I do tell them 
— but nobody ever believes me. Life and 
people on the moon, for instance — " He 
sighed again, and shrugged resignedly. 
"I've told them all about that and they 
don't take me seriously. They think because I've never been there, that I'm making it up. Sometimes they won't even buy 
what I've written. They — " 

Tubby's fat little arm went around Sir 
Isaac's thin waist. 

"Don't you care, perfessor. I'll believe 
you. I won't never think you're makin' 
nolhin' up." A sudden thought occurred 
to him. "You're hungry, ain't you, perfessor? You look hungry. Did you eat today?" 

"I — no, I didn't," Sir Isaac admitted reluctantly. "But I don't care about eating. 
1 want people to appreciate my genius. I — " 

"You must eat," declared Tubby. He expanded his stomach. "Look at me — I ain't 
never missed a meal in ten years." 

The further thought struck him that possibly Sir Isaac had no money with which 
to buy food. McGuirk's lunch-wagon was 
less than a mile away — Tubby himself 
would pay for (he meal. And then, as a 
climax to this mental activity, Tubby remembered his own newly discovered power. 

"I wish we had a abso-/tf/e-Iy perfect dinner served right now, here on the ground," 
he declaimed abruptly. 

And, even before Tubby himself realized 
his wish had come true, Sir Isaac was squatting cross-legged on the ground eating the 
food with avidity. Tubby had eaten only 
an hour before, and with difficulty he 
crammed down barely a third of the lavish 
meal. But Sir Isaac was equal to his task; 
and, for ten minutes, Tubby, completely satiated, sat in silence watching his new 
friend empty the huge silver platters. Tubby noticed now that from the pockets of 
Sir Isaac's shirt the stubs of three or four 



14 ★ * * Futur* ?i:>-»i 



grubby lead pencils and a fountain pen protruded; and that the third finger of his 
right hand had a corn on it, near the end 
joint; and all his fingers were ink-stained. 
Also from each of his hip pockets, as he 
sat hunched forward on the ground, Tubby 
could see a huge bundle of folded manuscript, sticking out. 

When everything edible was completely 
eaten, Sir Isaac sighed contentedly. 

"I wish we each had a good cigar," said 
Tubby promptly; and striking a match deftly with his thumb nail, he courteously lighted the huge black perfecto which Sir Isaac 
had in his mouth. 

With his own cigar lighted, Tubby 
leaned back luxuriously and smiled at his 
companion. 

"This ain't so bad," he declared cheerfully. "Now, perfessor, tell me all about 
everything. You can begin with — " He 
deliberated. " — begin with the edge or 
Space. These here guys — " 

Tubby broke off, for a stupendous idea 
had just occurred to him. Sir Isaac knew 
all about everything — but he had not actually seen it. The Moon, for instance. 
He had never been there — that's why people wouldn't believe what he wrote about 
it. Now with his (Tubby's) ability to wish 
for anything, why not go there— go everywhere — and see everything? It ought to be 
possible. . . . 

"Listen, perfessor," he said, excitedly. 
"You don't need to tell me nathin'. Let's 
go see things for ourselves." He explained 
hts idea vehemently. 

Sir Isaac looked almost dazed for an instant. "If I only could," he said musingly, 
his deep voice filled with awe. "I know 
just what we would find — on the Moon, 
Venus, Mercury, Mars — everywhere, everything — I know it all. If only I could verify 
it — could see it all for myself — " 

Tubby was standing up impatiently. 
"Come on, perfessor. Let's go." 

Sir Isaac climbed to his feet mechanically, a look of exaltation on his face. 

"If I only could — " he murmured; but 
Tubby interrupted him sharply. 

"Come on. Don't be no goop." 

"But where? How? asked Sit Isaac almost stupidly, for the anticipatory joy in 
his heart had dulled momentarily even his 
gigantic intellect. 

"I wish we could go anywhere in the 
Universe. I wish we were all ready to go 



now. I wish we had a — a abso-/r//£-Iy perfect ship to go in," Tubby intoned rapidly. 

THEY BOTH saw it the same instant, 
shining in the moonlight in a field not 
fifty feet away — a pale, grey-white, square 
metallic object, as large as the little building that housed O'Conner's Grocery. 

"There it is," said Tubby. "What is it? 
Come on — let's go see." 

Sir Isaac's eyes shone as he looked at it. 
"My Inter-planetary vehicle," he murmured, pride and awe mingling in his tone. 
Without another word he gripped Tubby 
by the hand, jerking him forward at a run. 

Tubby's breath was almost gone when 
they arrived. He stood leaning against the 
side of the vehicle, panting. The thing 
was indeed as big as a very small cottage. 
It was made of metallic substance — similar 
to aluminum only different, Sir Isaac said. 
In shape it was like a huge cube with a little dome set on top. It had several tiny 
windows of heavy plate glass set in each 
side, with a small metal door in front, 
which door now stood invitingly open. 

Tubby, his breath recovered, walked 
around the vehicle, inspecting it curiously; 
while Sir Isaac stood regarding it as a proud 
mother might regard her precocious offspring. 

After a complete circuit outside, Tubby 
peered through the doorway into a dira interior. 

"Come on in, perfessor. It's all ready, 
waitin' for us." 

They went inside together; and Sir Isaac, 
as though he had lived in the place all his 
life, immediately switched on a light. 

Inside, the vehicle was divided into several tiny rooms on two floors — just like a 
toy cottage, Tubby thought — and seemed 
fully furnished and equipped ready for occupancy. There was a store-room of food 
— a little kitchen, like the kitchen of a Pullman dining car — a main room, filled with 
a mass of scientific instruments — and two 
very small beds upstairs. Tubby sat down 
on one of the beds tentatively. Its mattress 
was soft; its springs yielding but strong, 
and its coverings luxurious. 

Tubby sighed with relief. "I ain't no 
kicker, perfessor, but I do like to sleep comfortable." 

They went back into the instrument room, 
where Sir Isaac quietly inspected a little 
keyboard like that of a typewriter. 

"What's that?" Tubby asked. "Do you 



Around the Universe * * ★ 15 



know how to run this thing, perfessor?'' 

Sir Isaac straightened. His manner had 
completely changed. He was now forceful, 
commanding, dominant. Tubby was impressed bv his look, even before he spoke. 

"This is my Inter-planetary vehicle," he 
said sternly. "/ invented it—/ designed it 
— I have operated it, in my mind, many 
times. It Is one of the most important of 
my contributions to science. I know alt 
about it, of course." 

"Oh," said Tubby. "That's fine. Then 
we're all ready to starts ain't we?" 

Sir Isaac bowed gravely, 

Tubby at the moment was standing beside one of the little windows. The moon 
was still over Bill Hawkins' apple orchard; 
and at the sight two ideas came to Tubby 
simultaneously. 

"Just a minute, perfessor." Sir Isaac was 
about to close the heavy front door. "I 
ain't goin' 'til I wish them apples of Bill 
Hawkins' is lyin' rotten on the ground. 
He's a mean guy, he is — wouldn't let me 
pick none ever." 

Tubby's eyes were sparkling with vindictive joy at the thought of this simple and 
efficacious revenge. "Come on, perfessor. 
Let's go see how all them apples look when 
they're rotten." 

Sir Isaac's glance was scornful. 

"That is childish," he said shortly; and 
banged the door shut. 

Tubby, subdued but still wishing fervently and audibly that this catastrophe would 
befall the luckless Bill Hawkins, stood by 
the window while j Sir Isaac went to the 
keyboard and unhesitatingly pressed one of 
its keys. 

There was a faint but perceptible trembling of the room. Tubby's feet pressed 
hard against the floor and his stomach 
seemed failing. It was like an elevator that 
suddenly takes you up much too fast. 

Sir Isaac switched off the light, plunging 
the room in darkness. Through the window Tubby saw a moonlight landscape silently dropping away beneath them. 

He turned from the window after an instant, slightly sick and very frightened ; but 
at once he felt better. The purring had 
ceased. The room, in fact, was apparently 
motionless and quite silent. Tubby felt no 
further desire to look out of the window; 
he sat down in a chair, mopping the perspiration from his forehead with his shirtsleeve. 

Sir Isaac, his tall thin figure barely vis


ible in the moonlit room, was still standing 
rigid by the keyboard, his fingers pressed 
delicately but firmly on its keys as a surgeon's assistant holds the patient's pulse 
during an operation. Tubby stared at him 
a moment, then ventured: 

"Where — where we goin", perfessor?" 

Sir Isaac moved, and as his fingers left 
the keyboard to itself, Tubby's heart leaped. 
Would the thing fall if you didn't watch 
it? Evidently not, for Sir Isaac went over 
to the window quite calmly. 

"We will not bother with the moon just 
now," he said thoughtfully, more to himself than to Tubby. "No, we can stop 
there coming home.... I think we should 
go toward the sun first, and then, after 
Venus and Mercury, skip back to Mars and 
so on out, . . .Yes, that will be best." 

He turned away from the window toward 
Tubby. 

"Our first stop will be Venus," he added authoritatively. 

"Venus!" exclaimed Tubby. "That's 
fine, Then — then where do we go?" 

"After that," said Sir Isaac slowly and 
impressively — "after that we will inspect 
the entire Universe!" 

CHAPTER II 

£^^~~^OME over here, Tubby," said Sir 
H Isaac a few moments later. He 
had gone back to the keyboard, 
pressed another of its keys after making a 
rapid mathematical calculation with one of 
his pencil stubs on a little paper tablet, and 
now was standing quietly by the window 
again. "Come here, Tubby, and look out." 

Tubby shook his head emphatically. "You 
look out. I ain't interested." 

He was considerably more frightened now 
than a few moments before, for a very disconcerting thing had happened. He had 
secretly been reassured as they started, by 
(he knowledge that in the event of any dire 
disaster, he could easily wish himself safely 
back at home. It had been getting extremely warm in the room, and he had 
wished it would be cooler. But, so far as 
he could tell, it was getting warmer, rather 
than cooler. Alarmed, he had wished vehemently that they were back on Earth 
looking at Bill Hawkins' apples. But nothing had happened. Sir Isaac was then making his mathematical computations at the 
keyboard; finally he had pressed another 
key carefully, and quite in defiance of Tub


U * * * Futur* Fktian 



by's frantic mental wishes, walked quietly 
to the window. 

Tubby considered the situation, and now 
decided to consult his companion about it. 

Sir Isaac laughed softly. 

"That was merely your Earthly power," 
he said condescendingly. "I suppose I am 
glad you possessed it, since you were enabled to bring into material being this inter-planetary vehicle of mine." He raised 
his hand deprecatingly. "Of course, / 
could easily have constructed it myself. In 
fact, I was intending to— as soon as I had 
the necessary money." 

Tubby was aggrieved at this ingratitude. 
"An' then I— I ain't able to wish for nothin" no more?" 

"No," said Sir Isaac. "Naturally not— 
since you have left the Earth. You are now 
in the realms of Science— subject only to 
rational scientific laws. That magical wishing ability you had was childish. / could 
never be concerned in an affair like that." 
He seemed to shudder at the thought, and 
added emphatically: 

"/ am a man of Science. Everything / 
have ever conceived has been strictly scientific. I am ashamed of you— and of course, 
now that you are in my realm, naturally all 
such foolishness has been left behind " 

Tubby pondered this, sitting hunched up 
in his chair and sweltering in the heat. He 
was somewhat sullen; but presently, when 
Sir Isaac patted him kindly on the shoulder 
and assured him they were in no great danger, he cheered up a little. 

"It's too hot in here, perfessor," he declared. "Can't we open the window an' get 
a little air in?" 

Sir Isaac smiled at the idea. "There is 
no air outside," he said quietly. "We have 
already traversed the few hundred miles of 
atmospheric envelope and passed beyond 
even the most rarefied strata of the Earth's 
atmosphere. We are now in space." 

"Oh," said Tubby. "Well, just as you 
say. But it's awful hot." 

Sir Isaac was bending down to squint upward through the window, which from 
where Tubby was sitting was merely a black 
rectangle. 

"It will cool off presently," he said casually. "There's the thermometer by you. 
See what it says." 

The room was now dimly lighted by one 
small electric bulb— which was lucky. Tubby thought, for there was not even moonlight coming in through the window. He 



found the thermometer. It stood a little 
over a hundred degrees. 

An alarming idea came to Tubby; it 

would be terrible to smother and be so hot 

all at the same time. "Say, perfessor, how 
are we goin' to breathe when we use up all 
the air we got in here?" 

SIR ISAAC reluctantly turned from his 
inspection of whatever it was showed 
through the window, and pointed to one of 
the instruments on a table over against the 
wall. 

"In breathing," he explained, "we alter 
the air only in so far as we use up its oxygen and add to it an excess of carbonic acid 
gas. Now over there on that table is Reisct 
and Regnault's apparatus— -which J still 
consider the best of its kind. It produces 
oxygen from chlorate of potassium and releases it into the air as fast as we use it." 

Sir Isaac smiled to himself with satisfaction. "I have thought of and provided for 
every contingency. The carbonic acid gas 
that we exhale is absorbed." He indicated 
several containers under the table. "Those 
hold caustic potash, which absorbs the carbonic acid gas 1 have explained ail this 

tn my books, but I suppose yon have not 
read them." 

"Yes — no," said Tubby. "Not all of 
them, I guess." He felt a little humiliated. 
"I ain't so very scientific, perfessor. You'll 
have to tell me things as we go along." 

"I will," agreed Sir Isaac magnanimous 
ly. He pulled out his handkerchief and 
mopped his forehead. "It // hot. That's 
because of our friction in going through the 
Earth's atmosphere so fast. We're far beyond the atmosphere now -exposed to the 
intense cold of inter-planttary space. We'll 
be freezing in a little while— you need not 
worry about the heat." 

Tubby glanced apprehensively toward his 
discarded coat, and tried to recall how many 
blankets there were on the bed upstairs. 

Sir Isaac added: 

"Come over here and look out the window. Don't be afraid." 

Through the window Tubby saw the 
stars, brighter, more brilliant than they had 
ever been before, freed now from the distortion of the Earth's atmosphere, they 
glittered like huge, sparkling diamonds, 
surrounded, not by the familiar blue of the 
sky as seen from the Earth, but by a profound inky darkness. 

It was a marvelous — indeed a stupendous 



Around the Universe * * * 17 



— sight. The whole extent of the heavens 
swarmed with stars and constellations of 
pristine purity. Here and there hung huge, 
spiral nebulous masses, fleecy white, and 
glittering with tiny blazing points of white 
fire. Some of the larger stars were bluewhite, others silver, still others a dull glowing red; and across the firmament stretched 
that immense ring formed by an impalpable 
dust of stars, the "Milky Way," in the 
midst of which our own sun ranks only as 
a star of the fourth magnitude. 

"Ain't that pretty?" Tubby marveled, His 
fear had entirely gone. "Where's the 
moon?'' 

"The moon is on the other side of us," 
answered Sir Isaac. "It is shining into the 
room next to this." The instrument room, 
in which they were, only extended half the 
width of the vehicle. "Looking out this 
window we cannot see the moonlight, for 
there is no atmosphere to diffuse its rays 
. . .Stoop down and look upwards, Tubby." 

Tubby squinted up through the window 
from beneath and saw a very large; thin 
silver crescent — an enormous arch extending 
nearly a third of the way across the sky. 
It glowed with a blue, almost phosphorescent light, and its outlines were blurred 
and wavy. Some parts of it were brighter 
than others, and there were many dark, 
almost black spots. 

<*"Wfc7HAT'S that?" he asked, amazed. 

ww "I ain't never seen nothin' like 
that in the sky before. Is that where we're 
goin' to? We must be almost there. What 
is it? Venus?" 

"That's the Earth," said Sir Isaac calmly. 
"We have turned over, you see, because our 
base is heavier. We are falling diagonally 
away from the Earth, partly toward the 
moon and partly toward the sun. I shall 
head directly for the sun later tonight." 

It was very hard for Tubby to realize that 
they were going the other way, having 
turned almost completely over; but finally 
he managed it. He was beginning to feel 
comparatively little surprise at anything any 
more. 

"Why don't we see all of the Earth?" he 
demanded. "Why is it so thin — like a 
new moon?" 

"Because the Earth is 'new'," Sir Isaac 
explained. "From the position we now occupy that is all that is illuminated by the 
sun's rays, though if you look closely you 
can distinguish the dim outline of the un


illuminated portion of the sphere. You see 

the Earth is in its first phase. It " He 

seemed contemplating the use of some profound scientific language; then, meeting 
Tubby's puzzled glance, he shrugged and 
gave it up. 

"It is just like a new moon," he added. 
"Only it's a new Earth. " 

They inspected the moon itself a few 
moments later, through the window of the 
adjoining room. It hung apparently motionless just below the level of the window. 
All around it in the blackness, the stars 
shone as brightly as though it were not 
there— which, as Sir Isaac reminded, was 
merely because there was no intervening 
atmosphere to diffuse its rays and thus obscure the stars. 

The moon was somewhat larger than 
when seen from the Earth, and considerably 
brighter. Its rays bathed the store-room 
with a brilliant, blue-white light. Tubby 
was opening a box of crackers as he stood 
regarding it. 

"Ain't that romantic," he murmured a 
moment later, with his mouth full of biscuit. "That's abso-////f-ly pretty moonlight. 
Come on, perfessor — eat somethin'. This 
travelin' so last makes me hungry." 

They made a very comfortable little midnight supper of sardines — which Tubby 
found in a well-filled ice box — and the 
crackers. Sir Isaac's appetite revived with 
eating, and he devoured such a prodigious 
quantity of the food that Tubby became 
alarmed over an ultimate shortage. 

"It's quite all right, you know," Sir Isaac 
assured him. "We are supplied for over a 
year. I've never started on a journey like 
this — even a mental journey-^- without an 
entirely adequate food supply. Besides, we 
can replenish along the way. You will find 
the Mercurian cuisine particularly good." 

It had been growing steadily colder; and 
Tubby, discovering that the tiny kitchen 
which adjoined the store-room held a very 
decent little gas stove, made them each a 
steaming hot cup of coffee. 

"How cold is it liable to get, perfessor?" 
he asked, as they sat at an immaculately 
clean board table and drank the coffee. 
"Ain't this house got any heatin' apparatus? A nice tittle furnace now " 

"It can be heated," Sit Isaac answered. 
"But we shall not need it. It will be warm 
enough presently." 

Certainly the weather in space was exceedingly changeable; but that was to be 



13*** Future Fiction 



expected when one was traveling from 
place to place with such rapidity. 

"But how cold would it get if we stayed 
where we are?" Tubby persisted. He was 
beginning to be theoretical also, which, as 
Sir Isaac had remarked, is the first prerequisite of a scientific mind. 

"I think 1 once estimated the temperature of space to be about 250 degrees Fahrenheit below zero,'* remarked Sir Isaac. 
"Pass me the cream, will you? And the 
coffee pot? You make pretty good coffee." 

"Thanks," said Tubby. "I ain't so terrible good at cookin' " He paused deprecating, his amazement at Sir Isaac's estimation at how cold it could get forgotten in 
the compliment to his culinary skill. 

"Minus two hundred and fifty degrees," 
Sir Isaac repeated thoughtfully. "I wish I 
could verify it now. But wc won't suffer 
from the cold. Soon we shall be " 

As though in answer to his unspoken 
words, sunlight burst in through a window 
in the floor directly under Tubby's feet. 
He had not known this window was there, 
and leaped aside in terror. The vehicle at 
that moment had emerged from the conical 
shadow cast by the Earth, and the diagonal 
rays of the sun struck its lower surface. 
Bathed in its golden fire, which mingled 
with the moonlight from the side window, 
the room in a moment became warm and 
pleasant. 

"This is nice," said Tubby, with rapidly 
recovered equanimity. He discarded his 
coat again, and pushed the hot coffee from 
him. "We sure do have speedy changes of 
weather, don't we, perfessor?" 

SIR ISAAC had donned a pair of smoked 
spectacles and was on his knees peering down through the window. He called 
Tubby and offered him a second pair of the 
glasses. 

Tubby sat down on the floor. The sun, 
through the smoked glass, appeared a glowing red ball, with enormous tongues of 
flame rising from it. The globe itself was 
no larger than usual. They were closer to 
it, Sir Isaac remarked, but its distance still 
was so comparatively great that its visual 
increase of diameter was undiscernible. 
Also, on Earth, the atmospheric refraction 
enlarged it. 

The sun was not directly beneath them, 
but off considerably to one side — on the 
side away from the moon. And although 



Sir Isaac had already explained the phenomenon in the case of the moon, Tubby was 
greatly amazed to see the stars shining quite 
imperturbably all around the sun. 

"That's the first time I ever seen stars 
shinin' m the daytime," he murmured. 

Sir Isaac climbed to his feet. "I'll be 
back in a moment. I want to change our 
course and put on more speed." 

He left Tubby sitting there and went into 
the instrument room, where, after a few 
more algebraic calculations, and careful reference to a huge book that lay at hand, he 
depressed another of the keys slightly — and, 
after an instant's hesitation, two others on 
another rank of the keyboard. 

Tubby, squatting on the floor in the other room, saw the sun and all the stars swing 
slowly over to one side — the whole firma 
ment shifting silently under him. The sun 
was directly underneath when the movement 
ceased. Looking over to the side window 
he saw that the moon had risen considerably. It was now so high he could only sec 
it because he was down on the floor. 

Sir Isaac returned. 

"We'll make good speed now," he said. 
"We're headed directly toward the sun, with 
eleven and a half times our former velocity." He sat down beside Tubby on the 
floor. 

It was amazing to stare down through 
that window at the sun and stars — into the 
immensity of space directly under them— 
and to realize that they were falling into it. 
Yet Tubby was not alarmed, possibly because the vehicle felt so stable, so vibrationless, so absolutely silent and motionless. 
There had not been the slightest perceptible 
movement since that first instant when they 
started. In changing their course it was the 
stars and sun that appeared to move, not 
the vehicle. 

Tubby pondered all this. "Why don't 
we feel like we was movin', perfessor?" he 
demanded some minutes later. "If we're 
goin' so fast " 

"My dear fellow," Sir Isaac answered, 
"you must realize that all motion is relative. 
There is no such thing as absolute motion — 
it all depends upon your immediate surroundings. Einstein might tell you that 
as something very new — yet / have always 
known it." 

"I don't get you," said Tubby, puzzled. 

"The Earth," said Sir Isaac, "is flying 
through space at the rate of some 66,000 
miles an hour. You never felt that motion, 



Around th« Un)v»rs« * * * it 



did you ? But when you are in a train going 60 miles an hour — that motion you do 
oerceive. That is because, relative to your 
immediate surroundings, you arc moving 
that fast. Do you understand now?" 

"No — yes," said Tubby. "I guess so. 
Show me Venus. When do we get there?" 

Venus, which fortunately was approaching inferior conjunction — that point in its 
orbit when it is between the Earth and the 
sun — was discernible slightly to one side of 
the sun at a visual distance of about twice 
the sun's diameter. Tubby saw it as a very 
Urge, bright, blue-white star. 

"A telescope would show it as a crescent 
in its last phase,'" said Sir Isaac. 

Tubby, with their first stop in such plain 
view directly beneath them, was intensely 
interested. "Tell me all about Venus," he 
demanded. "An' tell me how you run this 
—this inter-planetary house we're in, so you 
can make it go where you want o." 

Sir Isaac glanced at his watch. "Twelve 
fourteen. You must get some sleep soon. 
I will explain the operation of my vehicle 
tomorrow." 

Tubby realized he was a little sleepy. 
"How long we been travelin'?" he asked. 

"Two hours and twenty-seven minutes ." 
Sir Isaac pulled out a lead pencil and a little 
slip of paper and began a rapid calculation. 

"We are now about 947,000 miles from 
the Earth," he announced. 

"In two hours an' a half! That's some 
travelin'," 

Sir Isaac smiled. I should not say that 
— however, it is quite satisfactory. I started 
very cautiously. We went through the 
Earth's atmosphere considerably less than 
one one-hundredth that fast. I increased 
our velocity soon after that — and just now, 
when I altered our course, I increased it 
again eleven and a half times." 

it^O ON," said Tubby. "Tell me 
more. Tell me more about Venus." 

"Venus," began Sir Isaac, "is a globe 
very little smaller and of very slightly less 
density than our Earth. Its mass, hence, is 
only a little less — gravity on its surface being .88 that of the gravity on the Earth. 
. . . Do you follow me? I'm only talking 
in round numbers, of course." 

"Of course," Tubby agreed. "Go on." 

"It revolves on its axis once in 23 hours, 
4 minutes and 19% seconds. Those are my 
figures, you understand — they are quite eic


act. Therefore, its day is very similar in 
length to our own. Its orbit lies about 67 
million miles from the sun — some parts of 
it farther, some nearer. The Earth, you 
know, revolves at a mean distance of about 
93 million miles from the sun. Venus 
makes one complete revolution around th« 
sun in a little more than 224 days — hence 
its year is that long — about a third shorter 
than ours. Venus has seasons just as we 
have — only less marked. Its atmosphere is 
a little denser than ours, but altogether Venus is more like the Earth than any other 
of the planets." 

"Good," said Tubby. "Go on." 

"It has no satellite," Sir Isaac added as 
an afterthought. 

"What's a satellite?" 

"A satellite is a smaller body revolving 
about a planet, just as a planet revolves 
around the sun. The moon is the Earth's 
satellite. It revolves around the Earth about 
once a month." 

"How far away?" Tubby demanded. 

"Oh, very close. Only about a quarter of 
a million miles. We ace already four times 
that far from the Earth. You can see how 
close the moon and Earth are together now. 
Look !" 

Sir Isaac pointed to the side window, 
pulling Tubby over on the floor nearer to it. 
The moon had risen still further, and had 
dwindled greatly in size. The tip of the 
Earth, very much smaller than before and 
more silvery, showed in the upper corner 
of the window. 

"Why, they're gettin' right together," 
Tubby exclaimed. "That moon really belongs to us, don't he ? He's our little 
brother!" 

"Yes," said Sir Isaac. "We'll stop off 
there going home. Now about our present 
velocity. Venus, at the time we started, was 
about 31 million miles from the Earth. We 
have already gone about one million, at an 
average rate of some four hundred thousand 
miles an hour. I have now increased this 
velocity to four million, six hundred thousand miles per hour." 

Sir Isaac looked a little worried as he 
named these figures. "I hope we don't hit 
anything," he added anxiously. 

"Hit anything !" Tubby echoed. He 
glanced down through the window at the 
heavens beneath. "Ain't we got plenty of 
room? It looks like we had plenty." 

Sir Isaac sighed. "All space is relative 
to motion. We haven't very much room at 



20 * * * Future Fiction 



this velocity. It's so crowded in here near 
the sun. Outside — particularly beyond 
Neptune — things will be different. Then 
1 can really put on speed." 

He shrugged. "You go to bed, Tubby. 
I'll watch here. I don't fancy we're in any 
great danger." 

"Right," said Tubby. "If you see anything comin' you steer around it." He got 
to his feet. "Good night, perfessor. I'm 
goin' upstairs right away. When do we 
land at Venus?" 

Sir Isaac was again absorbed with his 
mathematics, the sunlight from below lighting with strange outlines his lanky figure 
and earnest, intellectual face. 

"What?" he asked abstractedly. 

Tubby meekly repeated his question. 

"I shall alter jur course later tonight," 
said Sir Isaac. "I am using the surf's attraction now. It's a little longer route, but 
simpler. Later I shall head directly for 
Venus and slow down somewhat." 

He added: 

"I'll call you about six o'clock. We will 
be fairly close in by then. We'll land 
shortly after breakfast. . . .Good night." 

"Good night, perfessor. Don't make no 
mistakes with them figures, will you?" 

He turned, and climbing to the floor 
above, carefully selected the better of the 
two beds and soon was snoring heavily. 

CHAPTER III 

TUBBY had gone to sleep in the 
starlight and very dim moonlight. 
He awoke most uncomfortably warm, 
to find the glaring sunlight beating directly 
on his bed through the bedroom window. 
For a moment he did not know where he 
was. The sun, larger than he had ever 
seen it before, was about level with the 
window — shining among the stars in the 
black sky, intolerably bright, excessively hot. 
He lay blinking and gasping; then with 
returning memory, he leaped out of bed and 
jerked down the green roller shade. 

The vehicle was without vibration, silent 
as before. The room was hotter than midsummer. Where was the professor? Was 
anything wrong? What time was it? 
"Oh-h, perfessor!" Tubby bellowed. 
Sir Isaac's voice answered him from 
below. 

"Oh, you're awake, are you? Come on 
down. Dress as coolly as possible." 
Tubby was dressed in a few moments, 



putting on his thinnest clothes— white flannel trousers, white buckskin shoes and white 
negligee shirt— which he had found in the 
bureau drawers and the ward r obe. He was 
glad to find them there, and glad that they 
fitted him so perfectly, for he wanted to 
look his best when arriving on Venus. 

When he got downstairs he found Sir 
Isaac also dressed all in white, with bis 
shirt sleeves rolled up and his shirt open 
at the throat exposing half his bony but 
broad chest. Around his forehead was 
tied a white silk handkerchief to keep the 
hair out of his eyes. He was sitting at the 
instmment room table, working at his interminable figures. 

The side window of the room, which was 
now turned away from the sun, showed only 
the black void of space with its glittering 
stars. Through another window, in the floor 
directly under Sir Isaac's feet — which Tubby 
had net known (o be there since it had been 
covered the night before — a soft, paleblue light was streaming. It flooded the 
entire room, more intense than moonlight, 
but blue rather than silvery. 

Sir Isaac looked up from his calculations 
and smiled. 

"Good morning. I was just coming up 
to call you." 

"The sun woke me up," said Tubby. "It's awful hot up there. ... It ain't so 
cool down here either. . . . What's that blue 
light from? How are we getting on? 
What lime is it?" 

Sir Isaac laid down his pencil reluctantly. 

"Seven thirty- three," he said. "You've 
had a -good long sleep. I just altered our 
course again. We intersected the orbit of 
Venus twenty-seven minutes ago, so I 
thought I had better turn and head directly for her. That's why the sun swung 
up to your window." 

Tubby hung his natty Panama hat on a 
rack and approached Sir Isaac. 

"What's that blue light? Venus?" 

Looking down through the window, 
Tubby saw directly beneath them an enormous blue half moon, with dark, irregular 
patches all over it. Against the black 
background of space it glowed with intense 
purity — its pale-blue light making it seem 
ethereal — unreal. 

"That is Venus," said Sir Isaac softly. 
"You can see the whole of the sphere when 
your eyes become accustomed to the light." 

A moment more and Tubby saw the dark, 
unilluminated portion. He saw, too, that 



Around the Universe * * * 21 



where the edge of the light crossed the face 
of the globe it was not a continuous line, 
but was broken into many bright spots and 
patches of darkness. 

"That's where the sun strikes the tops of 
the mountains," Sir Isaac explained. "The 
dark places are valleys and plains. ... Let 
us have breakfast. Aren't you hungry?" 

"No — yes, sure I am." Tubby rose to 
his feet from where lie had been kneeling 
heavily on the floor. "That Venus is awful pretty. How far away is she? When 
do we get there?" 

"We intersected her orbit at a point 
1,142,606 miles away, roughly speaking, " 
Sir Isaac replied. "I had to change our 
velocity once or twite during the night— 
but still I fancy I may say we have done 
fairly well." Sir Isaac drawled this out 
complacently. He was, Jndeed, very English at times. 

"I ain't got noihin' to complain of,' 
Tubby agreed. "When do we land?" 

"Our present velocity is only 575,001 
miles per hour. Venus is coming toward 
us at the rate of some 68,000 miles per 
hour. . . ." Sir Isaac seemed to be calculating in his head. ". . . But allowing 
time for landing— we shall have to slow 
up much more a little later on, you knowwell, I think we should be there by tenthirty or eleven o'clock this morning." 

"Very good," said Tubby briskly. "Come 
on. Let's eat." 

They had bacon and eggs for breakfast, 
and iced coffee with whipped cream, because 
it was too hot for regular coffee. Tubby 
would have made pancakes, but there did 
not seem to be any maple syrup, at which 
he was exceedingly annoyed. Several tunes 
during the meal Sir Isaac went into the 
instrument room for a moment to make a 
brisk calculation, to verify their course and 
to decrease their velocity a little. 

TUBBY'S questions about Venus were 
incessant at first; but as Sir Isaac said, 
why discuss it theoretically when they were 
to see it so soon? 



level with the instrument room side window 
and thus almost exactly opposite the suu. 
So far as Tubby could see it was a star 
no dirk-rent from any of the rest of them, 
except possibly a little larger. The moon, 
of course, was invisible. 

Venus, through the window beneath their 
feet, had grown very much larger during 
breakfast. It was now an enormous glowing ball, half dark, half light, apparently 
nailed fast to the black surface of the 
firmament. The sensation that they were 
high above it and falling directly down to 
its surface came to Tubby suddenly. It 
made him a little giddy at first; but the 
unpleasant feeling soon passed away. 

For nearly an hour they sat talking 
idly, while this glowing sphere beneath 
them grew steadily in apparent size. They 
could distinguish even its dark portion quite 
clearly now, and its convexity was unmistakable. They were hardly more than 25,
000 miles above its surface, and falling 
slightly toward its northern hemisphere, 
when Sir Isaac suggested that Tubby wash 
up the bre.ikla.st dishes. 

"I shall go down through the atmosphere very slowly," he said. "But still I 
think we shall be there in rather more than 
an hour." 

Tubby hastened into the kitchen, and 
Sir Isaac, pencil and pad in hand, took 
bis station at the keyboard. When Tubby 
finally returned the instrument room was 
considerably darker than before. Sir Isaac, 
with two small electric bulbs lighted, was 
still seated at the keyboard. 

"Say," began Tubby indignantly, "the 
sun went behind a cloud or somethin'. 

1 ain't quite finished, but I don't know 
how to light the lights." 

They had already entered the atmosphere of Venus, and had encountered, as • 
chance would have it, a heavy bank of 
clouds— heavier than clouds ever are in the 
atmosphere of the earth. The sun thus 
obscured, the interior of the vehicle had 
grown quite dark. 

"Never mind," said Sir Isaac. "Let it 



The store-room, which they were using _^o- We'll be there very shortly.' 



as a dining room because it adjoined tfic 
kitchen, was directly under Tubby's bedroom. The sun hung level with its window, 
but they kept the shade closely drawn. After 
breakfast they returned to the instrument 
room, Tubby insisting he would not wash 
up the dishes so soon after eating; and Sir 
Isaac showed him the Earth. It was about 



'Tubby located his Panama hat, rolled 
down his sleeves, and donning a thin blue 
serge jacket sat down to await their landing. He could see nothing but grey mist 
through either window for a time; then, 
as they burst through the clouds, the room 
suddenly brightened. 

Sir Isaac bent over the window in the 



22 * * * Future Fiction 



fioor, tailing to Tubby. Beneath, spread 
out in a vast panorama extending to the 
horizon in every direction, lay the landscape of Venus — forests of green vegetation; a thin silvery ribbon of water; tiny 
grey blobs that were cities; and in the 
distance a range of blue-green mountains 
with heavy white masses of clouds above. 
And, curiously enough, by a familiar optical 
illusion, it seemed now a concave surface, 
as though they were hanging over the 
center of a huge shallow bowl, with the 
horizon rising upward lo form its circular 
rim. 

"My!" exclaimed Tubby. "Ain't that 
pretty? Just like bein' in a airplane, ain't 
it. perfessor?'' 

Sir Isaac, hovering anxiously between the 
floor window and the keyboard, was now 
exceedingly busy. 

"I've got to select a landing place," he 
said. "If you see a large open space where 
there are no trees, tell me at once." 

Tubby, forgetting the possible damage to 
his white trousers, sat down on the floor 
beside the window, peering intently downward. They were falling rapidly; the landscape grew momentarily larger in detail, 
passing slowly to one side as they fell 
diagonally upon it. 

The instrument room was now hotter 
than ever before. Tubby took off his hat 
and coat again, and dashed the dripping 
perspiration from his face. 

"Hey, perfessor, slow up a little," he 
called to Sir Isaac at the keyboard. "We're 
gettin' pretty close.'' 

They were now at an altitude of hardly 
three thousand feet. The circular horizon 
had already risen so that the range of mountains in the distance was visible through 
the side window. It was a beautiful day 
outside — subdued rays of sunlight filtering 
through the white cloud masses and falling 
upon the vivid green countryside in brilliant patches of light. 

They passed over the narrow river, and 
Tubby saw an open space surrounded by 
tremendous fo'cests of tangled green vegetation, with occasional white blobs that might 
have been houses. Beyond, perhaps fiiry 
miles distant, a city lay— its low stone build*" 
ings gleaming a dazzling white. 

When they were directly ever the open 
space, Sir Isaac depressed another key sharply; and the vehicle began falling vertically 
downward, with constantly decreasing velocity, until, when they were only a few 



hundred feet up, it seemed floating gently 
down rather than falling. 

Sir Isaac's eyes were now glued to the 
window, his fingers resting lightly on the 
keys. Tubby stood up and put on his coat 
again ; and a moment later, with scarcely 
a perceptible jar, they landed on the surface of Venus. 

Sir Isaac relaxed, his face radiating 
triumph. 

"We have landed," he cried exultantly. 
"A perfect trip, my dear fellow — 12 hours, 
14 mjnutes and 7 seconds elapsed time!" 

"Right," said Tubby. "We're here. Come 
on perfessor. let's go outside an' get some 
air." 

<<W«THAT'S that?" Tubby exclaimed 
WW abruptly. "Don't you hear 

somethin', perfessor?" 

Music was wafting to them on the 
breeze — soft, liquid tones like the music of 
a harp, and the sweet, pure voice of a 
girl singing. 

"It's over there," Tubby half whispered. 
"Over in the banana trees. Come on — 
let's go see." 

They crept quietly forward; and within 
the grove of trees came upon a tan-bark 
path. As they followed it the music grew 
steadily louder, until nestling under the 
huge spread of banana leaves they saw a 
little white marble pavilion, with a tiny 
splashing fountain before it. The figure of 
a girl in white reclined beside the fountain 
— a girl who was apparently alone, playing on a small harp-like instrument and 
singing to its accompaniment. 

"Heilo-o!" Tubby called incautiously. 

The girl sprang erect; and stood trembling, lyre in hand, as they hurried forward. Tubby saw she was a rather small, 
very slim girl, dressed in a flowing white 
garment from shoulder to knee, which was 
gathered at the waist with a golden cord 
whose tasseled ends hung down her side. 

"Good morning, mfi'am," he said graciously. "It's a nice day, ain't it?" 

The girl smiled, seemingly reassured by 
his greeting. 

"We trust you speak our language," Sir 
Isaac added anxiously. "It has always been 
my theory that on Venus — " 

The girl rep tied in a gentle, softly musical voice: 

"I speak the language of the North 
Country of Venus, sir." 

Her fear seemed to have left her. She 



Around th» Univert* * * ★ 23 



stood, with dignified bearing, waiting for 
them to explain their presence. 

Sir Isaac, with infinite relief on his face, 
turned to Tubby. "You see? I am vindicated. I always knew that on Venus — 
particularly in the North Country — the Ian* 
guage was — " 

Tubby frowned. ''My name's Tubby," he 
said to the girl. "An" my friend's name 
is — " 

"Sir Isaac Swift DeFoe Wells-Verne," 
stated Sir Isaac impressively. "We are 
charmed to meet you. Miss — er — " 

"I am called Ameena," said the girl, 
simply; she extended her hand in most 
friendly fashion. 

When they had all shaken hands, she 
added : 

"You are not of my world, surely. We 
so seldom have visitors here. I cannot 
tell—" 

"We're from the earth," said Tubby 
promptly. "We just got in this mornin'." 

"The earth!" Ameena exclaimed. She 
seemed suddenly perturbed. "I had thought 
you were Mercurians — men of the Light 
Country perhaps. We have never had earthmen here before. Never have I seen — " 

"No," said Sir Isaac. "We are the first." 

The girl had seated herself on the marble rim of the fountain; her pretty little 
face was clouded over with anxiety. 

"I am so glad you came," she said after 
a moment of silence. "Now I can warn 
you of the danger to your earth. My people are so indolent. The Martians are 
about to descend upon your earth and conquer it. Rebels from the Twilight Country of Mercury are their allies. Only last 
month they were here in Venus — emissaries 
asking our people to join with them." She 
shrugged. "We would not do that, of 
course. What is war to us? These Martians do not covet out world, for we have 
nothing — only our fruits and our wine and 
our simple buildings, and our music and 
poetry — and love-making." 

She added, "But your earth — that is different. Your world they desire. They — " 

"Martians to conquer the earth!" Sir Isaac 
gasped, stupefied. 

"They have gone to Jupiter also," 
Ameena went on. "When they found we 
would not join with them, theu they said 
they would enlist help from the great 
Jovians themselves. I do not know if — " 

"Oh, my gosh!" Tubby was almost 
speechless with fright. 



"To conquer the earth!" Sir Isaac repeated. "When, Ameena? Only tell me 
when?" 

She answered quietly, but with obvious 
agitation: 

"Already they have conquered your moon. 
Your poor Selenites could offer but little 
resistance, and a Martian outpost is established there. And the Twilight army of 
Mercury is already massed in readiness on 
Mars." 

She paused; then added swiftly: 
"At the next opposition of Mars with 
your earth — only two months off they say 
it is — then the Martians and their allies 
wilt descend in hordes upon you!" 

CHAPTER IV 

IN TRUTH it was a drastic, desperate 
situation for their native earth of 
which the voyagers were thus unexpectedly informed. Even without his 
reference books, or the use of mathematics, 
Sir Isaac's well informed mind told him 
that they had no time to waste. Mars 
would reach opposition — that point in its 
orbit when it was nearest the earth — in 
just 57 days, 6 hours and 30 minutes from 
the present moment. Sir Isaac knew that. 
He also knew that if the miserable renegades of the Twilight Country of Mercury 
were allied to the Martians in an attack 
upon the earth, this attack, when it occurred, would be irresistible. And already 
the enemy had conquered the moon — occupied it — established there a hostile outpost barely 250,000 miles away! 

Sir Isaac's stern, intellectual face was pale 
as he questioned the Venus-giri more closely. Tubby, when the details of this dastardly plot began to sink into his mind, 
spluttered with indignation. 

"How dare them people attack our 
moon?" he demanded. "That ain't right. 
We never did nothing to them. What are 
we going to do about it, perfessor? We 
got to do something," 

Sir Isaac had seated himself beside 
Ameena on the fountain rim. He was 
trembling a little, and his thin lips were 
pressed tightly together, 

"Yes," he said, struggling to keep a 
semblance of composure in his voice. "Yes, 
you are right. We must do something. 
But what?" 

"That's what I said — what?" Tubby 
prompted. "Go on, perfessor." 



24 * * * Future Fiction 



He had so forgotten Ameena's gracious 
beauty in the excitement of the moment 
that his hat was now jammed on the back 
of his head, and his fat little fists were 
clenched belligerently. 

"It isn't the moon I'm worried over,'' 
Sir kaac went on musingly. "That's a 
mere detail. It's the safety of our earth itself. If they land there in any strength 
at all we'll be annihilated in a day — every 
living being on the earth ! Why with that 
Mercurian Light-ray — and with those great 
machine bodies to house the Martian Intelligence — " Sir Isaac broke off, overcome 
at the thought his words invoked. He recovered after a moment, however, and 
added to Tubby and the girl impartially: 

"I fancy you have never read my books. 
I've told all about it in them." 

Ameena shook her head; Tubby seemed 
embarrassed. 

Sir Isaac obviously was disappointed. "Oh 
well, of course here on Venus they had no 
sale. It is immaterial. , . . This attack on 
our earth is too horrible — it is unthinkable. 
It must not be." 

"No," agreed Amtena soberly. "It must 
not be. But what can we do to prevent 
it?" 

"We?'' exclaimed Sir Isaac. "You will 
help us?" 

She held out her two hands simply; and 
Tubby and Sir Isaac impulsively grasped 
them. 

"I could not let my cousins of the earth 
come to harm for lack of my help," she 
said quietly. 

Sir Isaac, sentimental by nature, was again 
overcome with emotion; Tubby pressed the 
girl's hand warmly, beaming on her. 

"That's fine, Ameena," he declared. "You 
are a regular girl, ain't you?" 

There was a brief pause. Then Ameena 
said: 

"I do not know if in Jupiter they are 
lending help to the Martians or not. But 
in the Light Country of Mercury I know 
they hate the Twilight People — these outlaw neighbors of theirs who are joining 
with the Martians. . They of the Light 
Country, perhaps, would help us." 

"The Light Country of Mercury!" Sir 
Isaac echeed. "By jove, how stupid of 
me! Of course! They, too, have the 
Light-ray. With one Light-ray we can 
fight the other!" 

"Fine," agreed Tubby, still beaming at 



Ameena, who flushed prettily under his 
openly admiring gaze. 

Sir Isaac stood up with determination. 
"Mercury is now fortunately approaching 
inferior conjunction with Venus. It is barely thirty million miles away from us at 
this present moment. Let us go to Mercury at once!" f 

"Come on!" cried Tubby enthusiastically. 
"Let's go. Let's aim to get there this 
afternoon — we can if we hurry." And 
clutching Ameena by the hand, he started 
off at a run through the giant banana grove. 
Sir Isaac following close behind. 

After a hundred yards Tubby stopped 
abruptly, almost jerking Ameena off her 
feet. 

"Say, listen, little girl — how about your 
family? Ain't your family liable to get 
scared, you runnin' out into space this way 
without sayin' nothin' to nobody?" 

Sir Isaac also seemed worried by this 
thought, but the girl smiled readily. "I 
have heard about your earth families," she 
said. "In Mercury they have them also. 
But here on Venus there is only the Slate 
and the Individual. At fourteen I was free 
from control of the State. I am my own 
mistress now." She raised her arms with 
a pretty gesture. "Even love has not come 
to me yet. 1 am free." 

Sir Isaac was relieved. "Of course! Naturally. How stupid of me. / should have 
known that on Venus — " 

"Great," said Tubby. "Come on then 
— let's get goin'." He started off again 
as fast as his fat legs would carry him. 

THEY departed from the surface of 
Venus ten minutes later, hurtling up 
through the atmosphere at a velocity that 
heated the interior of the vehicle like an 
oven'. Sir Isaac put its cooling system into 
operation at once — chemically cooled coils 
over which air was driven by electric fans 
and then circulated through the various 
rooms — after which, ignoring their guest, he 
seated himself at the instrument- room table 
and began a computation of their course 
to Mercury. 

Tubby showed Ameena over the vehicle 
with enthusiasm. He had forgotten for the 
moment the dire portent of this new journey and was like a boy on a holiday. The 
girl was intensely interested in everything, 
especially in the marvelous, ever-changing 
aspect of her own world as they slowly 
turned over and dropped away from it. 



Araund th« Unlvers* * * * 25 



"You can have a.I the upstairs to yourself," Tubby declared, with due regard for 
the conventionalities. They were standing 
then in the doorway of one of the dainty 
little chintz bedrooms. "The perfessor an' 
j II bunk downstairs. He's a real nice guy, 
the perfessor— you'll like him.'' 

"I'm sure I shall," Ameena said. Her 
eyes, glancing at Tubby sidewise, .were 
vfilcd by their heavy black lashes. She 
added softly: 

"And you, too, my friend Tubby." 

Tubby did not quite realize it then, but, 
indeed, this Venus-girl, typical of her race, 
had a distinct talent for love-making. 

When they came to the kitchen, Tubby 
was much embarrassed over the remains 
of the breakfast dishes. But Ameena proved 
herself a real housewife by immediately 
assuming charge of this department of the 
vehicle. She began washing the dishes at 
once — a curiously incongruous sight in her 
Greek-maiden robe as she bent over the 
kitchen sink ! — while Tubby stood admiringly by, watching her. 

When the kitchen and store-room were 
immaculate, Tubby and Ameena returned to 
the instrument room. The sun was shining up through the lower window; the 
vehicle was cooling off a trifle sino. leaving 
the atmosphere of Venus; they were now 
well launched into space. 

Sir Isaac, having completed his computations, greeted them triumphantly. 

' We have traveled 2,138 miles," he 
said. "I am heading directly for the sun 
now. 1 have been taking it very slowly 
until a moment ago,'' 

"Very good," Tubby agreed, with a most 
business-like air for Ameena's benefit. "But 
we got to hurry from now on if we're 
goin' to get there today," 

They sat down then to discuss the future. There was really very little to discuss, 
as a matter of fact, for Amcctia's knowledge of war conditions throughout the solar 
system was very slight. What the voyagers 
could do to protect the earth depended upon 
two factors. Had the great Jovians joined 
in this dastardly war? And would the 
Light-Country of Mercury lend its aid— its 
Light-rays and other weapons — for the 
earth's defense? 

"Well," said Tubby, "we'll know pretty 
soon. "What's the use arguin'? Ain't I 
right?" 

Sir Isaac yawned involuntarily in spite of 



their interesting argument. He looked embarrassed. 

"You're sleepy," exclaimed Tubby solicitously. He added to the girl: 

"The perfessor ain't had a wink of sleep 
since we left the earth last night. He'd 
better go take a nap," 

Sir Isaac was indeed tired out. "I must 
direct our flight," he said. "I cannot leave 
our course to—" 

"Why can't you?" Tubby demanded. "I 
ast you twenty times already to show, me 
how this here thing works. I can run it 
the same as you, if you show me how just 
once." 

IN THE face of his growing fatigue 
which would not be denied, Sir Isaac 
was forced to yield. 

"My inter-planetary vehicle operates upon 
a very simple principle," he began. "First 
you must know that the law of gravitation 
says that every body in the universe attracts every other body directly as the mass 
and inversely as the square of the distance 
between them." 

Tubby and Ameena were all attention. 
"We don't quite get you," Tubby said. 
"Directly as the mass means that if one 
body weighs 100 tons and another weighs 
10 tons, the big one will exert ten times 
the attractive force of the tittle one." 
"That is very clear," said Ameena. 
"Go on." nodded Tubby. 
"And inversely as the square of the 
distance means that when bodies are twice 
as far apart they only exert one-fourth 
the attractive force upon each other. Thus 
you see every mass of matter in the universe is attracting every other mass according to those laws. 

"Now each of the six faces of this 
vehicle— top, bottom, and the tour sides — 
is lined with a metallic plate. This very 
curious metal is found principally on Mercury — although, as I have shown in my 
books, it has been prepared by one scientist 
on earth — he who went first to the moon. 
My projectile, fired from an enormous cannon, you remember, failed to reach the 
moon, but merely encircled it." 

"I remember that other one, " Tubby exclaimed. 

Sir Isaac was pleased. "Yes. . . . That 
was where I explained my gravity screen. 
. . . Well, we are using now a device very 
much tike that, only vastly more efficient. 
You see, in this particular interplanetary 



« * ★ ★ hitur. Nctien 



vehicle I have a current something like the 
Mercurian Light-ray, and something like our 
own electricity. With it I charge any or 
all of these metallic plates both negatively 
or positively. 1 mean, I can make them 
neutral to gravity — so that gravity is cut 
off entirely as in the cast of the gravity 
screen. Or 1 can make them attractive, or 
repellent. Without any charge, you understand, they are attractive, as all matter 
is. With my negative charge they repel 
with exactly the same force as normally 
they would attract." 
"Ah," said Tubby, 

Sir Isaac warmed to his task. "Let me 
explain to you the exact result of this. 
When we were resting on the earth's surface, I cut off — only partially, for you see 
the change may be made with any rapidity 
desired — the gravity from our base. Having 
then an insufficient attraction from the earth 
to hold us there, we left its surface, flying 
off at a tangent because of the earth's rotation on its axis. . . . But I won't go into 
that. . . . Once in space, as we are now, 
I merely make one face attractive, and the 
others neutral or repellent. Thus the attractive face acts on whatever heavenly 
bodies lie in the direction, and we are 
drawn toward them. For greater speed I 
also use the repellent power of those bodies 
lying behind us. For instance, after leaving the earth, 1 used the attraction of the 
sun— only a portion of it, of course. Later, 
merely for experiment, I combined with 
that a fraction of the earth's repulsion. 
Early this morning, when we apprached 
Venus, I used her attractive power, cutting 
off the sun completely." 

Sir Isaac turned to the keyboard. It was 
quite similar to the keyboard of a very 
large typewriter — and with more keys. 
These keys were of three different colors 
—white, red and black— and all of them 
were numbered plainly. 

"These keys," said Sir Isaac, "you will 
observe are on six banks— each bank governing a different face of the vehicle. For 
instance — " He indicated the lowest row of 
keys— "this bank governs our base. And 
this, the top of the vehicle— and these are 
the sides. 

"There are, you notice, fifteen keys on 
each bank. When they are all up there 
is no action at all— the face allows any 
heavenly body to attract with its full, normal 
force. But, when 1 press down this red 
key — each bank has one, you see— then the 



face becomes neutral to gravity. The seven 
white keys give seven different intensities 
of attraction, and the seven black ones 
give seven different intensities of repulsion. A key pressed down stays down until 
you pull it up." 

"Sure," agreed Tubby. "That ain't so y 
awful complicated." 

Sir Isaac went on: 

"You will understand then chat when 
number seven white key is down, the face 
is fully attractive, just the same as it is 
with all the keys on that bank up. Do you 
follow me?" 

"Absolutely," nodded Tubby. "I doped 
that out long ago." 

"Well," said Sir Isaac, "with these ninety 
keys, working singly or together, a very 
great number of combinations can be obtained. We can go in any direction we 
choose, and at almost any velocity — at least 
1 have never been able to calculate any 
limit to the velocity if sufficient time for 
acceleration is allowed." 

"Right," agreed Tubby. "You mean we 
don't get up speed all at once — we keep 
goin' faster. That's good. . . Show us 
what's doin' now." 

"Our present course is very simple," continued Sir Isaac. "You observe five of 
the red keys are down— the top and all 
four sides of the vehicle are neutral to 
gravity. On the bank governing our base 
the first white key is down. We are being 
drawn toward the sun, pulled by oneseventh of the sun's attraction. If we 
wanted to go faster we could use more of 
the sun's attraction, or some of the repulsion of Venus. If we wanted to go 
slower, we could combine some of the 
attraction of Venus, which would act as a 
drag. By balancing the attraction ot Venus 
and that of the sun we could stop entirely. 
... I think 1 shall use another seventh 
of the sun's attraction. Watch carefully." 

Sir Isaac suited the action to the word, 
pressing down the second white key of that 
bank, and then releasing the other. 

Tubby watched closely. "That's easy 
What else?" 

For half an hour more Sir Isaac explained 
the navigation of space— with practical demonstrations, during which he made the 
heavens swing over at will in most dizzying 
fashion as he altered the vehicle's course. 
Finally Tubby announced himself satisfied, 
and competent to assume charge for a few 
hours at least. 



Around »ha Unlv*r»» * * * 27 



"You go lie down," he said. "We'll get 
you up when Ameena has lunch ready." 

Still Sir Isaac hesitated. "In half an 
hour," he explained, "I would, I think, increase our speed by using about threesevenths the repellent power of Venus." 

He indicated the changes. "Our velocity 
is steadily increasing as we approach the 
sun — but we must go still falter. We Are 
in a hurry." 

As he turned to leave the room, his face 
clouded with sudden anxiety. 

"We shall shortly attain a velocity of 
nearly seven million miles an hour," he said 
soberly. "I — I hope fffi not taking too 
great chances. It's so crowded in here 
with meteorites. We've been marvelously 
lucky so far." 

"Go on to bed," commanded Tubby. "1 
ain't goin" to let us hit nothin'. I'll watch. 
If I see anything comin' I'll thump them 
keys, or yell for you." 

Most reluctantly, Sir Isaac gave up command; and, with Ameena's gracious permission, he retired to one of the upper 
bedrooms. 

IT REALLY was Ameena's fault, though 
Tubby was too much of a gentleman 
ever to say so — for if Ameena had not 
called htm into the kitchen it could never 
have happened. She had gone to prepare 
the noonday meal, and Tubby reluctantly 
had parted with her and maintained his 
post at the lower window of the instrument room. The sun shone up at him intolerably bright. 

Nothing showed in the sky below, except that huge, flaming red ball slowly but 
steadily increasing in size — the sun as it appeared through the smoked glass — and 
those glorious constellations of stars hanging immovable in the black firmament. In 
thirty minutes exactly, by the instrument 
room's chronometer — Tubby had added to 
their velocity three-sevenths the repellent 
power of Venus. This world they were so 
rapidly leaving hung directly overhead — an 
enormous silver-blue sphere now completely illuminated by the sun, but visible only 
from the upper windows of the vehicle. 

It was just after he had put on the additional speed that Ameena had called Tubby 
into the kitchen to ask him how to open 
a can of tomatoes for canned goods were 
unknown on Venus. Tubby, once in the 
kitchen, had forgotten to return to his post. 
He was sitting in the doorway of the ad


joining store-room, chatting vivaciously with 
Ameena, when suddenly he became aware 
of an unusual light coming diagonally in 
through the side window. 

Leaping up, he saw in the black, starry 
void a huge silver disc — a thousand moans 
in size! It was below them, off to one 
side. It was so close he could see barren, 
rocky mountains on it; and it was turning 
over like a ball thrown into the air. Even 
while he gazed, with his heart in his throat, 
it doubled in size, so stupendously fast was 
it approaching — and already exerting its attractive power upon the base of the vehicle, 
it was altering the vehicle's course so that 
the heavens began shifting sidewise. 

With a startled cry, Tubby dashed into 
the instrument room, Ameena following 
him with the can of tomatoes still in her 
hand. Through the instrument room floor 
window the heavenly derelict, again doubled 
in size, shone directly beneath them. They 
were rushing into it, drawn irresistibly by 
its attraction! 

Tubby took one horrified glance, and 
then, jumping to the keyboard, he depressed 
half a dozen of the keys indiscriminately. 
There was no answering vibration perceptible within the vehicle; but outside its 
windows the heavens were whirling! The 
sun, Venus, the threatening derelict globe, 
a myriad of stars— all flashed past the windows so rapidly they were distorted into 
mere blurs of light. The vehicle, beyond 
control, was spinning on its axis and falling abandoned in space! 

Tubby and Ameena, standing stock-still 
on that solid, apparently motionless floor, 
were giddy at the sight. 

"Oh-h, perfessor!" Tubby bellowed. 
"Help, perfessor! Come here quick! We're 
fallin' to pieces!" 

Sir Isaac came clattering downstairs, his 
apparel awry, his face still dazed by sleep. 
With one quick glance at the windows he 
hastened to the keyboard. Tubby and the 
girl stood anxiously beside him. 

"Somethin' w-went wrong," Tubby chattered. "There's a b-big world right outside. We war r-runnin' into it." 

The vehicle, spinning like a top, gave 
Sir Isaac no opportunity of locating the 
correct keys to depress- He first threw them 
all into neutral; then tried, tentatively, 
throwing the attraction into the base of 
the vehicle for that instant when it was 
facing Venus, and releasing it an instant 
later. 



28 * ★ * Future Fiction 



For five minutes he worked, his face pale 
with anxiety. "Am I stopping our rotalion?" he asked. "Are we slowing down?" 

Tubby forced bis gaze to the window and 
saw that the heavens were spinning with 
a little less rapidity. 

"Go on," he encouraged. "You're doing' 
fine." 

"1 don't dare leave everything in neutral," Sir Isaac muttered to himself. His 
gaze was glued to the floor window; the 
perspiration was rolling down his face. 
"Inertia would carry us forward on our 
former course without any force of attraction. We could not avoid collision. Perhaps we cannot anyway." 

"Don't say that," pleaded Tubby. "Go 
on. You're doin' fine." 

Ameena now crouched on the floor, gripping a chair leg to steady herself; and 
peered intently downward through the window. At each instant when Venus came 
into view she called to Sir Isaac, and he 
promptly depressed the necessary key, releasing it once the planet had swung past. 
With Ameena 's help he did this more accurately than before, and gradually the 
vehicle's axial rotation was decreased. 
Finally they caught Venus and held it directly beneath them. 

Sir Isaac stood up, trembling. 'Thank 
God !" he exclaimed. "We are headed 
the other way. The danger is past." 

"T^TOW that the excitement was over, 
Tubby felt extraordinarily weak in 
the knees. He sat down in a chair, panting. 

"What was it, perfessor? What happened ?" 

"An asteroid," Sir Isaac answered, smiling 
weakly. "A minor planet, unknown to astronomers. / knew its orbit lay in here, but 
I had calculated the asteroid itself to be 
on the other side the sun this month— fool 
that I was!" 

A moment later, carefully, Sir Isaac resumed their former course. The asteroid 
had disappeared; the sun now shone up 
from beneath them as before. 

"How close did we come to it?" Tubby 
asked, when they had all three recovered 
calmness. "I guess we didn't miss it by 
more'n a mile." 

"We passed it about 4000 miles away!" 
Sir Isaac answered.. 

Tubby w as amazed . "Fou r thousan ' 
miles! An' I thought we nearly hit it!" 



Sir Isaac smiled. "1 should not care to 
come any closer. Our velocity at that moment was 7,200,000 miles an hour. That 
is exactly 2000 miles per second. In just 
two seconds more we would have collided 
with that asteroid and been annihilated! 
That's why I said we were crowded in 
here. It is very dangerous to approach 
within a millfon miles of anything," 

They had lunch shortly after that, Sir 
Isaac insisting on having his served on the 
store-room floor so that he might keep 
close watch through the lower window 
there, for cornels, and even infinitesimal 
meteorites, as well as asteroids, were to be 
avoided. As Sir Isaac pointed out, to collide with even a hundred-ton meteorite at 
a velocity of 2000 miles a second would 
be a fatal catastrophe! 

After lunch, over their cigars, while 
Ameena straightened the kitchen, Sir Isaac 
told Tubby about Mercury, which he had 
hoped they would reach about five o'clock 
that afternoon, but which now they might 
not arrive at before six or seven o'clock. 

"Mercury," Sir Isaac explained in his 
slightly pedantic way, "is the smallest of the 
major planets, and the closest to the sun. 
Its orbit lies at a mean distance of 36,000,000 miles." 

"An' how far did you say Venus was 
from the sun?" Tubby asked. He was becoming avid for astronomical mathematics. 

"Sixty-seven million," answered Sir 
Isaac. 

"An' the earth is 93,000,000. An' the 
moon a quarter of a million from the 
earth." Tubby was memorizing the figures. 
"All right. Go on." 

"Mercury makes one revolution around 
the sun every eighty-eight days. That is 
the length of its year. It is so close to 
the sun that the enormous solar attraction 
holds one side of it always facing that 
way. Hence its axial rotation is also once 
in eight-eight days, and it has no day or 
night — always daylight, twilight or darkness according to what portion of its surface you are on." 

"What part are we goin' to?" Tubby 
demanded. 

"To the Light Country, where there is 
daylight — but it is not too intense. Heavy 
clouds and a dense atmosphere make life 
possible on Mercury, even though it is so 
near the sun. In the Fire Country, which 
directly faces the sun, the planet is practically uninhabited. We wil! land at the 



Arsund rh« Univers. * ★ ★ 2? 



Great City— the largest center of population 
on the planet. It is the Light Country 
people we want to enlist as allies, against 
their outlaw neighbors, the Twilight people and those horrible Martians." 

This brought them again into a discussion of the Martian plot which they were 
determined at all hazards to frustrate. 
Ameena joined them shortly alter that, and 
for hours they argued, without however, 
reaching any new conclusions. 

Sir Isaac was momentarily growing more 
sleepy; and finally, when Tubby had 
solemnly promised that for two hours he 
would not leave the window under any 
circumstances and would call out at once if 
anything unusual came into sight. Sir Isaac 
again retired. They were then about 18,000,000 miles from Mercury, which shone 
as the brightest star in the lower hemisphere 
of the firmament, visually quite near the 
sun s outer limb. And so great was their 
haste that again Sir Isaac had resumed almost their former speed. 

During these two hours, Tubby and 
Ameena sat on the floor by the window, 
exchanging accounts of their respective 
worlds. 

"I'm strong for Venus," Tubby declared 
once. "When we get these Martians put 
in their place, an' get our moon back, 1 
believe I'll come to Venus to live." 

The girl agreed that would be very nice 
indeed; and Tubby; intoxicated by her 
beauty and the fragrance of her person, 
suddenly laid his hand over hers, 

"Ain't this romantic though — shootin' 
around the sky like this? Sing somethin', 
Ameena. Where's that harp you had?" 

Ameena played on her lyre, and sang; 
Tubby listened, and complimented her, and 
urged her constantly for more. Thus absorbed in their youth, the two sat oblivious 
to the vehicle's course, while the sun blazed 
larger and hotter, and Mercury grew from 
a gleaming star to a silver crescent larger 
and larger until, like Venus of the morning, it stretched an enormous arch in the 
blackness, with the sun to one side behind 

Fortunately for the safety of these bold 
voyagers (and indeed tor the future existence of earth itself, which depended upon 
the success of their mission) , no other 
uncharted wanderers of space chanced to 
be in the vehicle's path during those two 
hours. 

It was nearly half-past four when Tubby 



came to himself. A glance through the 
window reassured him that all was well, 
and, reluctantly tearing himself from 
Ameena's presence, he went upstairs to 
awaken Sir Isaac. 

They entered the atmosphere of Mercury 
at 6:57 P. M. ( shortly after a hurried supper. Falling diagonally over the Dark 
Country, they came into the Twilight Zone. 
A few moments later the Narrow Sea lay 
beneath them, and at last they sighted the 
Great City at the edge of the Light Country. 

It was 7:29 P. M. exactly when, with 
only a slight jar, they landed upon the 
surface of Mercury. 

CHAPTER V 

HOW selfish is human nature the 
Universe over! After a voyage of 
some thirty million miles, the 
travelers might quite as well have remained on Venus! The Mercurians of the 
Light Country were sorry — indeed, they 
greatly deplored the action of their neighbors ot the Twilight Country in joining 
with the war lords of Mars against the 
unoffending Earth— but they would do 
nothing about it ! How simple all human 
problems become, when viewed in that detached spirit! How human nature does repeat itself, wherever in the Universe it 
may be found! 

The audience with the ruler of the Light 
Country took place at 9:49 p. m., Earth's 
Eastern Time — shortly after the First Meal, 
as time chanced to be on Mercury. 

Tubby, Sir Isaac and Ameena gravely 
faced the white-haired King and his aged 
dignitaries who were sealed around a huge 
table in the Audience Room. The place 
was crowded ; its gallery above, open to 
the public, was thronged with those curious 
to see these strange visitors from another 
world. 

Sir Isaac, who, fortunately, was fairly 
fluent in the Mercurian tongue, explained 
their mission. He was earnest and elo
3uent. And when he had finished having 
one his very best, the King, after a 
whispered conference with his councillors, 
mads bis speech of condolence! 

Sir Isaac was aghast. He translated the 
King's words briefly to Tubby and Ameena. 

"How dare they?" the girl cried. "It 
is inhuman. Tell him / say — " 

Sir Isaac interrupted her, in a whisper, 
for the Audience Room was intensely <juiet. 



30 ★ * ★ Future Fiction 



"Your position is not so impregnable, 
Ameena. Your own people refused to mix 
up in this interplanetary war. How can 
you expect — " 

"My people have no weapons of war," 
she defended passionately. "They know 
nothing of fighting. Never has a voice 
been raised in anger in my world! What 
could they do to help, if they would?" 

"You let her alone," Tubby whispered 
vehemently to Sir Isaac. "She's got the 
right idea. You tell this King he can 
help. Ain't he got that Light-ray? Make 
him lend it to us." 

Sir Isaac then requested the use of the 
Light-ray — a sufficient amount of its apparatus which they could set up on Earth 
for defense. 

At this a stir ran over the assemblage. 
The King's guards, squat little men in 
leather jackets and wide, knee-ltngth leather 
trousers, shouted for order. Several young 
girls flapped their long red-feathered wings 
—only the women had wings, it seemed — 
and one fluttered across the room near the 
ceiling, until commanded by the guards to 
cease. 

The King looked exceedingly grave at 
Sir Isaac's request; his whispered conference with his advisors lasted several minutes. At last he shook his head. 

Sir Isaac translated his answer. "He says 
he is sorry. They could hot trust their 
Light-ray to another world. He claims 
the Earthmen would then learn its secret 
and some day might use it against Mercury." 

"He's a fool!" shouted Tubby angrily. 
"Ain't they got it on Mars already? An* 
maybe on Jupiter?" He turned toward 
the King. "Say, listen here you — " 

Thirty feet separated Tubby from the 
King at that moment, but he encompassed 
it on one bound, for on so small a planet 
as Mercury even Tubby weighed hardly 
sixty pounds! He landed beside the King's 
chair. 

"Say, listen here you — " 

As Tubby's fat little body went hurling 
through the air pandemonium broke out 
in the room. Girls were fluttering about; 
the guards were pushing and shoving the 
crowd. One or two of the older women 
fainted. A little boy broke into terrified 
screaming. 

The King, finding lie was not hurt, 
ignored Tubby's fist in his face, and with 
rare presence of mind rose to his feet, 



shouting reassuringly to the assemblage. 
Three of the nearest guards, their faces 
dark with anger, were making for Tubby 
belligerently; one of the aged councillors 
put a restraining hand on his shoulder, 
but he shook it off. 
Sir Isaac bawled: 

"Come back here, you fool! They'll kill 
us all!" 

It was Ameena s pleading voice, rising 
above the tumult, that brought Tubby to 
his senses. He stopped abruptly his abuse 
of the King, and with another prodigious 
bound leaped over the heads of the intervening people, and landed back beside his 
friends. 

"Come on, let's get out of here," he 
gasped. "This here Mercury ain't goin' to 
get us nothin'." 

Sir Isaac, with true diplomatic suavity, 
waited until order was restored. He then 
paid his respects to the King, apologizing 
for Tubby's conduct, and stating with curt 
dignity that the Earth would solve its own 
problems and look after its own safety in 
its own way. After which, escorted by the 
King's guards to protect them from the 
incensed populace, the three visitors coldly 
departed. 

As they left the room, a young girl — . 
with huge wings and a sneering, unpleasant 
face, so different from the beauty of the 
other girls in the room as to mark her of 
another nation— climbed from the balcony 
into one of its outer windows. Poised 
there a moment, she launched herself into 
the air, spread her wings and flew away. 

Sir Isaac, Tubby and Ameena were on 
the palace steps when this girl flew past, 
just over their heads. She shouted something venomously at Sir Isaac, and rising 
higher, flew rapidly toward the Narrow Sea 
and the Twilight Country. 

Sir Isaac did not mention this incident 
then- to Tubby or Ameena, who had not 
noticed the girl. Indeed, he forgot it in 
a moment, though afterward it was brought 
most vividly and unpleasantly to his memory. 

IT WAS 1 1 :45 p. m., Earth time, when 
the vehicle was again launched into 
space. When they had passed over the 
Dark Country and had left the atmosphere 
of Mercury— headed this time away from 
the Sun, back toward yenus and the Earth 
— the three inter- planetary adventurers sat 
down quiet ly in the instrument room to 



Around the Unlvtrtt * * * 11 



determine what should now be done, in the 
face of this unexpected disappointment. 

"An' here we went an' wasted all day," 
Tubby moaned. "We could have been almost anywhere while we was foolin' around 
here with them selfish, pin-headed — " He 
trailed off into abuse of the Mcrcurians. 

Sir Isaac, more practical, summed up 
the situation as it now stood. 

"We have, of course, no means of knowing whether the inhabitants of Jupiter are 
against us or not," he said. "But at all 
events, at the next opposition of Mars with 
the Earth we may expect their attack." 

"Less'n two months from now," Tubby 
put in gloomily. 

"In fifty-six days and eighteen hours," Sir 
Isaac corrected. "I assume their method 
will be to mass their army first Lpon the 
Moon. From that point of vantage, always 
close to the Earth, they can launch their 
successive attacks at will." 

"That is what they will do," Ameena 
cried. "From the Moon of course." 

Tubby frowned. "What will they do to 
the Earth? You say they're goin' to kill 
us, but you ain't never said how." 

Then Sir Isaac, his voice trembling in 
spite of himself, explained the horribly de 
structive power of the Mercurian Lightray — that beam of red-green light-fire, 
which from giant projectors ignited everything within its path over a distance of 
fifteen miles! And the tremendous warmachines of the Martians — giant mechanical 
bodies housing the Martian directing brain 
in their tops — mechanisms with metal legs 
like steel girders fifty feet long running 
rampant over the Earth! 

"That's enough!" interposed Tubby 
hastily, mopping his face. "Don't tell us 
nothin' more like that. My idea is we 
better not let 'em land on the Earth." 

"Quite right," agreed Sir Isaac. "But 
how to prevent them? That's just the 
question." 

It was the question indeed, and for another hour they wrestled with it. 

"Let's eat," Tubby suddenly announced. 
"We can do that if we can't do nothin' 
else." 

Tubby now found himself, after this 
episode on Mercury, somehow more in the 
nature of leader of their enterprise than 
he had been before. 

"We're done with Mercury," he said, 
when over the midnight supper the argument was resumed. 



Sir Isaac nodded. "We are, most certainly." 

"An' Venus ain't no use to us." 

"No," Ameena put in. "My world ii 
powerless." 

Tubby went on with merciless logic: 

"If we go home an" wait, we're licked 
sure." 

"Yes," agreed Sir Isaac, "that will mean 
absolute annihilation, even though the 
world's armies and navies were massed to 
our defense." 

"An' we can't land on the Moon," Tubby 
persisted. "They'd murder us in thirty 
seconds — on our own Moon too." The 
pathos of this struck Tubby with sudden 
force. "Ain't that actually criminal? Can't 
land on our own Moon!" 

"What are we going to do?" Ameena 
asked hopelessly. "Oh, dear, we cannot 
seem to land anywhere." 

"How about Jupiter?" Tubby demanded. 
"That's a big place, ain't it?" 

"The largest planet of the solar system," 
said Sir Isaac. "But whether they are 
friends or enemies — " 

"Well let's go see an' find out !" 

T he logic as well as the daring of this 
simple suggestion was immediately apparent. 

"If them Jupiter people ain't enemies 
they can help us easy," Tubby added. "Let's 
take a chance anyway." 

There seemed nothing else to do. The 
Earth was powerless to defend itself. Help 
must be obtained — from whate\er source — 
at all costs. 

And so it was decided. 

Back in the instrument room Sir Isaac 
computed their course to Jupiter. A little 
later, for it was then nearly three o'clock 
in the morning, Ameena retired to the 
upper floor. 

The vehicle had now reached a point in 
space almost midway between Mercury and 
Venus. Tubby suddenly remembering the 
asteroid with which they had so nearly 
collided that afternoon, peered anxiously 
down through the lower window, to the 
tiny blue-white disc among the stars that 
was Venus. 

Sir Isaac, hearing Tubby's muttered exclamation concerning the asteroid, laughed 
reassuringly. 

"It has passed on in its orbit," he said. 
"Rushing around the Sun in a most eccentric ellipse, it is now many million miles 
from here. ' 



32 * * * Future Fiction 



Having been the one to suggest their future course of action, Tubby was feeling 
his growing responsibility. He felt simultaneously his need for more specific astronomical information than he now possessed. 

(<WF I'm goin' to boss this expedition," 
H he announced, "I got to have all the 
dope in my head." 

Sir Isaac had frequently been tracing their 
flight upon a celestial map of his own 
making, and Tubby now demanded to see 
it. Sir Isaac produced it readily, from the 
table drawer, and clearing a space on the 
table, unrolled it before them. By the 
light of an electric bulb — for the side and 
floor windows admitted nothing but starlight — Tubby examined it. 

"This is merely a rough drawing I made 
myself," Sir Isaac explained apologetically. 
"It shows the solar system — though not at 
all to scale — and gives a rough idea of 
the present positions of the planets, and 
our course up to date." 

This is what Tubby saw: 

"You notice," said Sir Isaac, indicating 
with his pencil point, "that the Sun occupies the center of the solar system, and 
the planets revolve around it in concentric 
lings which are called orbits. These are 
not circles, but are ellipses — so that the 
Sun is not exactly in the center, but a 
little off to one side — in one of the foci 
of the ellipse, to be technical. Thus the 
orbit is somewhat nearer the Sun in one 
portion and further away in another. The 
amount of this difference is called the eccentricity of the orbit." 

Tubby nodded his comprehension ; Sir 
Jsaac went on: 

"Fortunately, as you observe, all the 
planets chance to be on this side the Sun 
just now. ... I must alter our course toward Jupiter. We are now headed for 
Venus, but Jupiter, you see, is considerably 
further along in his orbit." 

Sir Isaac went to the keyboard, and a 
moment later Venus, as seen through the 
lower windows, swung sidewise out of 
sight. A new region of gleaming stars — 
none of unusual brightness — came into 
view. 

"I am heading well past Jupiter," said 
Sir lssac. "We are falling diagonally sidewise now, forward by the combined attraction of all those stars, and sidewise by the 
repulsion of Venus and the Earth and ill 



the stars behind them. This will bring us 
into a direct line drawn from the Sun to 
Jupiter — and then I can make better speed 
by using the Sun's repulsion and Jupiter's 
attraction combined, which I cannot do 
now." 

By careful consultation of the chart, 
Tubby finally got (his clear. 

"It's a longer route," Sir Isaac added. 
"But I think it will prove quicker. . , . 
You'd better lie down, Tubby — you're tired 
out." 

Tubby was indeed terribly sieepy — but, 
unselfishly he realized that Sir Isaac must 
be also. 

"I'll watch," he said. "You take a nap." 

But Sir Isaac wished to get the vehicle 
upon its direct course first. 

"We'll be in line with the Sun and 
Jupiter in about two hours," he explained, 
"I'll call you then. From then on we 
will hold the same course all the way." 

Tubby yielded, and started upstairs. 
Then, remembering Ameena, he went into 
the store room instead, and with the cushions from one of the chairs of the instrument room for pillows, stretched out 
on the floor and went to sleep promptly. 
S^i2p^j??^~ * * * - ' ' . : 

"Wake up," said Sir Isaac, shaking him. 
"It's seven forty — you've been asleep nearly four hours." 

Tubby rubbed his eyes, and clambered 
to his feet. "What's doin?' Anything new? 
Where are we?" 

"We're on our direct course to Jupiter," 
Sir Isaac answered. He had shaved and 
washed. His hair was slicked back and he 
was smoking a cigar; but his face was 
hazard and he looked tired out. 

"You can take charge now," he added. 
"I must get some sleep, if only for a few 
hours." 

Tubby sat alone on a cushion at the floor 
window of the instrument room. The 
Sun, from which they were now receding, 
as Sir Isaac had told him, at a velocity 
of 15^2 minion miles an hour, was blazing high over the roof of the vehicle, and 
thus was invisible from the starlit room 
downstairs. Through the floor window 
Tubby could see nothing but gleaming 
silver stars. One of them, he could not 
distinguish which, was Jupiter. 

Tubby whistled to keep himself awake. 
After an interval he looked at the chronometer. It was 8:20 A. M. Why didn't 
Ameena wake up? Tubby was Jooesome 



Around +ht Unlvsrs* * * * 2) 



and depressed. A little later he went into 
the kitchen and made himself a cup of 
coffee. Again he wished fervently Ameena 
would come down and join him. Should 
he wake her up? Wasn't it time for breakfast? Wouldn't she even come down? 

For another hour he wandered disconsolately about the lower rooms, glancing at 
intervals through the floor windows to make 
sure no derelicts were in sight. Remembering Sir Isaac's jaunty appearance, he 
shaved and washed — fortunately having had 
the forethought, the night before, to rescue 
his razor from the bedroom upstairs. 

He had about decided in desperation to 
awaken the girl, when, on an impulse he 
climbed into the little dome on the roof 
where Sir Isaac had mounted a small telescope. A moment later he was clattering 
down through the vehicle, bellowing loudly for Sir Isaac and Ameena. 

"Hey, perfessor! Ameena! Oh, Ameena! 
Get up, quick! There's somethin' follerin' 
us!" 

Sir Isaac came bounding upstairs from 
the storeroom, meeting Tubby in the upper 
hallway. From one of the bedrooms came 
Ameena's sleepy voice: 

"What is it? Musi I get up?" 

Together the two men rushed up into 
the little observatory. Another vehicle, 
twice as large as their own and somewhat 
different in shape, hovered almost directly 
above them, showing as a dark spot in 
the firmament and edged with silver from 
the Sun's rays behind it. 

"That Mercurian girl!" Sir Isaac gasped, 
with sudden memory. "She flew to the 
Twilight Country! She said she was going 
to have revenge!" 

They were indeed being followed! This 
pursuing enemy was at that moment hardly 
more than five million miles away, and 
was overtaking than rapidly! 

CHAPTER VI 

SIR Isaac dashed back to the instrument room three steps at a time, 
with Tubby at his heels. Ameena 
came from her room and followed them. 

"What is it?" the girl demanded. "Is 
something wrong?" 

Tubby called back over his shoulder: 
"Them Mercuriaus is after us. Right 
overhead — comin' fast. Come on down — 
we got to do somethin'." 

Sir Isaac rushed to the keyboard. 



"Switch our course," Tubby suggested. 
"Let's see if they can turn when we do. 
Or how about goin' faster? Can we go 
faster?" 

"Wait," commanded Sir Isaac. He depressed two keys — a black one on one bank 
and a white one on another — and raised 
the ones which had been down. Then ha 
dashed away upstairs again. 

Tubby had no more than time to compliment Ameena on her appearance — she was 
dressed quite as on the day before, but she 
was flushed with excitement and her eyes 
sparkled, so that she was more beautiful 
than ever— when Sir Isaac was back. He 
sank into a chair and smiled at them 
weakly. 

"That danger's past, for the moment. 
We have left them out of sight behind us." 

"So quick?" exclaimed Tubby. "Out of 
sight already? We must be goin' some." 

Ameena looked her relief. Sir Isaac made 
some further adjustments of the keys. 

"I've just slowed us up again," he said. 
"I would not dare go as fast as we would 
very soon have been going." 

"Well, how fast are we goin' the way 
you got it now?" Tubby persisted. 

"About 28 million miles an hour," stated 
Sir Isaac. "Of course I haven't computed 
it yet — but I judge we shall shortly attain that velocity. I am now using sixsevenths of the Sun's repulsion with everything else in neutral. Our rate of speed 
depends very largely on the length of 
time allowed for acceleration, you understand." 

He gazed down through the lower window anxiously, and muttered: 

"Heavens, I do hope nothing gets in our 
way!" 

"Maybe we better slow up," Tubby suggested. It did seem a trifle fast to be going, when he came to think of it On 
the other hand such a speed was not in 
the least beyond his understanding now. 
Sic Isaac had already explained something 
of the laws governing freely falling bodies; 
and Tubby had recalled that old stunt of 
dropping a baseball from the top of the 
Washington Monument, which fell so fast 
even in that little distance that the professional catchers could hardly catch it. 
The vehicle was more than a freely falling 
body— it was heing pushed downward. 

Sir Isaac shook his head at Tubby's suggestion that they slow up a bit. 

"We loust chance the danger," he said, 



34 * * ★ Future Fiction 



though not without considerable perturbation. "That Mercurian vehicle may be 
able to attain this speed also— or even a 
greater one. We cannot tell." 

"Suppose they should overtake us," 
Ameena speculated. "They could not 
board us — or collide with us without death 
to themselves?" 

"They might have some means of destroying us — / do not know," Sir Isaac replied. "Though possibly the Light-ray is 
useless in Space." His voice became meditative. "Curious I never thought of that 
before. 1 suppose it wouid be inoperative." 

"t think," said Ameena, "that they are 
merely trying to reach Jupiter before us. 
Perhaps they want to warn the Jovians 
against us. To persuade them not to — " 

"Meaning — " Sir Isaac interrupted eagerly. The poor man's mind was working 
so constantly that he seemed grateful to 
anyone who would do his thinking for 
him. 

"Meaning that I think it shows that on 
Jupiter the rulers are at least neutral." 

"Sure," exclaimed Tubby. "You're some 
clever girl, Ameena. If them Jovians was 
our enemies, these Mercurian guys wouldn t 
bother chasin' us there. They'd know we'd 
get walloped anyhow. You got the right 
idea, kid." He gazed admiringly at 
Ameena, and the Venus-girl blushed 
charmingly. 

This conclusion, thus happily arrived at, 
cheered the three adventurers immeasurably. They now felt tolerably certain of 
at least a square deal on Jupiter — if only 
they could arrive there ahead of the enemy. 

"Well, that bein' settled," declared Tubby, rising. "Let's eat." 

On this flight outward from the Sun 
they had crossed the orbit of Venus about 
6.30 A. M., while Tubby and Ameena 
were asleep — though this course to Jupiter 
took them many million miles ahead of 
Venus' position in her obit. This Tubby 
and Ameena readily understood by another 
glance at Sir Isaac's drawing, which they 
consulted soon after breakfast. 

About 8.15 A. M., while Tubby had 
been on watch alone, they had crossed the 
orbit of the Earth — though nearly twice 
as far then from the Earth as they had 
been from Venus. 

"Mars revolves around the Sun at a 
mean distance of 141, 701,000 miles," said 
Sir Isaac, some little time after breakfast. 
"We should have intersected his orbit 



about 10.40 A. M. — that was when we 
were closest to him." 

"An' you didn't tell us!" cried Tubby 
reprovingly. "I want to get ft look it 
that — that murderin' villain." 

It was then about ten minutes of eleven. 
Mars, to which they had passed comparatively close, still showed as a half-lighted, 
circular, reddish disc. Its tracings of fine 
intersecting lints — the "canals" — were quite 
distinguishable. 

Even at the enormous velocity the vehicle 
had now attained, all the heavenly bodies 
hung apparently motionless in the firmament — except Mars, which because of its 
nearness, seemed slowly moving upwards 
as the vehicle dropped past it. 

Tubby, standing at the side window, 
shook his fist at (he disturber of the peace 
of the Solar System. 

"We'll fix you yet — you — " 

Ameena laughingly pulled him away. 

"Is Mars as large as my Venus?" she 
asked Sir Isaac. "Or your Earth?" 

"The diameter of Mars is 4,316 miles," 
said Sir Isaac. "The Earth is 7,917 and 
Venus 7,629." 

"Only a little guy!" Tubby was contemptuous. "That's the way with them 
little fellers — Mercury too — always lookin' 
for a scrap." 

Sir Isaac went on; 

"Mars revolves around the Sun once in 
a little less than 687 days. That is 
the length of his year. His orbital speed 
is 15 miles per second. He is ahead of 
the Earth now in his orbit; but the Earth 
travels forward at the rate of l8 l / 2 miles 
per second. Thus you see, the Earth is 
overhauling Mars— and when they are both 
in line with the Sun, that will be opposition. That's their closest point to each 
other until the Earth comes around again 
— and that's when the Martians will attack." 

Sir Isaac, because of one threatened catastrophe or another, had had so far very little 
sleep since leaving the Earth two days before. About half past eleven that morning 
Tubby and Ameena sent him to bed again. 

"Don't let me sleep more than two hours 
at the most," he said anxiously. "There 
are thousands of Minor Planets in here between Mars and Jupiter." 

"Shucks," disclaimed Tubby. "That don't 
make no difference. Ain't / on guard?" 

It was a magnificent chance for sarcasm, 
but the sterling character of Sir Isaac forbade such weakness. All he said was: 



Around the Universe * * * 35 



"Our velocity of 28,000,000 miles mi 
hour would be sufficient to carry us from 
Earth to Venus, or from Venus to Mercury 
in a little over sixty minutes! I don't 
want you to forget how fast we are falling now." 

With which admonition he retired. 

It was a long, tiresome, comparatively 
uneventful day — at least it would have been, 
if Tubby had not had Ameena's companionship. She sang to him again; and 
with his somewhat raucous tenor voice they 
contrived "Inter-planetary duets" as Sir 
Isaac jocularly called them. When they 
had tired of music they climbed into the 
dome to make sure their pursuers had not 
again come into sight. The overhead sky, 
out of which they .were falling, showed 
nothing unusual. Mars — well above them 
now — had dwindled to a small, reddish 
star; the Earth, Venus and Mercury were 
indistinguishable among the mass of" other 
glittering worlds. 

"Look at the Sun," said Tubby. He 
pulled Ameena toward him. He had indeed, progressed to where his arm was 
almost constantly about her, which, since 
youth and love are the same the Universe 
Over, Ameena accepted as quite reasonable and natural. 

"Ain't the Sun gettin' little?" Tubby 
added. 

The orb of day had dwindled to half its 
apparent size as viewed from Earth. The 
vehicle too, was growing hourly colder. 
Ameena shivered a little. 

"Come on down," said Tubby solicitiously. "We'll have to get the perfessor to 
heat the place up more— an' get you dressed 
warmer." His appreciative glance swept 
Ameena's dainty figure. "I'll see what I 
can dig you up — right after lunch. Come 
on down where it's warmer— let's play 
cards." 

EXPLAINING to the girl the intricacies of the fifty-two different cards 
of the deck took nearly another hour, after 
which Tubby 's stomach peremptorily informed him that it was time for lunch. 
He swept up the cards, and with sudden 
ihought gazed anxiously down through the 
lower window to see if they were about 
to collide with anything. Jupiter had 
grown to a marvelously brilliant star; beyond that, everything was as before. 

"You go fix up somethin' to eat," he 



said to the girl. "I'll call the perfessor 
— he's asleep long enough anyway." 

Sir Isaac came down shortly, dressed in 
a warm-looking tweed suit with golf trousers. Glancing at the chronometer, he immediately plunged into an intricate mathematical calculation. 

"Our velocity since 9-30 this morning 
has averaged just 28,502,122 miles an 
hour," he announced a little later. "My 
guess was right." 

"Good," said Tubby. "Come on into 
the dinin' room. Lunch is ready." 

After lunch Tubby himself dressed more 
warmly — in a Norfolk jacket golf suit and 
heavy grey flannel shirt, an outfit that was 
extremely becoming. He then sent Ameena 
upstairs, magnanimously offering her anything and everything in the way of apparel she could find. She returned a few 
moments later, and stood shyly awaiting 
his approval. She had donned a heavy 
pair of golf stockings and rubber-soled 
shoes which miraculously were .Imost small 
enough for her. And over her knee-length 
white dress she was wearing a natty-looking man's overcoat which almost swept thcground. Her hair was now piled on her 
head, with a huge, red-silk handkerchief 
bound around it. 

Even Sir Isaac glanced up from his figures long enough to admire her appearance. She looked indeed, like a radiantly 
beautiful little Earth-girl, on her way to 
the beach for a swim. 

"Fine," declared Tubby. "Keep that 
coat buttoned up an' you'll be nice an* 
warm.'' 

They were now — it was about 2.30 P. M. 
— more than half-way in distance from 
Mercury to Jupiter, Sir Isaac announced. 

"Tell us somethin' about Jupiter," said 
Ameena, sitting down beside Tubby and 
giving him her little hand to hold. "You 
said it was a very big Planet. ' 

"Its mean diameter is 87,380 miles," 
Sir Isaac answered. "Its volume is 1.390 
times greater than the Earth !" 

"Some big planet," Tubby commented. 

Sir Isaac added: 

"And it makes one revolution around the 
sun in 4332.5 days. Thus its year is equal 
to 11 years, 314.9 days on Earth." 

"My goodness," said Tubby. 

"But Jupiter's day is only about 9 hours 
and 56 seconds long. That is because it 
rotates on its axis so very swiftly." 

Tubby interjected. 



34 * * * Future Fiction 



"This here Jupiter's a re-Wcjri-able 
Planet, ain't it?" 

"Go on," said Ameena. "Tell us more." 

Sir Isaac seemed embarrassed. "Well to 
tell you the truth," he said hesitantly, "I 
don't really know very much about Jupiter. 
You see I've never really had occasion, uti 
to now, to — " 

"Right," interrupted Tubby. He had no 
wish to be hard on his friend, especially 
before a girl. "What's the difference? 
We'll soon be there an' see it for ourselves. . . . When do we land, pcrfessor?" 

Sir Isaac looked worried again. 

"At our present velocity I calculate we 
should enter the Jovian atmosphere about 
10.15 P. M. tonight, but — " 

"Very good, indeed, perfessor." 

"But I dare not maintain this velocity," 
Sir Isaac finished. 

"Why not? Ain't we in a hurry?" 

"We are in a hurry certainly," Sir Isaac 
conceded. "But, as you know, the more 
haste the less speed sometimes. We are 
now in the region or Minor Planets. More 
than eight hundred or these little worlds 
have been discovered and listed, even by 
those inefficient astronomers of Earth. / 
have never given the subject much attention—except in the case of 'Hector Servadac' — and in that story — " 

''We ain't seen no Minor Planets yet,'' 
Tubby hastily interrupted. 

Sir Isaac drew him and the girl to the 
side window. 

"There are a dozen or so," be said simply. 

Tubby made them out after a momentvery tiny half-moons gleaming among the 
stars. They were apparently moving upward as the vehicle fell past them, while 
all the stars appeared quite motionless. 

"Some of these little worlds are only 
from a few hundred thousand to a million 
miles away from us," Sir Isaac added. "We 
could reach them with this velocity in a 
minute or two ! They're all around us 
now— so you can understand what chances 
we're taking." 

Tubby understood indeed ; and when, a 
little later, he saw through the lower window a gleaming disc come into sight, grow 
to the size of the Moon, and sweep past 
them to one side and out of sight above 
them — all in the space of a minute— he was 
glad enough to have Sir Isaac reduce his 
speed. It gave the pursuing Mercurian 
vehicle a better chance to overtake them, 



of course, hut even that was the lesser of the 
two dangers. 

The evening was a long one. Tubby and 
Sir Isaac played cards after dinner, with 
Ameen,i an interested spectator. They discussed their Mercurian pursuers a little — 
the other vehicle had not again appeared. 
Ameena retired about ten o'clock and Sir 
Isaac, shortly afterward, lay down at 
Tubby's feet on the Hoor of the instrument 
room. 

Tubby faithfully kept watch until two in 
the morning. Jupiter was now considerably 
larger than the Moon appears from Earth — 
a silver disc with broad dark bands on it, 
and a huge red spot, like a dull red Untern 
gleaming from its lower hemisphere. The 
red spot winked and went out shortly after 
Tubby discovered it. 

When Sir Isaac woke up, of his own 
accord, Tubby, too tired to ask any questions, fell asleep on the floor, wrapped up 
in a blanket from the vacant bed upstairs. 
He dreamed he was a railroad train and 
that Jupiter was flagging him with a red 
lantern. He wanted to stop, but couldn't. 
There was a terrible collision. . . . 

Tubby opened his eyes to find Sir Isaac 
shaking him violently. 

"All right," lie protested, sitting up 
dizzily. "Lemme alone. What time is 
it? Ain't we there yet? Where's Ameena? 
"What's that red light comin' from?" 

IT WAS just six o'clock. A lurid red 
glare was shining up through the 
lower window. The room was frightfully 
hot! Tubby, as soon as he was fully 
awake, stared down through the heavy glass 
pane. The dark surface of Jupiter, over 
which they were poised, stretched out as 
far as he could see in every direction. Directly underneath the window, like the huge 
mouth of a red-hot furnace, yawned a gap 
in the Jovian atmosphere from which lurid 
tongues of flame were licking upward into 
Space — venomous, scarlet-red tongues thousands of miles in length. 

Tubby was awed as well as alarmed. They 
were dropping directly into the mouth of 
Hell! 

"Don't be frightened," laughed Sir Isaic 
from behind Tubby's shoulder. "We're two 
million miles up yet and failing only at 
the rate of half a million miles an hour. 
That is the great red spot of Jupiter. I' -e 
always wondered just what it was. Those 
are tongues of flaming hydrogen. It proves 



Arowid tto Unlv*rs« * * * 37 



conclusively that Jupiter is more like the 
Sun than any other Planet. Its surface 
is not solid on this side, and as you see, 
it is internally heated to a very considerable degree." 

While Tubby gazed, fascinated, Sir Isaac 
went on enthusiastically: 

"Jupiter is partially self-luminous, which 
1 have also always believed. And, because of its internal heat, the surface temperature is easily warm enough to sustain 

I life, even out here so remote from the 

| Sun." 

"That looks absolutely too hot to live in," 
Tubby declared, gazing down into the crater 
of this mammoth volcano. 

Sir Isaac laughed again ; evidently he 
was in high spirits at this complete verification of this theories. 

"Of course it's too hot on this side. I 
knew that, but I came around here to see 
the red spot. We had to follow it around, 
you see, because of the Planet's very rapid 
axial rotriion. The surface, as I said, isn't 
solid. Nevertheless, since we know that 
Jupiter is inhabited, however much it would 
appear not to be, there must be at least a 
small portion of solid surface. We'll go 
around to the other side again and locate 
1 it." 

"Like lookin' for land when flyin' over 
the ocean?" Tubby illustrated. 

"Exactly. That is just what it can be 
compared to." 

Tubby rose to his feet. 

"Very good, perfessor. Very good, mdeed. You navigate us around, an' I'll go 
wake up Ameena. She mustn't sleep ail 
the time. We got to eat." 

They passed fairly close to Satellite IV, 
which revolves around its mother globe at 
a mean distance of 1,162,000 miles. They 
were then having breakfast, and during 
the remainder of the meal Sir Isaac entertained them with a most interesting dissertation on the nine satellites of Jupiter. 

They were all three dressed as on the 
evening before, though Ameena had discarded the overcoat. She resumed it after 
breakfast, however, for when they had 
passed around over the other hemisphere 
of Jupiter, beyond the flames of the "red 
spot," exposed again to the cold of Interi planetary Space and warmed only by a 
very small, pale little Sun, the interior of 
the vehicle rapidly cooled off. 

After breakfast, an observation of Jupiter 



through the lower window showed only 
dense, black cloud masses. 

"Let's go down, perfessor," Tubby suggested. "Can't see nothin' up here through 
them clouds." He added gloatingly: 

"I guess we beat them Mercurians in, all 
right." 

They entered the Jovian atmosphere about 
eight o'clock— at an altitude of 1,400 miles 
—a depth of air strata that surprised even 
Sir Isaac. Inky blackness surrounded them 
for a time. At 110 miles they emerged 
into daylight. Later all the clouds swept 
away. The pale Sun shone through the 
side window, rising over the horizon — for 
it chanced to' be early morning on this portion of the mighty Planet— shortly after 
dawn of a clear, frosty-looking Jovian day. 

"Looks awful chilly out," Tubby remarked dubiously. 

"Yes," agreed Sir Isaac. "We would be 
freezing in here now if it were not for our 
friction in passing through the atmosphere. 
I have shut off our heating apparatus. . . . 
It will be much warmer down below, however. The internal heat of Jupiter warms 
its lower strata of air." 

At an altitude of 25,000 feet they could 
distinguish quite plainly the Jovian landscape over which they were passing horizontally— a barren land that looked as 
though it might be thick black water and 
mud. It seemed to boil very sluggishly in 
spots. Here and [here it appeared firmer — 
and there were curious vegetable growths as 
near like two hundred foot mushrooms as 
anything else Tubby could think of. 

The landscape was changing constantly. 
Now they came over a barren, almost rocky 
land, with enormous trees like pines and 
cedars. Half an hour later the forests began occasionally to be dotted with cities — 
mammoth buildings rising in terraces two 
thousand feet into the air. . . .Everything 
seemed built on the same gigantic scale. 

They selected, quite at random, one of 
the largest of the cities; and descended in 
an open space nearby. It was 9-50 A. M. 
when they came to rest upon the surface of 
Jupiter— a flight from Mercury, smallest 
major planet of the solar system, to Jupiter, 
the largest, of exactly J>-\ hours and 5 minutes. 

THE AUDIENCE with the Great Mogul 
of Jupiter — who came riding out of the 
city with his Wise Men on an enormous 
animal — like a queer-looking elephant with 



33 A * * Future Fiction 



broad, very flat feet— took place about 12 
o'clock noon Earth Eastern time, though it 
was by then late afternoon of the Jovian 
day. 

It may seem remarkable that so great a 
dignitary would go to his visitors rather 
than bidding them coine to him. The answer, however, is obvious to any thinking 
student. Tubby and Sir Isaac had flatly 
refused to allow themselves to be carried; 
and since gravity on the surface of Jupitei 
is more than 2'/> times that of the Earth, 
they coufd hardly stand on their feet, much 
less walk! 

The Great Mogul was a towering giant 
some fifteen feet tall, with his Counsellors 
in proportion. A robe of richly -colored 
cloth fell in folds to his feet. There were 
ropes of enormous gems about his neckthat is to say they might have been considered gems, though they looked more like 
little gargoyles moulded out of red and 
green putty and his braided white beard 
hung down his chest to his waist. 

The audience was held in front ot the 
vehicle, with Tubby, Sir Isaac and Ameena 
sitting on the floor in its doorway while a 
circle of guards kept back the crowd ot giants that had collected. Within this circle 
the Great Mogul and his four Wisest Men 
stood. 

Tubby felt as though he weighed over 
four hundred pounds — which indeed was 
the case; and his companions in proportion. 

"It's just like being a Lilliputian in Gulliver's Travels," he whispered to Sir Isaac as 
the Great Mogul kneeled down to see him 
more closely. Tubby was struggling for 
breath; a great weight seemed compressing 
his chest; his head was ringing; his eardrums felt as though something were pushing them inward — -all, as Sir Isaac had explained an hour before, because ot the excessive pressure of the Jovian itmosphere. 
It was most disagreeable. And especially it 
was unpleasant to be nailed down by one s 
own weight — to be forced to interview he 
greatest monarch of the Solar System in an 
undignified sitting posture on one's own 
doorstep! 

Sir Isaac beamed when Tubby made his 
remark about the Lilliputians. "Ah, so you 
have read my 'Gulliver's Travels'? There 
was a book! If I do say it myself, my sci 
entific conceptions in that were. ..." 

"Sb !" Tubby whispered. "He's talk in' 
to us!" 



Tubby noticed suddenly that the Great 
Mogul and all his followers had very big, 
flat feet — shaped like snow-shoes — as 
though they were meant for walking on 
very soft surfaces. They 

The Great Mogul was talking in a huge, 
roaring voice. The words were strange, unintelligible. 

Sir Isaac smiled with embarrassment; and 
shook his head. "Too bad," he whispered 
to Tubby. "I ought to know their language 
— but I don't. You see I've never written 
much about Jupiter. I " 

The little Joviar stepped forward- -a 
stoop-shouldered, weazened individual no 
more than nine or ten feet tall. By his 
face- he might have been two or three hundred years old. He looked more like a 
giant mummy than a man. 

"I speak your Earth- language," he said. 
"All of them — the languages of the Solar 
System are my study." 

Tubby feit impressed. He whispered to 
Sir Isaac; 

"Looks like he'd been studyin' too much, 
don't he? Mean look in' guy, huh, perfessor?" 

The Interpreter added: 

"His Supreme Highness demands that 
you explain your mission." 

Sir Isaac did so, respectfully but eloquently outlining the nature of the disaster that 
threatened the Earth from Mars and Mercury, and ending by pleading most earnestly 
that the great Jovians lend their aid to the 
Earth to prevent so murderous an attack. 

The Interpreter turned to his master and 
translated. When he had finished, the 
Great Mogul laughed ! 

The three voyagers knew then, before an 
answering word was spoken, that their mission to Jupiter was a failure. They had 
made their plea— the lives ot all the teeming millions of people of the Earth were at 
stake — and the Great Mogul laughed ! 

"That dirty, mean " Tubby would 

have broken into open vilification, but Sir 
Isaac stopped him. 

The Great Mogul was now speaking to 
his Interpreter. 

"His Supreme Highness the Great Mogul is extremely sorry," said the Interpreter 
a moment later. 

"Yes, lie looks it." This from Tubby. 

The Interpreter's face darkened as he repeated this sarcasm to his master. A torrent of passionate anger swept over the 
Great Mogul's face. The Interpreter lis


AreMd Umv*tm ★ * * 3» 



tened to his words a moment; then, m 
translating them his anger made him lapse 
into an Earth-colloquialism more expressive 
than elegant. 

"His Supreme Highness says all you little 
worlds can shoot yourselves to Hell for all 
He cares," said the Interpreter. 

Tubby tried belligerently to rise to his 
feet, but his weight made the effort a 
lamentable failure. 

"We're sorry," Sir Isaac shouted at once. 
"Tell His Highness we meant no offense 
....These Jovians are most hot-tempered 
people it would seem." He added this last 
lo Ameena in an undertone. 

"Ask him about Saturn, Uranus and Neplune," the quick-witted girl said immediate
I I? • 

Sir Isaac put the question as humbly and 
placatingly as possible. 

"They are uninhabited," said tl>e Interpreter sourly. 

His Supreme Highness was making ready 
to depart, apparently without further interest in the proceedings. Tubby had almost 
managed to climb to his feet, but at last he 
! gave tt up and sank back again. 

"Come on," he panted. "Let's get — out 
of this.... This ain't no place for us — 
| we're wastin' — time again."' 

Without further ceremony, like little disappearing manikins in a mechanical box, the 
three voyagers pulled themselves back out of 
the doorway of their vehicle and closed the 
door after them. Sir Isaac rolled across the 
floor of the instrument room — the easiest 
mode of locomotion — and hoisted himself 
into reach of the keyboard. 

An instant later the vehicle, freed from 
the tremendous gravitational pull of Jupiter, flew like a rifle bullet into Space. 

CHAPTER VII 

AGAIN, after a voyage of some 450,000,000 miles, the would-be saviours of their own world were 
doomed to disappointment! When they 
had again safely traversed the Jovian atmosphere, avoided Satellites II and IV with 
one of which they very nearly collided and 
were again launched into space, headed 
they cared not whither for the moment, the 
adventurers sat down to discuss this terrible 
misfortune. 

As might be expected, the discussion 
yielded nothing. The miserable Jovian af


fair was most discouraging, though Tubby 
took a measure of satisfaction in it 

"I'm sorry for them Mercurians when 
they get here," he declared, with a sudden 
grin at the thought. "I wouldn't wish them 
no worse luck than askin' a favor of that 
Mogul guy." 

"But what will we do?" Ameena asked. 
The brave little girl was extremely agitated 
as the possibility — even probability — of 
their final failure forced itself upon her. 
"Saturn, Uranus and Neptune are uninhabited ! That leaves us nowhere else to 
go — and we must have help. We must!" 

"/ wouldn't bet a plugged nickel on anything that guy said about them other Planets," Tubby declared doggedly. "/ say — 
let's see for ourselves. It ain't so much of 
a trip, is it?" Tubby, with Ameena's hand 
to hold most of the time, was not finding 
the voyage unpleasant in the least. 

Ameena flashed him a loolr of admiration as he made this sturdy suggestion. Sir 
Isaac pondered, 

"We are now about 485,000,000 miles 
from the Sun," he said thoughtfully. "Saturn's mean distance is 887,098,000 miles; 
Uranus is 1,784,732,000 miles, and Neptune is 2,796,528,000 miles from the Sun!" 

Tubby was slightly staggered ; but he 
tried not to show it. 

"That ain't so far," he declared. "Maybe we could speed it up a little out here." 

Sir Isaac, as the idea began taking hold 
of him, was making a swift mathematical 
calculation. 

"We might go past each of them without stopping to land if they are not habitable," he said finally. "Owing to their present positions it would be a trip of about 
3,281,000,000 miles from here." 

He added ; 

"That's nearly a third farther than a direct route to Neptune owing to Saturn and 
Uranus being out of line." He showed 
Tubby and Ameena his chart again. "However, we ought to be able " 

"Sure thing," Tubby interrupted. "Let's 
get goin'. We're always wastin' so much 
time." 

They were comparatively uneventful, the 
days that followed — uneventful that is, so 
far as astronomical occurrences were concerned. To Tubby, however, they were days 
of never- flagging interest. Sir Isaac, with 
his charts and his mathematics, concerned 
himself almost exclusively with navigating 
the vehicle. He had started on a rapidly


40 * * ★ Future Fiction 



growing manuscript itso — a sequel to the 
"War of the Worlds," he said; and except 
for a brief game of poker in the evening, 
he left his fellow-travelers entirely to their 
own devices. 

Tubby and Ameena cooked the meals together, and washed the dishes; and, for relaxation sang their Inlet -planetary duets. 
Tor the rest, Tubby held her little hand, 
and with his arm around her awed into silence, they watched together the never-end 
ing vista of glorious stars toward which the 
vehicle was falling with constantly accelerating velocity. 

Now that their voyage was extended into 
such gigantic distances, Sir Isaac, more than 
ever before, felt the need of haste. Only 
fifty-five days and some six hours Irom the 
time they left Jupiter remained before the 
fatal opposition of Mars with the Earth. 
Much could bt accomplished in fifty-five 
days; but still, as Tubby lugubriously remarked, at the rate they were accomplishing it, fifty-five day* was a very little time. 
Wherefore Sir Isaac, setting his determined 
jaw firmly, hurled the vehicle with prodigious velocity onward. 

The danger of collision, which had so 
perturbed Sir Isaac in the region of Minor 
Planets between Mars and Jupiter was now 
greatly lessened. They had plenty of room 
now — for Asteroids, Meteors, even Comets 
were seldom sighted. It was a run of some 
460,000,000 miles to Saturn, through a 
region of space comparatively deserted. 

At their former maximum velocity of 
twenty-eight million miles an hour, which 
Sir Isaac now maintained as an average, sixteen hours after leaving Jupiter they were 
approaching Saturn. It was then halt-past 
four the following morning. Sir Isaac had 
slept the afternoon previous . nd was on 
watch. He awakened Tubby; and Tubby 
went immediately upstairs and called 
Ameena. Shortly afterward all three were 
crouched over the instrument room floor 
window, peering down at the great Ringed 
Planet above which they were seemingly 
poised some twelve million miles away. Sir 
Isaac had decreased their speed materially 
so that they might make observations without approaching too close. 

Saturn, a globe almost as large as Jupiter, and with its marvelous system of rings 
very much larger, at this proximity was a 
magnificent sight. The globe itself— a gigantic silver disc occupying half the firmament visible through the window— had 



broad bands of darkened area upon it similar to those the voyagers had observed on 
Jupiter. But those rings ! Tubby and 
Ameena were amazed into silence; even Sic 
Isaac was awed by their splendor. 

As viewed from the vehicle's present position, the concentric rings — the inner one 
somewhat darker — were opened up to an 
angle of nearly thirty degrees — a glistening, 
gleaming silver band, like the broad brim 
of a crownless hat encircling the Planet— a 
silver brim more than 37,000 miles broad, 
with a total diameter, including the sphere 
it encircled, of nearly 167,000 miles! Hanging there in space below them, the Planet, 
its rings and its several tiny moons bathed 
the interior of the instrument room with 
silver fire. It was the most glorious, most 
stupendous sight that human eyes had ever 
looked upon! 

"Let us go down close," said Sir Isaac 
quietly. 

A little later they could make out the 
composition of the rings with perfect clarity. Billions upon billions of tiny fragments 
of star-dust, each of them infinitesimal satellites, each of them like tiny moons reflecting the sunlight, whirled in their respective orbits about the mother Planet! 

"The wonder of it!" Sir Isaac murmured. 
"A billion billion, and yet countless other 
billions of satellites — -all on one identical 
plane, each separate, each holding its place 
and following its own circular orbit!" 

Through the cloud-masses occasionally the 
onlookers could distinguish the surface of 
the Planet itself — could observe that it also 
was in motion, moving in gigantic whirlpools. 

"It is undoubtedly entirely liquid or gaseous," said Sir Isaac, "of a density very 
much less than water. We shall find no 
inhabitants here." 

"No, I s'pose not," Tubby agreed. He 
seemed, tor once, reluctant to proceed with 
the journey. He sat with his arm tightly 
encircling Ameena's waist — as who would 
not with such a girl and such a sight before 
one? "I guess we got to get on our way," 
he added with a sigh. 

Sir Isaac altered their course; and in an 
hour more they were well on their way to 
Uranus, with Saturn and his ring-; hiaJJ En 
the firmament above them. 

It was a run of about eleven hundred 
million miles from Salurn to Uranus. Sic 
Isaac had already maintained an average 
velocity of twenty-eight million miles an 



Around the Universe * * * 41 



hour for some hours. He now determined 
to belter it. Beyond Saturn, be was convinced, there was still less chance of encountering any derelicts. And, with each 
passing hour — each passing Planet from 
which they hoped to obtain help for their 
own threatened world — the panic in their 
hearts grew. 

It was Tubby who voiced it most strong
K 7 ■ ' . : - ' , 

In fifty-four days from today the Earth 
goes out of business," he remarked dolefully, from a deep, reflective silence into 
which all three had fallen. 

"Fifty-four days and twelve hours," corrected Sir Isaac. "// we don't succeed." 

"We shall succeed," declared Ameena. 
"We must never think but that we shall." 

Thus, always, woman's stronger hope and 
courage never flags. 

The run to Uranus occupied some 28 
hours — an average velocity of a trifle over 
39,000,000 mi!es_ an hour. It was about 
noon of the following day when, after no 
particularly unusual incidents-- Sir Isaac 
again slowed down for them to make observations. 

It had grown colder steadily ; the vehicle's heating plant was in active operation. 
The Sun had dwindled to a little blazing 
point among the stars. 

All that morning the travelers had sat 
looking downward, watching Uranus grow 
from a brilliant star to a little moon; from 
moon to glowing silver-green disc. And 
now, at noon when they slackened their 
fall, the seventh Planet of the Solar System lay beneath them. 

After Saturn, the sight was disappointing. 
Uranus, 32,879 miles in diameter, lay perfectly barren. Its axial motion, observed 
closely over a period of time, was distinguishable — like the minute hand of a clock 
that creeps slowly forward. Sir Isaac believed it to be of some six or eight hours 
duration. 

Heavy banks of cloud masses obscured 
the Planet's surface; Sir Isaac had not believed Uranus would prove to have an atmosphere — but it haa, and a very dense 
one obviously. But the surface of the Planet itself, what little they occasionally could 
set of it, was obviously liquid. 

((IfJO INHABITANTS here," said Sir 
Isaac. Quite evidently he was tremendously disappointed, for he knew that 
the average density of Uranus was not much 



more than that of Jupiter, and he had hoped 
that in this instance the Jovian interpreter 
had been lying. 

"No inhabitants here," Tubby echoed 
sadly. "Well, let's get on our way." 

Between the orbits of Uranus and Neptune there lies a mean distance of 1,011,796,000 miles — that is to say, something 
over a thousand million miles. Neptune 
now, however, was unfortunately very much 
farther along in its orbit, so that the 
oblique course necessary to reach this latter Planet lengthened the distance to nearly eighteen hundred million miles. Sir 
Isaac, after a very abstruse calculation, announced the exact mileage to be seventeen 
hundred and ten million and twenty-six. 

Tubby was getting used to these gigantic 
figures, which as anyone can realize, are 
only relative. Sir Isaac pointed this out 
clearly. 

"On earth, in a railroad train," he said, 
"if you were going at the rate of fifty miles 
an hour and had a journey of 1710 miles 
to make, it would not be very confusing to 
fathom the figures, would it? Or to calculate how Jong it would take you to make 
the run? That is exactly comparable to this 
run we have before us now, from Uranus 
to Neptune. We have about 1710 million 
miles to go, and I propose to average about 
50 million miles an hour." 

Here Sir Isaac feil back upon one of his 
favorite topics. "All distances are relative 
to other distances. A mile to a snail is a 
long trip, but an airplane makes it in two 
or three dozen seconds. There is no such 
thing as absolute distance— or absolute motion, or time or size. Everything is relative 
to something else. Twenty-four hours is a 
very little time in the life of an elephant 
— but it is more than a lifetime to many 
insects. Our trip from here to Neptune is 
not more than an inch in all the countless 
miles of space.... But I'll tell you more 
about that some other time." 

"Right," said Tubby, considerably relieved. "Just now we got to eat. Ameena 's 
got lunch all ready." 

The flight to Neptune occupied just thirty hours- — an average of 57 million miles an 
hour. Sir Isaac was intensely pleased, 
though as he admitted to Tubby, the maximum velocity of the vehicle had never yet 
been tested. 

Tubby and Ameena were also enthusiastic. 

"Wonder what become of them Mer


42 * * * Mmr* Fiction 



curians who was after us?" Tubby speculated. "Swell chance of them gettin' way out 
here." 

"They must have stopped at Jupiter," said 
Ameena. "We were gone then — they could 
not tell where." 

This, obviously, was logical. At al I 
events, the Mercurian vehicle was now the 
least of their worries. Neptune lay beneath 
them. Would they secure, on this far outpost ot the Solar System, the help they 
needed ? Fervently they prayed so, for it 
seemed their last chance. 

It was just 6 P. M., on the day following 
their departure from the vicinity of Uranus, 
when Sir Isaac held the vehicle poised above 
the surface ot Neptune. The Planet, very 
slightly smaller than Uranus, lay completely 
enveloped in its dense atmospheric envelope. 

"We got to go down," said Tuhby 
frowning. "Can't see nothin' from way up 
here." 

The descent through Neptune's atmosphere was pleasurable, for the friction 
warmed the vehicle once more to comfortable temperature. At an altitude of some 
fifteen thousand feet they emerged from 
the dense cloud-banks into Neptunian daylight. And what a dim, miserable daylight 
it was! And below, what a bleak, dreary 
sight met their disappointed gaze! With 
sinking hearts— their last hope gone — they 
stared downward. Neptune's surface— flat, 
unmarked by a single distinguishing physical conformation — might have been the surface of a polar sea! In all directions, to the 
circular rim of the raised horizon, stretched 
■a level surface of" grey-white snow, dirtylooking in the twilight which was Neptune's day. But whether land lay beneath, 
or merely some frozen liquid, could not be 
told. 

There was not a sign of life — nothing but bleak desolation. It was an amazing sight— an old world seemingly, when 
everything in the logic of Sir Isaac's scientific mind had led him to anticipate a new 
one — a world of heat, of liquid or gas turbulent from its own internal fire. 

Sir Isaac muttered to himself. Looking 
upward through the side window with Tubby, they saw the Sun through a rift in the 
clouds — a tiny pencil-point of light in the 
dull, reddish-blue day — a dreary, remote 
Sun, hopelessly impotent to light or to 
warm this far-away offspring. 

Tubby's face was solemn as he turned to 
his friend. 



"Ain't no use goin' down no farther. 
That's our finish— that puts our Earth out 
of business." 

Silently the vehicle, with its three saddened, frightened occupants, ascended 
through the Neptunian atmosphere again 
into space. 

"Well," said Tubby finally. "Now what? 
That's the end, ain't it?" 

Again it was Ameena who first recovered 
her courage. Her lips were compressed; 
her beautiful, dark eyes blazed with determination. 

"It is no! the end, my friends! To such 
men as you the end never conies before 
defeat!" 

She pointed to the Stars blazing outside 
the window — the band of "Milky Way," a 
myriad stars brighter now from this outer 
edge of the Solar System— and added: 

"There are other worlds — countless other 
worlds. Let us go to them! With all the 
haste we can make — forgetting danger to 
ourselves — let us hurry. Here at home, in 
our own little Solar System, we have been 
rebuffed. But somewhere in this Universe there must be humans who are unselfish — who though without hope of reward, still will not suffer their own kind 
fo go down into disaster and death!" 

Her enthusiasm was contagious. 

"Come on!" shouted Tubby. "Let's get 
goin' ! There's a big star — let's go to that 
one!" 

Sir Isaac- thumped his fist on the table. 

"We will!" he exclaimed. "I shall attain a velocity never before even imagined! 
We must— we shall find help for our 
Earth !" 

A few moments later, sweeping circularly 
around Neptune, the undaunted adventurers 
left tlie Solar System behind them and 
launched themselves boldly out into the 
uncharted realms of Inter-stellar Space! 

CHAPTER VIII 

£f.m"m"TE MUST nol rush into this 
^^^W thing thoughtlessly" Sir 

W w Isaac declared, when the first 
flush of their enthusiasm was passed and 
practicality began to creep in. "We must 
plan— calculate. Our time is limited. We 
only have — " 

"Fifty-two days exact," Tubby finished. 
"How far we got to go? Ain't we gone 
a good ways already?" 

Sir Isaac had made several brisk compu


Around tli* Universe * * * 43 



tations a few moments before. Neptune, 
with the entire Solar System behind it, already hung far above them. They were 
falling downward, apparently toward a very 
bright Star which gleamed amid a myriad 
of its fellows in the lower firmament. 

"We have relatively a very great distance to go," said Sir Isaac, answering 
Tubby's question. "We are already on our 
course to the nearest of all the Stars— 
and fortunately we happen to be at that 
extremity of the Solar System nearest to it. 
He pointed to the lower window. 

"Very good," approved Tubby as usual. 
"The closest Star. Very good. What's its 
name an' how far away are we? An' say, 
what's a Star anyway? We been dealin 
in Planets so long—" 

Sir Isaac smiled. "To answer your last 
question first, I shall have to give you a 
brief explanation of the nature of the entire 
Universe." 

Anticipating a somewhat lengthy dissertation of the sort Sir Isaac seemed to delight 
in, Ameena settled herself beside Tubby 
and gave him her hand to hold. 

"Go on, Sir Isaac, please do," she 
pleaded. 

"Go ahead — shoot!" said Tubby. 

Thus encouraged, Sir Isaac began: 

"The region we call Space is a limited 
area whose boundaries I shall explain some 
other time." 

Tubby and Ameena were anxious to 
know. 

Sir Isaac frowned slightly. "Oh wellthat is immaterial. In that scientific narrative I dealt with infinite smallness, and 
now we are dealing with infinite largeness. 
The theory is the same. . . . However, this 
region we call Space is devoid of air. It 
is not, of course, a vacuum, but is completely filled by the ether." 

"What's that?" demanded Tubby. 

"The ether, my friends, is an agglomeration of imponderable atoms, which, relatively to their small dimensions, are as far 
removed from each other as are the Celestial bodies in Space. It is these atoms 
which, by their vibratory motion, produce 
both light and heat in the Universe. . . . 
That's my own definition. I hope you 
like it?" " 

"It's — it's beautiful," declared Ameena. 

"Thank you," replied Sir Isaac, smiling 
graciously. "I think it is rather neat. I've 
used it frequently. Though lately, these 
foolish modern scientists of Earth are be


ginning to dispute me. . . . Well, to proceed. In this region of Space, billions 
upon billions of Celestial bodies are whirling. They all obey recognized laws of 
Celestial mechanics — all are acted upon by 
different balancing forces. ... I shall not 
weary you with that." 

"No," said Tubby. "We'll pass that up. 
Go on." 

"These Celestial bodies range in size 
from the most gigantic blazing Suns, millions of times in volume ol our own Sun 
of the Solar System, down to the very 
minutest fragment—which is nothing more 
or less than an atom of the ether itself ! 

"We call these Celestial bodies by different names. A Star, for instance, refers 
to luminous bodies. Our own Sun is one 
of them. Planets are reflecting, or partially 
self-luminous bodies revolving around a 
central Sun. You already understand what 
Satellites are. Then there are Asteroids, 
which are merely Planetoids— smaller Planets. And there are Comets, and Meteors 
and—" 

"Never mind all them,'' Tubby interrupted hastily. He squeezed Ameena's hand 
consolingly as Sir Isaac plunged on: 

"Therefore, you understand, we live on 
one of tire Planets — I beg your pardon, 
Ameena — on two of the Planets of the Solar 
System— the Earth and Venus. Our Sun. 
with all its Planets, forms only one System 
of an infinite number. Each of those 
Stars—" He waved his hand again toward 
the window— "Each of those Stars very 
probably has revolving about it a system 
of worlds much greater than our own 
'Solar System ' " 

"My goodness, " Tubby commented . 
' This here Universe is a big place, ain't 
it? We only got started, so far." 

The memory of those fifty-two days of 
grate which were all that remained to them, 
struck Tubby forcibly. He added anxiously: 

"How soon do we get to this first Star, 
perfessor?" 

Sir Isaac referred to a memorandum 
"The nearest Star to the Solar System is Alpha Centauri," he answered. "Tire Astron 
omers of Earth recently claim to have found 
one slightly nearer, but / do not recognize 
it. That is Alpha Centauri we are heading 
for— a splendid binary of the First Magni 
tude, with a parallax of 0.75" whose com 
ponents revolve in 81 years. I meanhe added apologetically, "it is really two 
Stars several hundred million miles apart. 



44 * * ★ Ftttw* FictiM 



revolving around each other. It is drifting through Space with a velocity of some 
sixty miles a second." 

Tubby lifted his eyebrows; Sir Isaac continued hastily: 

"Every Star is moving — drifting, I call 
it — as though they were in gigantic currents circulating about— I don't know just 
whither or why. Our own Sun, for instance, with all its Planets, is drifting — 
floating toward some of the Stars and away 
from others — at the rate of many miles a 
.second, but always holding its mass of 
Planets intact." 

Tubby turned to the girl beside him. 
"Kind of complicated, ain't it, Ameena ?" 
Then to Sir Isaac: 

"How far is this closest Star we're headin' for? I ast you ''tat, an' yau...." 

"1 was getting to that. But if you must 
know at once. ..." Sir Isaac spoke with 
some asperity. "If you insist, I II tell you 
that Alpha Centauri is a trifle less than 
25.000,000,000,000 miles from here!" 

Tubby and the girl stared blankly as Sir 
Isaac stated this astounding figure. 

"You see? I knew you would not understand me. What I wanted to explain 
first, was that in dealing with these larger 
figures, to save confusion we generally use 
a larger unit than the mile. The best one 
is the Light-year. It is the distance light 
(ravels in a year." 

"How far?" Tubby asked, with rapidly 
recovered poise. 

IGHT travels about 186,000 miles 
a second," said Sir Isaac. "Multiply that up to a year and divide it into 
25,000,000,000,000 and you get 4.35. A 
child could do that by simple arithmetic. 
Thus you find that Alpha Centauri is distant 4.35 Light-years." 

This latter figure was considerably less 
awe-inspiring. Tubby seized it eagerly. 

"Only four Light-years. That ain't so 
far." 

"No," said Sir Isaac, smiling with relumed good humor. "Comparatively speaking, of course, it isn't far. All distance is 
relative. If you can travel fast enough, 4.35 
Light-years, especially compared to the many 
hundred Light-years which separate .some 
of the Stars, is relatively quite near. . . . 
Now about our own velocity. . . ." 

It was, in truth, the problem of attaining 
a sufficiently great velocity to cope with 
these greater distances that had worried Sir 



Isaac from the moment they decided to 
launch out into Inter-Stellar Space. Within the comparatively narrow confines of the 
Solar System — menaced by Asteroids and 
Meteors — a great velocity was neither necessary nor desirable. But now — in the outer realms — it was both. 

Sir Isaac, in spite of his bombastic statement to Tubby as they left the Earth, had 
never really anticipated a prolongation of 
the voyage beyond Neptune. Nevertheless 
he had always believed that the vehicle's 
velocity, theoretically, was illimitable. Several factors contributed to this conclusion. 
It is one of the laws of motion, inertia to be 
exact, that a body once in motion and not 
acted upon by any force, will continue forever in motion at exactly its original rate. 
Thus, whatever force was applied to the 
vehicle must accelerate its rate of speed indefinitely. 

The entire Solar System now lay above 
them, and thus the combined repellent force 
of all its Planets and its Sun could be used. 
This, with the attractive force of all the 
countless gigantic Stars that lay below, Sir 
Isaac was confident would cause them to 
fall into the void of Space with tremendous 
velocity— a velocity that had no limit except the time allowed for acceleration. 

Haste was needed, and now, for the first 
time since leaving' the Earth, Sir Isaac used 
almost all the total force at his command. 
They had left the vicinity ot Neptune about 
8 P. M. At midnight, just when the sleepy 
Ameena was about to retire, Sir Isaac looked 
up from the most complicated calculation 
he had so far made. 

"Our velocity is now approaching two 
hundred thousand miles a second," he announced triumphantly. 

"Thousand!" Tubby exclaimed in dismay. "We was goin'- in millions this afternoon !" 

"I said a second," Sir Isaac returned. "We 
did attain — at one short period last night 
— about a hundred million miles an hour. 
But I cut it down at once. This is per second—not per hour." 

"Oh," said Tubby with relief. "How 
much is that an hour?" 

"About seven hundred and twenty million — that is to say, seven times our former maximum." 

This was joyful news indeed; but Sir 
Isaac's next words dispelled the joy completely. 

"At this rate," he added, "we should 



Arauad Hie Universe k * * 



reach Alpha Centauri in about four years!" 

And in fifty-two days Mars would destroy the Earth unless they were back there 
to prevent it! 

"But — but then—" Tubby protested. Sir 
Isaac's quiet smile stopped him. 

"You need not worry over that," he said. 
"There are many forces acting upon us 
which you do not understand. The acceleration of a falling body is in astounding 
ratio— especially when it has an additional 
repellent force above it.... I've told you 
that before. Wait until tomorrow — then 
we shall see." 

There followed a somewhat lengthy silence. 

"Say, perfessor," Tubby began finally, 
"ain't this kind of re-mark-able — this extra 
speedy travelin'?" " 

Sir Isaac looked up from his mathematics. 
"My dear fellow, I do suppose these Astronomical figures confuse you. I've alreadv 
tried to explain — " 

"No — I mean, us bein* able to jo so fast." 
Sir Isaac laid aside his pencil, and frowned. 
"I see nothing extraordinary in it. Your 
mind is still in its Earth-rut. You must get 
out of that line of thinking." 

"I will," Tubby declared humbly. "Only 
tell me how to." 

Sir Isaac's good nature returned, promptly 
as usual. He laughed. 

"You must understand that on Earth you 
have always been dealing — personally, ! 
mean, with mileage the longest distance of 
which is the circumference of the Earth — 
25,000 miles. All your life you have been 
a little ant, chained down by gravity. Naturally, for you, motion has had a very narrow meaning. Your own motion, in relation to the ground beneath you, is all your 
mind daily recognized. That, for you, was 
the standard of motion. 

"But, my dear friend, that is not really 
motion at all. You were like an ant, crawling around the narrow limits ot its little 
world. How can yon expect an ant to understand, or to fathom the velocity of an 
airplane, or a rifle bullet, which covers in 
a fraction of a second, a space — a distance 
— equal to the entire known world of the 
ant?" 

Sir Isaac was gradually warming up. 

"You call that motion. On the other 
hand, though you did not know it, perhaps, 
both you and the ant have always been mov•ng with great rapidity. For instance, the 
rotation of the Earth on its axis, if you 



happened to be on the Equator, would carry you around a circle of 24,000 miles m 
one day— every day. That is a thousand 
miles an hour. Added to that, the Earth 
also moves around in its orbit some 66,000 
miles an hour. Still more than that, the 
Sun drags the Earth along at about 36,000 
miles an hour. This motion of the Sun can 
only be calculated by its relation to the other Stars. And, so far as / know, the whole 
Universe may be hurtling through Space a 
thousand times that fast. In fact, I think it 
is. And still more than thai probably Space 
itself is moving- — a million times faster than 
everything else. . . But that you cannot understand yet.... I'll explain fbat to you 
later." 

"Tell me more," Tubby murmured desperately. 

"Well," said Sir Isaac, "in Space, you see, 
all Earthly ideas of motion must be reconstructed. We are now a Celestial body ourselves—obeying all the laws of Celestial 
Mechanics — -a little world all our own — a 
world of three inhabitants." 

It was an interesting thought ; it aroused 
in Tabby a sudden patriotism for the vehicle and its welfare. 

Sir Isaac went on quietly and earnestly: 
"Some of the Stars are drifting at the rate 
of 250 miles a second. Drifting- — you understand. But we are not drifting, wc are 
jailing — pulled down by attraction from below and pushed down by repulsion from 
above. Is it any wonder then— after falling freely for millions of miles, and with 
such a constant, iremendous impulse — that 
we should attain an enormous velocity?" 

Both Tubby and \meena admitted the 
reasonableness of this. Motion, as Sir Isaac 
so clearly pointed ^ut, depended entirely 
upon the motion of something else with 
which you compared it. 

"I guess it atn't so wonderful, perfessor?" Tubby said finally. "But you got to 
get used to thinkin' about it." 

Sir Isaac smiled, and turned to the tired 
girl. "Hadn't you better run along to bed. 
Ameena ?" 

Tubby escorted her to the foot of the 
stairs. As he parted with her for the night, 
she said softly: 

"Do not worry, Tubby dear. Wc shall 
succeed — I know it." 

With a radiant smile she kissed him 
goodnight and darted up the stairs. For an 
hour thereafter Sir Isaac's figures fell upon 
deaf ears; the memory of Ameena's beau


tiful face and the tenderness in her voice — 
attributes that had all the inherited intensity of hundreds of Venus-women ancestors 
behind them— absorbed Tuhby's entire consciousness. 

During the night, Tubby and Sir Isaac 
alternated keeping watch, though as usual 
Tubby did most of the sleeping. Poor Sir 
Isaac was getting thinner than ever; but his 
wonderful courage and vitality held him up. 
He was almost always either working with 
his calculations, or using some of the many 
scientific instrument? with which the room 
was equipped ; and, for diversion, writing 
his manuscript, which hourly grew in bulk. 

HE WAS engaged in this latter occupation the following morning after 
breakfast, when Ameena, coming in from 
washing the breakfast dishes, timidly asked 
him what he was writing. He looked up 
to her with tired eyes as she and Tubby, 
with arms around each other, stood beside 
him. 

"I am writing a scientific narrative which 
1 think I shall call 'Around the Universe'," 
he said quietly. 

Ameena clapped her hands. "Oh, isn't 
that fine? All about our trip! Will you 
publish it on your Earth? Everyone will 
love to read about all these wonderful 
things, won't they?" 

Sir Isaac's smile was very gentle, slightly 
cynical. 

"My dear child," he said, "you do not 
understand human nature. People may condescend to read what we have done, but do 
you think they will believe it?" 

" But, of course, they must," the girl 
cried. "Is it not actually happening to us?" 

Sir Isaac sighed. "It is, most certainly. 
But people are so skeptical. They do not 
even believe that jupiter is habitable. They 
will think I made it all up — treat it as a 
joke. All my scientific data— my personal 
observations — the most wonderful Astronomical " 

"Let 'em go to blazes," Tubby put in 
fiercely. "We'll give it to Venus. If them 
Earth-people ain't got no more sense 
than 

"But first we must save the Earth-people, 
or those terrible Martians will destroy 
them," reminded Ameena. 

Tubby sobered. "That's so." Another 
thought struck him. "We'll save all them 
Earth-people from gettin' murdered — an' 
then they'll laugh at us for tellin' them how 



we did it! That's gratitude for yoo! 
That's " 

Ameena k i ssed bim gently . ' ' Never 
mind, Tubby. We shall do what we can 
—for the sake of humanity- — without hope 
of reward." 

Sir Isaac, practical as always, remarked 
somewhat cynically: 

"To accomplish that, we must have help. 
We must find some other humans in this 
Universe as unselfish as ourselves. Can we 
do that? 1 doubt it." 

"You are extreme, Sir Isaac," Ameena 
said. "On your Earth, when you have had 
war, have not Nations aided each other?" 

"Yes," he answered. "But only for their 
own interest— for their own defense. J 
cannot recall a single instance of real unselfishness. Yes, I think there were two. 
A few years ago there was a little Nation " 

"A little Nation !" Tubby exclaimed. 
"Say, maybe that's the answer! Maybe we 
was wrong to pass up all them little Planets between Mars and Jupiter!" 

"I thought of that," Sir Isaac responded. 
"A small Nation or a world, I think, is 
more likely to be completely unselfish. I 
don't know why it should be so — but it 
seems to be. There are Ceres, Juno, Pallas—many Minor Planets — and we ignored 
them all." He shrugged. "You see, a little world, however willing, would be powerless to help us materially anyway— even 
if they wanted to. That is why I did not 
consider them." 

The train of thought which this conversation brought to Sir Isaac worried him afterward very considerably. In drawing an 
analogy between individual Nations and 
Planets, it became perfectly clear that to ask 
aid of any Nation is a very different matter from going to another world. Nations 
on the same Planet have infinitely diversified interests interwoven. War comes. 
However unselfish a Nation may appear — 
may in fact really and sincerely in its heart 
feel itself to be — it cannot by the very nature of things, be wholly detached. But go 
to another Planet. The detachment is complete. Then — and then only— can you put 
it to the real test of altruism. 

Thus the identical attitudes of the people of the Light Country of Mercury, and 
of Venus, and Jupiter, while they cannot 
be condoned, at feast can be understood. 
And following this train of thought, as Sir 
Isaac did that morning while he sat star


Around the Universe * * * 47 



ing with unseeing eyes at his neglected manuscript, an additionally disturbing conclusion was inevitable. 

All the Planets the voyagers had so far 
importuned, belonged to the Solar System. 
To some extent, therefore, their theoretical 
interests were mutual. And, if Mercury. 
Venus and Jupiter were willing to stand by 
and see the War Lords of Mars overrun 
the Earth, how much more likely were 
worlds far outside the Solar System to adopt 
a similar attitude? Sir Isaac pondered this, 
until at last he began to realize how inevitable would be their rebuff, no matter 
where in the Universe they went. 

Noon came. Sir Isaac ate moodily, then 
went back to the instrument room and his 
gloomy reverie. Ameena put the kitchen in 
order with Tubby's help, after which the 
two young people sat in the store-room, 
Ameena strumming her lyre and Tubby 
singing with enthusiastic abandon, 

It finally became too much for Sir Isaac's 
overwrought nerves. 

"Won't you please slop?'' he called 
querulously. "1 can't stand that infernal 
noise when I'm thinking." 

They stopped obediently; and a moment 
later joined Sir Isaac. 

"How we makin' out, pertessor.' " Tubby 
asked timidly. "We're sorry we disturbed 
you — this here house is so awful quiet." 

Sir Isaac was never one to hold rancor. 

<<WMTE ARE doing very nicely. Our 
W per second velocity now is approximately 45 million miles. At this rate 
wc would reach Alpha Centauri in about 
six days. I shall, however, do much better 
than that — our rate of acceleration is quite 
satisfactory." 

But Sir Isaac only shook his head and 
went back to his reverie. 

It was a futile thing— Sir Isaac smiled 
cynically to himself at the thought of it. 
The Stars themselves would not be inhabited since they were blazing Suns. Hope 
only remained with their individual Planets; and to locate these Planets anii land 
upon them would consume much more time 
than the meager 51 days of grace that were 
left. 

A very real problem of Celestial Mechanics showed Sir Isaac the mathematical impossibility of landing upon more than two 
or three additional Planets at the most, in 
such a time. The vehicle, during these 
many hours that Sir Isaac had remained lost 



in thought, had accelerated to a velocity of 
some two hundred million miles a second 
— enough to take it far beyond Alpha Centauri in a very few days — especially since 
the acceleration was constantly progressing. 
But more than twenty-four hours had been 
consumed in attaining this velocity; and to 
check it entirely, under similar conditions 
would require an equal length of time. But 
suppose Alpha Centauri had no Planets! 
Or suppose the Planets were not inhabited ? 
To go to the next nearest Star would require many days more — a still higher velocity — a still greater loss ot time in starting and stopping. And then the actual time 
necessary to land upon a Planet — the slow 
descent through its atmosphere — the ascent, 
and hours afterward proceeding at a snail's 
pace such as they had used within the Solar 
System! No, it was impossible. A year 
would be required to make any extended 
exploration- — a year at the very least. 

"I wilt figure it out," he muttered grim 
ly. "The most delicate, abstruse mathematicjl problem ever attempted! But it 
can be solved — and I will— I must — solve 

CHAPTER IX 

THE CAR passed between the component stars of Alpha Centauri during the early afternoon of the following day. The two gigantic blazing suns 
were four times our own sun in apparent 
diameter. Their light was intolerable to 
the naked eye. Even with the shades of 
the side windows drawn, the interior of the 
vehicle was disagreeably bright. 

The heat was tremendous — almost "stifling. A 1 1 that morning the temperatu re 
had been rising, until, at lunch time, the 
two men again appeared in their white flannels, and Ameena was back to her charming 
native costume. 

During the morning the two stars that 
compose Alpha Centauri had visibly separated, and Sir Isaac laid his course between 
them — a thing that was possible only be 
cause the vehicle's tremendous velocity precluded even these gigantic masses from 
drawing it aside and into them. 

The actual passage between the stars was 
very brief, fortunately, or the voyagers 
would have perished in the intolerable heat. 
Sir Isaac estimated the stars to be some 
3,600,000,000 miles apart. He professed 
ignorance as to what figure the earthly as 



48 * + * Fufur. FUtioa 



tronomers had set, and admitted his estimate probably was greatly in error since be 
bad nothing to judge it by save the stars' 
apparent flight upward past the side windows. It was indeed, only a few seconds 
before they were above the vehicle and visually again drawing together. 

When it was over, Sir Isaac, trembling 
at Ifce keyboard, turned his white face to 
his companions and smiled weakly. 

"I should not have tried that," he said. 
"It was too dangerous, attempting to pass 
through that little space. How ' ever managed it " 

He broke off, adding: 

"Well, we're past now, at all events. 1 
did not want to slow down— but suppose — 
just suppose we had run too close to one of 
those stars— suppose we bad collided with 
one of Alpha Centauri's planets?" 

"Was there any planets?" asked Tubby. 
"I didn't see none." 

"Neither did I," Sir Isaac confessed. "I 
did not see anything. There might have 
been — I do not know." He took a swallow 
of water from the carafe on the table, lighted a cigarette — he was smoking incessantly 
— and went back to the mathematics in 
which he was now constantly engaged. 

Tubby watched him timidly for a moment. Then, encouraged by a glance from 
Ameena, he said, hesitatingly: 

"Where we goin' next, perfessor?" 

Sir Isaac looked up, frowning. "Eh? 
What's that?" 

"I said, where we goin' next? You said 
this mornin' we wouldn't stop at Alpha 
Centauri, but you forgot to tell us why." 

Sir Isaac, still working on his plans, had 
made a brusque statement to that effect. 
He had promptly immersed himself in his 
mathematics again, so Tubby and Ameena 
had thought it best to let him alone temporarily. They had spent almost the entire 
morning together in the little observatory 
upstairs, where, through the small telescope 
they had tried to locate the Solar System. 

Sir Isaac, during the morning, had 
reached a definite conclusion; and now in 
the face of Tubby 's ingratiating attitude, his 
austerity melted a little, and he detailed his 
plans. 

"I did not stop at Alpha Centauri," he 
said, "because I calculated that the time we 
would lose in checking our present high velocity and starting again, would, after a very 
few stops, exhaust all the time at our com


mand." He smiled in friendly fashion, and 
explained in detail. . 

"But then," protested Tubby, "it we don't 
never stop, how are we goin' to get any 
help?" 

Sir Isaac hesitated. "To be quite frank 
with you, my friends, 1 have about concluded we cannot get any help." 

"Oh," said Tubby 

"Oh dear," Ameena echoed faintly. 
Sir Isaac continued. 

"i think we can save our earth alone — 
through our own efforts — without any outside assistance." 

Coming from such a meticulous person 
as Sir Isaac this was good news indeed. 
Tubby and the girl vociferously demanded 
details. 

Sir Isaac raised his hand. "I have not 
worked it out yet. That's why 1 didn't 
want to tell you anything about it. The 
plan involves a tremendous, a very abstruse 
and delicate mathematical calculation. If I 
can secure complete and exact enough figures the execution of my plan will be very 
simple. \ am working on the calculation 
now. I worked all last night — all this 
morning. It may require many days — I do 
not know. But if only my strength holds — " 

"You go right ahead," encouraged Tubby. 
"We won't bother you none. And meantime — ■" 

"In the meantime," Sir Isaac supplied, "I 
thought we might as well go onward." He 
smiled with just a touch of embarrassment. 
"To tell you the truth, 1 am very curious 
about these outer realms oi space. I have 
lots of good theories— but I really know 
very little about this portion of the Universe." 

"Me neither," Tubby declared liberally. 

"And," Sir Isaac went on, "since we have 
attained this high velocity, and are each 
moment accelerating it, 1 thought we might 
as well utilize our spare time to— well just 
to satisfy our curiosity. I have a theory 
regarding the edge of Space — " 

"Ah! The edge of Space!" 

"Yes, the very ultimate edge oi this 
Space we are traversing. If we could reach 
it and return with my calculation completed, 
and then save our Earth, it would — " 

"Great!" cried Tubby. 

"We can! We will!" cried the girl. 

" — it would gratify me very much," Sir 
Isaac finished. 

Thus it was arranged. Tubby and Ameena 
returned to the observatory — the only part 



Around th« Universe * * A 41 



of the vehicle where they could sing with 
abandon and without fear of disturbing Sir 
Isaac. 

Two hours later they came quietly down 
to indulge in afternoon tea. In the instrument room, sprawling in his chair, with 
his arms on the table and his head upon 
them in the midst of a litter of papers covered with algebraic hieroglyphics, sat Sir 
Isaac, fast asleep. 

"Poor dear man," murmured Ameena. 
"He is completely worn out." 

"Yeh, he's all in," agreed Tubby. "Let's 
get him to bed." 

They awakened him gently, and ordered 
him up to one of the bedrooms. Like a 
child, he obeyed. On the stairs he roused 
himself sufficiently to caution Tubby. 

WANT you to look ahead through 
H the floor window at least once every 
minute," he declared. "We have very little room, even out here, at this velocity. 
I have several times barely avoided collisions that I haven't told you about. If 
we approach closer than 900,000,000 miles 
— or even as close as that — to any celestial body of sufficient mass to deflect us, 
we are lost. Will you promise?" 

Tubby promised; and this time, with 
Ameena's assistance, he kept his word. 

As Sir Isaac explained to them the following morning, the danger of collision 
in one way was now very great, though 
in another way it had lessened. They had 
passed Alpha Centauri at a velocity per 
second of something like 275,000,000 miles. 
This by steady acceleration, now approximated 740,000,000. Any very gigantic celestial body in front of them would deflect them aside and into it. It was this 
danger that they must avoid. But of course, 
so enormous a body would be visible an 
enormous distance away and so could be 
seen in time to be avoided. 

On the other hand, there was now little 
danger to be apprehended from smaller 
bodies such as the asteroid with which they 
had so nearly collided back in the Solar 
System. Even if one of these should separate itself from the proximity of the 
larger worlds, its comparatively minute 
mass could not exert sufficient attractive 
force to make the slightest deflection in the 
course of the vehicle For a collision to occur, therefore, one of these smaller bodies 
would have to lie exactly in the vehicle's 
path— a space of some forty feet which was 



the vehicle's width. And, as Sir Isaac remarked, any particular forty feet in these 
vast realms of outer Space was too smalt to 
be considered. Sir Isaac also pointed out 
that any asteroid would be invisible until it 
was only a fraction of a second away at 
this velocity. A collision with one was a 
blind chance which they could not avoid 
taking. 

Twenty- four hours after passing Alpha 
Centauri the voyagers found themselves distant from the Earth some 1 5 l /2 light-years. 
Sir Isaac left his mathematics for an hour 
that afternoon to point out to his friends 
places of interest in the Heavens. 

The firmament now shone with dazzling 
brilliancy, though tlie faint stars of the 
Milky Way still seemed as far away as 
ever. The sun of the Solar System — its 
planets quite invisible— had dwindled to 
one of the faintest of all the stars in that 
region. Alpha Centauri, visually quite near 
the sun, was infinitely brighter, but still it 
was surpassed by many of its fellows. 

Sir Isaac, passing from one window to 
another, pointed out the red stars — Antares, 
most deeply colored of all — Betelgeuse, Aldebaran and Arcturus. Tubby wondered if 
any of these stars were as large as the Sun, 
or whether it was only on account of their 
closeness they looked so much brighter. Sir 
Isaac laughed with genuine amusement. 

"They are somewhat larger," he said ironically. "Take Betelgeuse, tor instance. 
There's our Sun— there's Betelgeuse. Our 
Sun is about 1 5 V2 -ight-years from here — 
Betelgeuse is about 150 light-years!" 

"He — be must be lots bigger, then," Tubby concluded after a moment of amazement. 

"He is," said Sir Isaac. "Professor Albert Michelson measured the diameter of 
Betelgeuse in the autumn of 1920. His 
figures show that star to be equal in size to 
27,000,000 Suns like ours!" 

TuNiy was staggered. Sir Isaac went on 
calmly. 

"The diameter of Betelgeuse is 260,000.000 miles. Let me show you how really 
enormous that is. You remember our trip 
from the Earth to Venus, and to Mercury? 
Well, if Betelgeuse were a hollow globe 
and you put our Sun suspended in its center, Mercury, Venus and the Earth would all 
have plenty of room to traverse their orbits 
inside it! Even the orbit of Mars would be 
only a short distance outside!" 



5C + * * Future Fiction 



Neither Tubby nor Ameena could think 
of anything to say. 

"Professor Michelson found all that out 
by what he calls the 'Interference Method.' 
1 won't bother you by explaining it...." 
Sir Isaac raised his hand despairingly. "Of 
course Michelson deserves a lot of credit. 
I never had occasion to work on just that 
particular problem, or I would, of course, 
have been able to " 

"Show us somethin' else," Tubby interposed. 

Sir Isaac pointed out several binaries that 
now were visually separated. It was all a 
most wonderful sight; the multiple stars— 
"clusters" — and the curious spiral nebulae, 
the still faint, far-off Milky Way. It was 
indeed a stupendous, awe-inspiring sight, 
(hough Tubby and Ameena were now sufficiently used to it, to be comparatively unimpressed. 

For nearly a week the vehicle, with steady 
acceleration, dropped into Spate, while Sir 
Isaac worked almost incessantly at his computations and Tubby and Ameena engrossed 
themselves in each other's companionship. 

They entered the Milky Way on the seventh day after passing Alpha Centauri. 
Though their actual entrance into the Galactic Plane was unmarked by any visual 
phenomena— the firmament blazed with 
stars as usual— a different set of stars were 
now brightest, but to the non-technical observer there was no marked change. 

During this week an apparent star motion had gradually increased, until now, 
looking down through the lower windows, 
the stars could be seen opening up as the 
vehicle dropped into them- -separating 
themselves, passing upward, across the side 
windows, and closing together again overhead' 

"How fast we goin' now, professor?" 
Tubby asked once. 

It was supper time. Sir Isaac hastily masticated a huge mouthful of cheese sandwich 
and washed it down with a swallow of coffee, before replying. 

"I cannot tell you in miles, " he answered. 
"In light-years I estimated it this morning 
lo be about 1/120 a second. That is, i/ 2 
light-year a minute, or about 720 a day. We 
are now about 3,500 light-years from the 
Earth." 

Tubby had by this time made up his mind 
never to be surprised again at anything. 
"That's an awful lot faster than we used 



to go, ain't it ?" he remarked. "Around 
Mercury or Venus, f'r instance.'* 
Sir Isaac's smile was condescending. 

i ffWIHE diameter of the entire Solar 
M. System, from Neptune's orbit, across 
the Sun, and out again to Neptune's orbit 
on the other side is a mean distance of 
5,593,056,000 miles. We are traveling that 
distance now just about once every second !" 

Probably no other statement of Sir Isaac's 
was so amazing. And, as Tubby and the 
girl pondered it, the immensity of this 
Space through which, day after day, night 
after night, they were plunging at this almost inconceivable rate, was made cleat 
to them. 

Sir Isaac added laughingly: 

"The Solar System isn't very large. Why, 
that star Betelgeuse could hardly turn 
around in it. A mere 5,500,000,000 miles 
- — it's only a few times the diameter of that 
one star. 

How Sir Isaac ever avoided the stars of 
the Milky Way, even with the gigantic disstances separating them, he never understood. ALI that night, his still elusive calculation neglected, he sat at the floor window in the instrument room. From time to 
time he leaped to the keyboard to alter 
their course. It was a nerve-wracking, horrible night. But in the morning, when 
Tubby, and a little later, Ameena appeared, 
the Milky Way lay glistening above them. 
Below, only a few stars showed ; beyond 
(hat, darkness- blank, unfathomable. 

Sir Isaac greeted his friends with a wan 
smile ; he was on the verge of physical 
exhaustion, but his spirit remained undaunted. 

"We are beyond the stars," he said. "It 
is as I always thought. Even from Earth 
I have telescopically observed a perceptible 
thinning out of the Celestial bodies. We 
have reached the limits of our Celestial 
Universe on this side. We have now helow 
us only empty Space— unless we encounter 
another Universe." 

Sir Isaac cjuite evidently had his own 
theories as to what lay beneath them tn 
that void of darkness. But he smilingly 
resisted all Tubby's efforts to make him 
talk about it. 

Finally in desperation. Tubby exclaimed: 

"We ain't got no business goin' much 
farther. The opposition of Mars comes off 
in forty-two days from 6 P. M. tonight — an' 



Around the Universe * * * 51 



we're gettin' a fair distance away from the 
excitement." 

Sir Isaac smiled confident!) . "We shall 
return without a stop — quite in time, even 
at our present speed. That isn't worrying 
me. It's — " 

"Your calculations?" supplied Ameena. 
"Your great plans ot which you will tell us 
nothing? How are they progressing, Sir 
Isaac?" 

His face clouded. "I have been so busy," 
he said somewhat anxiously. "But I'm making progress. Now that we are beyond the 
stars, I will have more freedom — will redouble my efforts." 

Poor Sir Isaac, for all his eagerness lo 
work, was forced to retire immediately after breakfast tor a few hours of much needed rest. They awakened him for luncheon 
— which he gobbled in haste — retreating at 
once to the instrument room, where by the 
light ot the table electrolier, he became instantly immersed in his interminable figures. 

Thus, in similar fashion, while the vehicle plunged onward through Space at a 
velocity sufficient to take it across the 
5,593,056,000-mile diameter of the Solar 
System in very much less than one second, 
fifteen more days and nights of interminable voyaging went by! 

The Universe ot which our Solar System 
is so minute a portion, had long since faded 
into invisibility. Others had been distantly 
sighted on both sides, and passed overnight 
— reduced by comparison into mere nebular regions, though each may have been as 
large, or larger than our own Universe. 

On the fifteenth day, skirting alongside 
a smaller Universe — possibly no more than 
a thousand light-years in diameter, Sir Isaac 
announced that they were approaching the 
end of their outward voyage. 

The vehicle was still dropping to that 
vast void of silence and darkness with a velocity now quite beyond calculation. It was 
a decreasing velocity, now, however, for, 
sometime since, Sir Isaac had begun to retard it. 

Overhead, the last starry firmament was 
visible, though every hour with perceptibly 
lessening brilliance. Tubby and Ameena 
sat together in the observatory, watching 
the receding stars, and wondering how, 
among all these Universes, Sir Isaac would 
ever set his course going back, in order to 
reach that particular one of the Solar Systems to which they belonged. 

The temperature of the vehicle was now, 



curiously enough, very comfortably warm — 
so warm, indeed, that Tubny wore his white 
clothes and Ameena that dainty costume in 
which he had first seen her on Venus. This 
paradox of temperature — for here in outer 
Space it should have been insufferably cold 
— Sir Isaac had explained to them the evening before. Their velocity was so great, 
he said, that even the minute, widely separated atoms ot the ether, pounding against 
the vehicle's base, were heating it — just as 
it had been heated before when passing 
through the atmospheres of the several planets upon which they had landed. 

Sir Isaac, alone in the instrument room, 
worked over his figures incessantly, feverishly, all that afternoon. It was nearly five 
o'clock when, with a cry of triumph, he 
dropped his pencil and staggered to his feet. 

"I've solved it ! Tubby, Ameena, my 
friends, at last the problem is completed. 
We shall save our Earth now— nothing can 
prevent us!" 

With head reeling, he groped bis way 
out into the dim hallway and up the stairs, 
looking tor his companions. In the starlight ot the observatory he found them — Tubby lying prone with his head in 
Ameena's lap, she stroking his hair gently, 
singing sottly a tender love song ot Venus. 

"I've solved it!" Sir Isaac cried. "We cannot fail now to savt the Earth ! My calculation is completed at last, down to the 
smallest decimal." 

Tubby turned his head slightly; Ameena s 
song died away. 

"Oh, is that you, perfessor? Come on in 
an' congratulate us. Ameena an' me just 
got engaged!" 

CHAPTER X 

THE SILENT, lonely, little vehicle 
plunging through the darkness of 
Space, a world to itself, now rang 
with the gay laughter of its three inhabitants. Sir Isaac haa successfully completed 
his complex calculation, using therein every 
intricate device known to higher mathematics, with a verified result correct to seventeen 
decimals. Tubby, and Ameena were engaged to be married. What stupendous 
events to have occur simultaneously. No 
wonder the little Celestial wanderer was the 
scene of rejoicing. 

It was an evening of the gayest festivity. 
"We must hasten now," Sir Isaac said in 
a moment of comparative quiet. "Nothing 



Si * * * Fu>ur* Hctlon 



remains but for me to show you the edge ot 
Space, which I want very much to do. 
Then we must hurry back and put my plan 
for the downfall of Mars and his allies into 
operation. I fear nothing now. We cannot fail." 

"You can't get back too quick for us," 
Tubby declared. "This here outer Space 
ain't no place to go lookin' for a minister 
in. Where we goin' to get married, 
Ameena? The Earth or Venus? 

The girl had not yet made her choice; 
and the question was left open. 

The penny-ante poker game in the instrument room — a game at which Ameena had 
now become extremely proficient — lasted 
well into the night. When it was over Sir 
Isaac made a brief calculation and concluded 
that the "Edge of Space" — as, with a slight 
smile, he still insisted on calling it — was 
still considerably below them. The vehicle, 
therefore, needed no attention. 

After this pleasant discovery, Ameena 
lingeringly parted from Tubby and retired 
to the upper floor. The two men made up 
their beds in the instrument room. Within 
fifteen minutes all three were fast asleep. 

Evidently nothing unusual occurred during the night, for when the three voyagers 
awoke about ten o'clock next morning they 
found themselves still dropping into the 
abyss of blackness. Overhead the stars of 
that last Universe were still visible, though 
now extremely faint. 

During a lazy breakfast the three friends 
fell to talking personalities. 

"You got a lot of names, ain't you, perfessor?" Tubby said. 

' 'Quite a good many, " responded Si r 
Isaac pleasantly. was obviously pleased 
at the question. "I am usually known 
merely as Sir Jsaac Swift Defoe Wells-Verne 
— but I have other names — Stockton, for 
instance." 

"What's the 'Isaac' for?" Tubby asked. 
"1 ain't never seen that on your books." 

Sir Isaac frowned. "Well, to tell you the 
truth, my friends, I am just a little ashamed 
of that. Even in my early infancy my 
marked scientific bent was apparent, and 
my grandfather insisted on my being named 
Isaac. He was a great admirer of Isaac 
Newton, you see. Of course Newton was, 
in a way, a brilliant man. I would have 
preferred Jules, or Herbert George however. 
I often use both those names. I think Herbert George is rather natty, don't you?" 

Ameena agreed that it was. 



Sir Isaac might have pursued this interesting topic indefinitely, but Tubby cut 
him short. 

"Won't you please tell us about this here 
Edge of Space we're headed for?" 

Sir Isaac, in view of their imminent arrival at the Edge of Space, evidently considered that the proper dramatic moment had 
come to tell them about it. 

"I'm sorry you are not familiar with my 
scientific narrative about this subject," he 
began somewhat pompously. "However, 
that is immaterial. .. .In it I explain that 
every atom of the Universe is really a world 
in itself. Its interior is a void of ether, an 
infinitesimal core of Space, surrounded by 
a shell of matter. That is an atom. 1 do 
not mean the old-fashioned word atom, but 
the inner nucleus which the professional 
scientists of Earth have just managed to discover. Do you follow me?" 

"Sure," declared Tubby. "An atom is like 
a cocoanut, only with ether where the milk 
ought to be." 

Sir Isaac beamed; Ameena regarded Tubby with admiration. 

<*~B^XACTLY," agreed Sir Isaac. "There 
Mj4 are electrons, ot course, which Sir 
Ernest Rutherford most doggedly insists are 
particles of disembodied electricity — negative, you know — spontaneously liberated 
from the atoms. However, in this Golden 
Atom which I described, there revolved, in 
its central void of ether, an infinite number 
of minute worlds, stars, planets, comets; a 
complete little Universe of its own. Do 
you still follow me?" 

His two auditors nodded somewhat dubiously. 

"What's this got to do with the Edge of 
Space?" Tubby demanded. 

"I'm coming to that. You must understand now, that just as all distances and all 
motions are relative one to the other, so 
also is size. I h?.ve brought to your imagination the golden Atom containing a minute 
Universe in its central void of Space. That 
to our minds, is almost infinite smallness." 

Sir Isaac hesitated impressively. 

"Now, my friends, remember, size is only 
relative. Conceive now another atom, an 
almost infinitely large atom. Within this 
gigantic atom, revolving in its central void 
of ether, place a Celestial Universe in which 
you and I live, the stars and planets among 
which we have been voyaging for many 
days past." 



Around tha Universe * * * 53 



"Yes," said Tubby faintly. "An' then — " 

"Then you will realize that we are soon 
to reach the limits of this atomic void. We 
shall land upon the inner, concave surface 
of the atom which contains us!" 

Sir Isaac's smile was triumphant. 

"Is it not wholly logical that we shall 
land upon this inner surface shortly? But 
we will not stay there, or proceed further. 
We must return at once to. our own tiny 
little planet. So much for facts. If you 
wish to imagine beyond that, I shall say 
that were we able enormously to increase 
our bodily size, we might pass through the 
shell of our Atom, which possibly is as 
thick through as it is across its central void 
of Space. Then we should emerge on the 
convex outer surface. By still further increasing our bodily dimensions, we would 
outgrow this Atom and find ourselves in 
another world, an inconceivably large world, 
of which this Atom of ours may quite well 
be an atom of somebody's wedding ring, or 
the atom of a column in a King's castle, 
or the minute fragment of a grain of sand 
in a vast desert. You asked me about absolute motion. Suppose our atom is in a 
grain of sand of some vast desert and is 
now being blown in a storm — or that — " 

"Never mind any more," Tubby cried. 
"We got the idea, ain't we, Ameena?" 

"It is very wonderful," the girl declared 
slowly. "But a little difficult to follow, 
just at first." 

"You'll get used to it," said Sir Isaac. 
"Just keep on thinking about it a while. 
It's my own theory. I'm going to tell Sir 
Ernest about it because my atom is really 
that inner nucleus, that portion, around 
which his electrons revolve. So you see this 
theory of mine will help him out a lot. . . . 
Ameena, you do make very good coffee. 
Can I have another cup?" 

When, after breakfast, they gazed down 
through the floor window, a very faint luminous glow seemed growing in the blackness far below them. Sir Isaac regarded it 
intently a moment, then with a cry of satisfaction hastened to the keyboard. 

"That is light diffused throughout the 
atmosphere of the Inner Surface," he said, 
as he altered the positions of several of the 
keys. 

"I am checking our velocity very rapidly 
now," he added as he straightened up. "We 
will arrive at our destination this evening." 

His prediction was correct. All that afternoon the luminous glow beneath them 



grew in intensity. By supper time it gleamed 
like a pale phosphorescence, spreading out 
in all directions to the visual limits of the 
floor window. Shortly after supper they 
entered the atmosphere of the Inner Surface at an altitude which Sir Isaac calculated to be several hundred thousand miles. 

It was nearly nine o'clock when Tubby, 
peering downward, saw what might have 
been the broad plateau of a mountain-top 
coming up out of the yellowish, luminous 
haze. It was a flat surface extending out 
of sight in three directions. But its fourth 
side, almost directly beneath them, ended 
in a sharp line with a dimly yellow abyss 
beside it. 

"Look at the cliff," Tubby called to Sir 
Isaac. "You better slow up some more an* 
figure out where we're goin' to land." 

They were then some ten thousand feet 
above the top of this "cliff," as Tubby 
called it. Sir Isaac, after a careful inspection of it which was difficult in the very 
dim, hazy yellow light, finally decided to 
descend very slowly close beside its perpendicular face and thus reach the lower level 
of land adjacent. 

They made the descent in the dim starlight in an increasing yellow glare from 
below a thousand feet away from the face 
of the precipice, The wall of rock extended in a direct line as far as they could see, 
as straight as though it were hewn by a 
rule. 

IT WAS a descent of some fifteen miles.Tiny points of light now showed beneath them. Through the side window of 
the instrument room, the dim face of the 
huge rocky wall slid swiftly upward, as 
though the vehicle were a silently dropping 
elevator car. Occasionally, rectangular openings in the rock wall went up past the window, openings five hundred feet long, from 
which a lurid glare of yellow-red light 
blazed with blinding force out into the 
night. 

"Say," whispered Tubby, awestruck. 
"What sort of a place is this?" 

A brilliant ball of fire, seeming hardly 
more than a hundred feet away, came vertically up past the side window, a ball of 
blazing flames fen times the size of the 
vehicle itself. The heat from it was tremendous. From the lower window an even 
brighter though diffused light was streaming in ; and a deafening, roaring noise filled 
the room. 



54 * + ★ FuWv Fiction 



It all happened within the space of a few 
seconds. Sir Isaac, who had been hovering 
anxiously between the windows and the 
keyboard, became suddenly confused. He 
started toward the table, then changed his 
mind and leaped to the side window, half 
falling over Ameena, who was in his path. 
"Look!" shouted Tubby, above the roar. 
Hey, look out, perfessor! Let's get out of 
here!" 

An enormous, swiftly moving black surface, completely obstructing the side window for an instant, went past close outside. 
Sir Isaac leaped back to the table just as 
the vehicle struck something soft and yielding — a glancing, sidewise blow. Tubby 
and Ameena were hurled to the floor. Sir 
Isaac, clinging desperately to the table, fumbled for the keyboard, and altered several 
of the keys. There was » gigantic swishing noise; the room trembled— tilted sidewise. Then silence. 

Tubby raised his aching head. "NX/here's 
Ameena? Ameena! You ain't hurt?" 

Her faint voice reassured him. He raised 
himself to a sitting position. "Oh, perfessor — you hurt? What happened? Where 
are we?" 

They were none of them more than badly shaken up. The room was level again, 
vibrationless, soundless. Through the floor 
window shone the faint stars; out of the 
side window, high above, the yellow glare 
of the Inner Surface was fading. The vehicle had turned over, and was again dropping out into Space! 

Tubby lifted Ameena to a chair and 
kissed her reassuringly. " 'Sail right. We 
ain't hurt none. What happened, peifessor? What was all that?" 

Sir Isaac did not know. For an hour they 
compared notes on what they had seen. It 
had all happened so quickly; it was so confusing, so unexpected. Their view through 
the little windows at near objects was so 
limited they found that each of them had 
seen things differently. 

"Well, anyhow," Tubby declared with a 
shrug, "we landed on that there Inner Surface, an' we got away again without gettin' 
smashed up. Now let's get home an' fix 
this Mars business. We only got twentysix days left." 

With the entire repellent force of the Inner Surface above it, and the attraction of 
several of the celestial universes at its base, 
the vehicle rapidly gained velocity. It was 
nearly midnight when Sir Isaac, coming out 



of a profound meditation, suddenly exclaimed. 

"I know what happened to us on the 
Inner Surface! Fancy that! How could I 
have been so stupid?" 

"What?" demanded Tubby. 

Ameena, who just at that moment was 
preparing to retire to bed, stood poised 
with a bottle of liniment in her hand. 

Sir Isaac said excitedly: 

"The inhabitants of the Inner Surface, 
relative to us, must be gigantic in size, 
How silly of me not to have realized that!" 

"Well?" 

"Well," Sir Isaac continued, "that was a 
gigantic building alongside of which we 
went down — a building fifteen or twenty 
miles high! Those huge, yellow rectangles 
were its lighted windows! That ball of. fire 
was a street light! We descended directly 
into a city street, and collided, probably, 
with the coal-sleeve of a pedestrian!" 

CHAPTER XI 

THE VEHICLE had passed within the 
orbit of Jupiter on its return voyage 
before Sir Isaac deemed it expedient 
to explain to his fellow voyagers his mathematical plan for the salvation of the Earth. 
It was the morning of the day before Mars 
was to be in opposition with the Earth. To 
be exact, just thirty-four hours remained at 
the moment the orbit of Jupiter was crossed. 

The return trip — of a little less duration 
than the voyage out — had been devoid of 
any exciting events chiefly owing to the unflagging vigilance of Sir Isaac. His genius 
for astronomy — by some method which he 
did not see fit to explain to his friends — 
enabled him unerringly to find his way 
back to the proper Universe, and thence to 
the Solar System. 

During these days and weeks, sleeping 
little, Sir Isaac had remained almost constantly at his post at the instrument room 
floor window, or at the table beside the keyboard, verifying over and over again, his 
gigantic calculations; or writing on his 
now very bulky manuscript. Tubby and 
Ameena, left thus to their own devices, 
passed the tune pleasantly enough, singing 
their duets whenever Sir Isaac would let 
them, and always cooking the meals and 
washing the dishes together. The wedding 
had now been set to take place on the Earth, 
immediately upon their arrival, with a 
honeymoon trip to Venus. 



Around the Universe * * * 55 



At meal time which the three friends occupied principally with argument and with 
scientific dissertations from Sir Isaac, Tubby had once remarked: 

"Them inhabitants of the Edge of Space 
must have been awful big, perfessor. Big 
as anybody could get. Ain't I right?'' 

Sir Isaac, in a manner that now was becoming quite habitual, smiled condescendingly. 

"My dear fellow, tiiose inhabitants of the 
Inner Surface of our Atom may "be, possibly, several hundred limes larger than ourselves. But, like us, they are merely denizens of an infinitesimal Atom. The inhabitants of that outer world are so much larger that their most powerful microscopes — 
assuming they have microscopes — would be 
necessary even to see our Atom itself much 
less see us or the planets in it!" 

Within the orbit of Jupiter — they were 
heading for Mars and had passed a very 
considerable distance from Jupiter itself — 
Sir Isaac materially checked their velocity. 
The region of the Minor Planets lay ahead. 
It was among them that he planned to operate. 

After breakfast that morning he called 
Tubby and the girl into the instrument room 
and very quietly but solemnly announced 
that he was ready to explain his plan. Tubby and Ameena sat together in the huge easy 
chair, she perched on his lap, and hand in 
hand they prepared to give Sir Isaac their 
closest attention. 

"My dear friends and fellow voyagers." 
Sir Isaac began, with something of the tone 
of a public lecturer, "we come now to the 
most important, most remarkable, and I may 
say the most awe-inspiring event of our scientific adventure around the Celestial Universe." 

"I wish he did not have such long prefaces," Ameena whispered to Tubby. 

"Sh! you'll make him mad," Tubby whispered back. "He don't mean nothin'. He 
gets that way from writin' so much." 

"As you both know," Sir Isaac went on, 
ignoring these whispered asides, "at 6:15 
P. M. tomorrow evening the Planet Mars 
will be at its closest point to the Earth. 
We anticipate then that the combined Martian and Mercurian armies will voyage to 
our Moon, which already they have conquered, there to prepare to attack the Earth. 
It is necessary, therefore, for us to prevent 
this migration. If we can keep the armies 
on Mars their small force now occupying 



our Moon will be powerless for offensive 
movement. We could even send armies 
from Earth to destroy them; or, at the next 
opposition doubtless they would return to 
Mars of their own volition." 

"Right," Tubby agreed impatiently. "But 
please tell us how we're goin' to stop the 
Mars armies from movin' over to our 
Moon." 

"I will," stated Sir Isaac. "But first you 
must understand the scientific laws governing what we are about to do. A poet once 
said, 'Thou canst not touch a flower without troubling of a star.' He did not mean 
it scientifically perhaps, but its scientific 
application is very pertinent. It means 
that if you so much as pick a flower anywhere in the Universe, you alter, by some 
minute fraction, the course of every star— 
every celestial body, no matter how distant, 
or how gigantic. 

"I see you do not quite understand me. 
The Celestial Universe is very delicately 
balanced. Every force acting upon the celestial bodies has another force to counteract it. Now since every body attracts every 
other body directly as the mass you will 
realize that a daisy growing in a field on 
Earth attracts Neptune or Mars just as much 
in proportion to its mass, as they attract the 
daisy. And since attraction is inversely as 
the square of the distance, it follows that 
if you pick the daisy, thus altering its position, you alter its attraction. And therefore 
— very minutely, of course — you disturb the 
movements of every body in the Universe." 

"I think we understand you," Ameena 
said. Sir Isaac had paused, and this time 
Tubby had failed to make any comment. 
"It is really very interesting. Do go on, Sir 
Isaac." 

Sir Isaac continued: 

"Well, I propose to do just that very 
thing. To " 

"Pick a daisy?" Tubby put in. He glanced 
at Ameena for approval of this quip, but 
she frowned. 

"To so alter the course of some very 
small celestial body — by using the attraction 
of our vehicle upon it — that a series of 
collisions, progressively greater in the 
masses of the colliding bodies, will rapidly 
occur among the Minor Planets." 

"Oh," said Tubby, somewhat abashed. 
"Then what?" 

"I have figured it out very carefully," 
declared Sir Isaac. "You may appreciate 
possibly the abstruseness and the delicacy of 



M * * * Future Fie Hon 



such a calculation. The collisions will climax at 5.34 P. M. tomorrow afternoon 
by " 

The sentence wa.> never finished. Past 
the side window, very close outside, a 
gleaming white object flashed! Sir Isaac, 
Tubby and the girl leaped to their feet in 
fright. A glance upward out of the side 
window was enough. It was that same 
Mercurian vehicle, hovering here between 
Mars and Jupiter, awaiting their return! 

"Say — what the — did they try an' run 
into us?" Tubby gasped. 

The glistening white cube was receding 
rapidly above them. Suddenly it turned, 
and as they hurried into the store-room to 
observe it from there, it came rushing toward them again. 

«|T'S RUNNIN' into us!" Tubby cried 
M in terror. "Hey, perfessor! Let's 
do somethin' — let's get a-goin' somewhere!'' 

Sir Isaac rushed back to the keyboard. 
The horrible meaning of the situation became clear. The Mercurian vehicle, manned 
by "suicide volunteers," was endeavoring 
to destroy them and itself simultaneously 
by a collision in Space! 

Sir Isaac, bis blood running cold in his 
veins, shook himself together, and with deliberate care depressed two of the keys. 
The Heavens turned over swiftly, dizzily. 

Tubby, who was standing in the center 
of the room, clutched Ameena for their mutual support. 

"Don't look at them windows'" he cautioned. "Close your eyes. Perfessor, which 
way we goin'? What'll I do to help? 
Where's them Mercurians? Are we duckin' 
'em?" 

Nothing could be distinguished through 
the windows save the rapidly shifting firmament. Sir Isaac gritted his teeth. 

"That tiny asteroid!" he muttered. "We 
were near it, the first asteroid in my calculation." 

A blinding white glare burst through the 
side window; Sir Isaac, desperately pressing 
other keys, finally brought the Heavens to 

rest. 

"It's — all right," he panted. "That burst 
of light— that " 

Through the side window a tiny blazing 
globe was receding above them; from none 
of the windows was the Mercurian vehicle 
to be seen. 

"We are safe," said Sir Isaac a moment 
later, when they had all calmed down a 



little, "The Mercurians collided with that 
little asteroid. They are annihilated." 

Sir Isaac's face was as sober as though 
this were personally a great misfortune to 
himself — which indeed it was. He added: 

"That asteroid was the first in my calculation — the one on which I was to begin 
operations. This unforeseen collision has 
changed its course— the whole fabric of my 
calculations has been altered." Tears welled 
into his eyes. "I — I tried so hard to have 
it mathematically perfect. And now it's 
ruined ! Now we are powerless to save our 
world !" 

The unfortunate man was overcome for a 
moment. Tubby and the white-faced girl 
sat beside htm. 

"You can figure it out again," Tubby 
said consolingly. "Try, perfessor. Maybe 
it ain't ruined at all." 

Under the influence of Ameena's gentle 
fingers stroking his hair, and her soft words 
of courage in his ear, Sir Isaac suddenly 
braced up. 

"I'll do it!" he cried. "Give me my pencil and paper. .. .Ameena, make me some 

strong, black toffee. Bring it here 

with my lunch. . . .Tubby, give me my cigarettes, and let me atone. Go away. I 
must rectify this terrible error." 

He dashed the damp locks of hair from 
his eyes; and while Ameena hurried into 
the kitchen, he lighted a cigarette, pushed 
Tubby away, and plunged feverishly into 
his ruined computation. Ten minutes later 
he was altering the vehicle's course and, 
with his array of delicate scientific instruments, was making careful observations of 
the asteroid's present direction and flight. 

Tubby kept out of the instrument room. 
At noon, Ameena took Sir Isaac's luncheon 
in to him on a tray. He smiled up at her, 
momentarily suspending his flying pencil. 

"I do hope your computation isn't ruined, 
dear Sir Isaac," she murmured gently. 

"Oh, no," he said. "In fact I am beginning to think quite the contrary." He 
seemed wholly cheerful. "The Mecurian 
vehicle colliding with my asteroid altered 
its course, naturally. But I am beginning 
to discover that the alteration is favorable 
to my plans rather than the reverse." 

He patted her shoulder. "Thank you. 
Ameena. . . . That stew looks delicious. . . . 
I shall have my new calculation completed 
in an hour, I hope. That Mercurian collision was a blessing in disguise." 

So it proved, for by two o'clock in the 



Areund 4k* Universe ★ * ★ 57 



afternoon Sir Isaac called his friends into 
the instrument room and triumphantly displayed his new set of figures. 

"Very good indeed," approved Tubby. 
"Let's get to usin' 'em. What do we do 
first?" 

"At 3.57 P. M. this afternoon we shall 
approach that same asteroid," Sir Isaac announced. "Just leave everything to me. It 
is all quite simple now!" 

At 3:57 P. M. exactly they were encircling the asteroid at a distance of some ten 
miles — speeding around it in a circular orbit as though they were its satellite. But 
with each revolution they paused on one 
side and drew away slightly, coaxing it from 
its path by their attraction. 

It was a tiny celestial wanderer indeed — 
not more than three or four thousand feet in 
diameter, Sir Isaac said — nothing but a 
boulder flying alone through Space. 

At 4.17 P. M. the vehicle withdrew. Tubby was anxious to have something happen; 
but for nearly an hour nothing did. It was 
4:45 P. M. when Sir Isaac pointed through 
the side window to another, somewhat larger asteroid approaching. With careful work 
at the keyboard he swooped the vehicle toward it — around it twice — and then slowly 
away again in the opposite direction. 

"There," he murmured. "I think I have 
done my part correctly. The laws of Celestial Mechanics must do the rest." 

He sat by at the side window, watching. 
Tubby and Ameena saw the first asteroid 
far above them. The other was obviously 
nearing it. Both had been deflected from 
their normal course by Sir Isaac's skill; a 
collision was inevitable. 

IT CAME at 5:51 P. M. — as Sir Isaac 
had calculated — a soundless flash, and 
then a new v larger celestial body, the fused 
mass of the other two, wavering in Space, 
plunging diagonally toward the Sun, and at 
last finding its new orbit by that delicate 
balancing of forces which is the marvel of 
Celestial Mechanics. 

Sir Isaac was jubilant. He took several 
observations of the new asteroid. 

"Perfect, my dear friends. The new orbit is identical with my calculation. There 
will be another collision, with a much larger planetoid, at 7:19 P. M. Let us have 
dinner." 

"Very good idea," approved Tubby with 
relish. 

Tubby and Ameena still had only a vague 



idea of how all this was to save the Earth; 
but they trusted Sir Isaac implicitly. Besides, 
they did not dart ask any advance details, 
which would have offended Sir Isaac's sense 
of the dramatic. 

The second collision— another, larger 
flash— look place exactly at the appointed 
time. And all during the evening and far 
into the night, other collisions occurred. 
Each involved larger bodies — and after 
each, from (he vehicle which followed in 
their train, Sir Isaac computed the orbital 
elements of the new celestial body. 

"You had better go to sleep," he said, at 
two o'clock. "There will not be another 
until 4.35 A. M. It involves a very considerably larger body — I shall wake you up 
in time to see it." 

He added solemnly: 

"I trust this next Minor Planet is not inhabited. I do not think so, though it is 
over two hundred miles in diameter. I did 
not want to involve it — but I had to." 

At 6:03 P. M. the following evening, 
just twelve minutes before the long-anticipated opposition of Mars with the Earth, 
the climax came. There had been two gigantic collisions during the day. The last 
one — at 2:23 P. M. — involved two bodies 
of almost equal mass which approached each 
other from diametically opposite directions. 
A head-on crash ensued. A new body, 
fused into a molten mass by the created 
heat of arrested motion, hung for an instant 
suspended— completely devoid of orbital 
velocity. Then it moved downward — slowly at first, then swiftly, with constant acceleration plunging down toward the center of mass of the Solar System — the Sun. 

The vehicle followed it cautiously. 
Watching this enormous, fiery derelict created by the mathematical genius of Sit 
Isaac, it was nearly six o'clock before Tubby and Ameena grasped the true significance of what was taking place before their 
very eyes. 

The new asteroid — five hundred miles in 
diameter, a white-hot core with flames hundreds of miles in height leaping from it, 
plunged for the Sun. But Mars also lay 
beneath it (hough slightly off to one side 
—Mars, now a huge, reddish, smug-looking 
crescent across the lower firmament. 

Minutes passed. The three watchers 
crouched tense at the lower window of the 
instrument room. The blaiing asteroid 
plunged on. Its course for the Sun would 
take it half a million miles to the side of 



58 * * ir Fuiura Fiction 



Mars! Five minutes more! The asteroid, 
feeling Mars' attraction as it approached, 
began turning gradually aside, deflected by 
this other attraction which at such proximity was greater than the Sun's. 

Then at last Tubby understood! He 
gripped Ameena — breathless. 

"Look! Mars is pulHn' it! Look!" 

It was 6.03 P. M. exactly when, with a 
gigantic, soundless flash, the molten asteroid collided squarely with the Planet's upper surface! 

CHAPTER XII 

HAT a triumph, even for the 
genius of a super-maihematician! 
A blazing, molten mass of matter five hundred miles in diameter had 
fallen upon the surface of Mars at almost 
the very moment of its anticipated triumph 
over an inoffensive neighboring planet! No 
wonder Tubby and Ameena were overjoyed! 
No wonder Sir Isaac's pale, intellectual 
countenance could not but reflect the pride 
in his heart! 

Tubby shook his friend's hand warmly; 
Ameena kissed him. 

"Well," declared Tubby. "I guess that 
settles them Martians. Some excitement foe 
them right now!" 

"Did it kill many of them, do you think, 
Sir Isaac?" Ameena asked anxiously. 
'Women and little children— — -" 

"I'm afraid it did," Sir Isaac said soberly. 
"I could not help that — the innocent must 
everywhere suffer for the guilty. I had to 
do the best I could for our own world." 
He sat down, pondering. Then he added: 
"I have no idea what such a collision 
would do or what may be the icsult of it 
to the orbit of Mars and thus to the other 
planets. The heat generated may have 
roasted every living creature on the globe. 
Or perhaps not. But I rather -magine these 
armies will have enough to do at home 
without undertaking an invasion of the 
Earth for some time to come." 

"I should guess yes," Tubby declared enthusiastically. He threw his arms around 
Ameena and kissed her vigorously. "Now 
all we got to do is hurry right home so you 
an' me can get married. Ain't I right, 
kid?" 

The girl agreed that this was logical. 
"I shall have you there tomorrow," said 



Sir Isaac. "We need not bother with the 
Moon — let us leave that little Martian army 
marooned there. We will let it alone — it 
cannot harm us." 

"Sure," agreed Tubby. 'Let it alone. 
Come on, let's eat and then play poker." 

On this last leg of the journey, Sir Isaac 
insisted on going slowly. In the first place 
he was thoroughly exhausted and demanded twelve solid hours' sleep; and also, with 
Tubby and Ameena thus in continuous command, he felt it was advisable to make haste 
slowly. It was therefore not until 9:45 
P. M. the following eveutng that the vehicle landed again upon the Earth from 
which it had departed some sixty days previously. 

The last evening in the vehicle was a solemn one. Tubby and Ameena were to part 
from their friend and take their honeymoon 
trip alone in it to Venus. A hazardous 
voyage, doubtless! But youth and inexperience are always confident. 

"You're a very wonderul man, Sir Isaac," 
Ameena said during that last supper. 

"You sure are," Tubby confirmed. He 
hesitated, scratching his head. "But say, 
perfessor, there's one or two things about 
this here voyage of ours I ain't quite got 
clear." 

Sir Isaac nodded encouragingly. 

'Tor one thing," Tubby began. "I ain't 
got this gravity part very straight. Why is 
it when we're in this vehicle we don't personally feel all these here changes of gravity? If the gravity is cut off from under 
us why don't we gel lighter?" 

It was a stupendous bit of logical reasoning on Tubby's part. It surprised Ameena; it amazed Sir Isaac. 

"Why — why — " he stammered. Then he 
smiled frankly. 

"I really cannot explain exactly," he confessed. "The thing surprised me very 
much. I've been worrying over it for my 
manuscript. It is a fact that we do not feel 
any changes of gravity until we actually 
land upon some celestial body. But why, 
I cannot say. I think it's because of our velocity, the constant acceleration or changes 
of velocity of the vehicle. Motion and 
gravity are very closely related. If it's that, 
Einstein would know all about it. He disagrees with me on almost everything, but 
still he's a nice sort of chap. I think I shall 
have to consult him." 



W 



Around *h« Uitivers* * * ★ 5? 



"I would," said Tubby. "Then there's 
another thing. You got this here vehicle 
built wrong. You got the observatory on 
top an' we're always gain' the other way. 
You never onc't used that little telescope. 
An' then there's " 

"Tubby!'* cautioned Ameena. And, in 
deference to the feelings of their friend, 
who after all was only human and therefore liable to err, Tubby took the hint and 
stopped. 

THEY landed, after a careful reconnoiter, within a few hundred feet of where 
they had started. As they stepped from the 
vehicle to that earth upon which Ameena 
had never before set foot, Bill Hawkins' apple trees were in plain sight in the moonlight. Instantly Tubby remembered his wonderful gift which had brought Sir Isaac's 
Inter-planetary vehicle into material being. 
The thought of it had never crossed his 
mind since the first few minutes after their 
departure from Earth. How foolish all their 
perturbation over the Martian attack! Why 
all they need have done was come home, 
and Tubby could have wished that all the 
Martians and Mercurians would drop dead 
as fast as they landed ! 

Tubby explained all this excitedly to his 
friends. Sir Isaac frowned. 

"I thought of that," he said. "But I 
could not be concerned in trickery like that. 
My public would not stand for it. We had 
a scientific problem to solve, and we solved 
it with science — quite reasonably and properly." 

Tubby nodded acquiescence; but his eyes 
were sparkling as he regarded Bill Hawkins' 
apple orchard. 

"All right, perfessor. But I'm gohV to 
get revenge on this guy Hawkins anyway. 
You do things your way — I do them my 
way. Come on over an' let's see them apples turn rotten." 

Sir Isaac was greatly annoyed. "I beg of 
you net to. It is childish. To engage in 
such foolishness, after all our scientific adventures^ " 

"You did that onc't," Tubby suddenly 
accused. "An' when you wrote how you 
did it, you signed that there Wells name. 
/ read it." 

Sir Isaac flushed. "Yes, I did," he admitted, with some heat. "I did descend 
once to such an unplausiblc trick — and I've 



been sorry for it ever since. I've been trying to live it down. I — Tubby, you'll only 
bring disaster upon yourself — upon all of 
us. Forget that ability you have. Don't 
ever " 

"I ain't goin' to forget it," Tubby persisted doggedly. "I wish all Bill Hawkins' 
apples was rottin' on the trees. I wish—" 

A diabolical memory of that similar situation Sir Isaac had once conceived under 
his favorite "Herbert George" name came 
to Tubby. 

"I wish the earth was revolvin' twice as 
fast as usual, so Bill Hawkins' house would 
fly off in the air," he intoned. 

Ameena flung her arms about his neck; 
Sir Isaac gave a cry of terror. A fearful 
gale of wind came roaring down upon 
them. Stones, sticks, every manner of flying missile, whistled by. 

Sir Isaac, shouting something incoherent, 
flung himself prone upon the ground. Tubby gripped a tree-trunk to hold himself 
from blowing away; Ameena clutched him 
in terror. 

In the midst of the hurricane Bill Hawkins' house was standing firm. Suddenly 
madness possessed Tubby. 

"I wish the Earth was revolvin' ten times 
as fast! I wish " 

Sir Isaac's body left the ground, hurtling 
into the air like a bullet. Tubby swung 
one arm around Ameena, and one about the 
tree-trunk. He felt like a balloon tugging 
its leash. The wind was a cyclone. A 
house went sailing through the air — Bill 
Hawkins' house. 

"Tubby! Don't, Tubby!" 

The girl's appealing cry frightened Tubby. A flying billet of wood struck him 
viciously on the shoulder. He tried desperately to think of something to stop this 
horrible cataclysm. 

"I wish — " he murmured. "I wish I 
hadn't never been able to wish nothin*. I 
wish I'd forget all about havin' done this. 
I tvtsh " 

The clink of the poker chips was incessant — annoying. Tubby stared across the 
smoke- laden room at the three men under 
the circle of light. He remembered dimly 
that they had been arguing, and sat up 
abruptly. 

"As I was sayin', Jake," he announced, 
"I got a idea that this here Edge of 
Space " 



NO STAR 
SHALL FALL 

an extravaganza 

by 

WILFRED OWEN 
MORLEY 

f Author of "A Matter of PhiJo3o»hy," "Am 
bition," etc.) 



"So long at the race endures, thus long 
(halt mankind extend Its hand to help any 
other beings who seek our aid. No creatura shall perish; no star shall fall if it be 
within our power to sot aside the danger." 



REMEMBER how startled you were 
when you awoke suddenly last 
night? For a moment you could 
not believe that you were in the world 
of actuality, so clear and intricate!) defined 
had been the sequences through which you 
had just passed. You were sure it was 
not merely a dream. You knew that, in 
some way, you had passed physically into 
the far-distant future, lived a portion of 
your own life there. 

Your first impulse was to get up and 
write down all the memories that flooded 
your consciousness, for you didn't want to 
lose any of them. But the first shock of 
awakening had now passed away; you felt 
drowsy. You lay back thinking that you 
wouldn't forget this anyway; you couldn't 
forget. Perhaps if you made just a few 
notes now, that would be enough. Tomorrow you would get to work and write down 
the entire experience in full detail. 

While you were thinking thus, sleep 
claimed you again. Morning came and 
you awoke, got up, and went about your 
usual way of living as if nothing had 
happened. 

But you haven't forgotten, really. Your 
conscious mind, occupied so fully as it is 
with the business of making a living in 




this world, lias merely shoved these memories into a corner of your brain. Relax. 
Forget for a moment about your obligations, your ambitions, your problems. Relax 
completely and remember. What was the 
first impression, now? How did it start? 

iTJpWO people, a man and a woman strollSL ing in the city. Both dressed in brightly colored costumes, the woman wearing 
a greatcape which trailed many yards behind her. For a moment, you could not 
believe that one of these figures was you. 
You thought, almost frantically, to your


No Star Shell Foil * * ★ 61 



self: but I don't look like this. For you 
were — beautiful. That is the only word 
for it. 

You glanced at your companion who 
smiled warmly at you. The two of you, 
you knew, were mated. Thoughtfully, you 
fingered your clothing, noting that tt had 
some of the qualities of silk and some of 
rubber, yet was neither. Bit by bit th« 
multitude of impressions came to you — it 
was as if you had been asleep for a long 
time; you knew all about this world, but 
so full of the otherworld were you that 
you must think in terms of it. 

This wide pathway beneath you — it was 
resilient to your step, giving your every 
motion a springiness most pleasing. The 
gently curving hills to the right of you 
that led to an expanse of white-sanded 
shore, the woodland to the left of you — 
you knew this scene well. In the distance 
you saw the shafts of buildings towering 
into the sky. The great height of them, 
you knew, was sheerly ornamental. 

These were not the outskirts of the city; 
you were strolling in the city proper. How 
different from the cities of that otherworld 
where so long you had sojourned) The 
people of those cities had to go far away 
from the metropolis to get into expanses 
of hills or woodlands or seashores. True, 
they did have parks and beaches but these 
were always so crowded . . . Was there 
anything at all in this otherworld to correspond with what you saw about you? 
Only the visions of a few dreamers, and 
a feeble attempt in the general direction 
at something they called a World's Fair. 

But you had been strolling long enough. 
You grasped your companion's hand, and 
indicated a colored block in the wide pavement, blocks which appeared at regular 
intervals. Without speaking, the two of 
you stepped upon it. and slowly it began 
to sink down beneath you, coming to rest 
at last in a great subterranean cavern, quietly lit, completely air conditioned. A single 
open car was there, one which seated two 
comfortably. You did not see any sign 
of wheels, or of any other locomotive 
power. However, as soon as the two of 
you were settled—it took a moment or so 
to fix the greatcape comfortably — the car 
began moving rapidly, the cool air streaming your hair pleasantly. 

YOU emerged from the car to find 
yourself in a large courtyard sort of 



place. The great shafts of what seemed to 
be several distinct buildings arose around 
you, although you knew that this was really 
but one construction. However, you had 
not long to look around, for ycur companion suddenly grasped your arm and 
pointed upward. You looked and gasped. 

For hovering in the air, near the top 
of the buildings was a creature fantastic 
beyond your wildest dreams. Huge it was, 
and you thought of a titanic jellyfish and 
a titanic plant, and discarded both for the 
creature was neither. The spread of its 
hood must have been some thirty feet, while 
(lie many hair-like tentacles of it were 
easily twice that in extent. Jet black it 
was, devoid of any marking; it floated 
there, as atop the crest of sea-waves, rising 
and falling softly in the air-currents. 

You were astonished, but you were not 
afraid. Deep in your brain, something 
tinkled, almost bell-like, then impressions 
began to come to you. They were not in 
the form of words, or even ideas, or then 
again definite images. Yet, you understood. 

The creature was telling you, in its own 
manner, that it meant no harm, that it came 
to you for help. It wanted you to accompany it to a far place; it promised that no 
danger, so far as it knew, awaited you there. 

And you assented. It was the very keynote of this society in which you lived that 
none who came to you for help could be 
denied. For man, in this remote day, had 
extended his reach far into the very deeps 
of creation itself and many were the strange 
and alien beings known to him. Emblazoned 
in the great central hall of the planet, 
where regularly all humans within reach 
met to engage in a common pooling of 
consciousness, was the legend you had 
learned as early in life as you ceuld recall. 

"So long as the race endures, thus long 
shall mankind extend its hand to help any 
other beings who seek our aid. No creature 
shall perish ; no star shall fall if it bt 
within our power to set aside the danger," 

You assented, even as you wondered how 
you would help this creature, wondered 
through what means you would bridge the 
stellar void. In this otherworld where you 
had sojourned so long as partially, it 
seemed, to forget your own world, men 
had dreamed of crude reaction ships for 
the purposes of leaping from Earth to 
her satellite. And some there were who 
dreamed of greater ships reaching farther 



42 * ★ * Future Fiction 



distances, but all were greatly limited in 
their dreams. 

While you were pondering, your hand 
stole to the wide belt you wore and 
touched a stud thereon, even as your companion performed the same act. You felt 
a slight exhilaration, and sensed that some 
apparatus on your shoulders, which you had 
assumed to be decorative, was operating. 
Then it was that you realized the ground 
was falling away from you and you were 
rising, soaring upward to meet the alien 
being. 

The being's tentacles touched you and 
lifted you up to its great hood where a 
smaller membrane wrapped itself about you. 
You knew this was merely to secure you, 
to keep you from floating away into the 
void. For you knew now that this was a 
space-dweller, a creature whose natural 
habitat was space itself, knew that it could 
plunge through the starry gulf at speeds 
greater than light; nor did this knowledge 
disturb you, for man had long known, in 
this world, of motions and velocities exceeding light. 

For the veriest fragment of an instant 
you felt alarmed, for how could you live 
in the airless, heatless deeps between worlds. 
But even as these thoughts came to you, 
your greater knowledge had dispelled them. 
Swiftly your body became inert, your breath 
stopped, your heart ceased, and, sc far as 
could be observed, your brain had ceased 
to function. Yet this was not entirely so, 
for in the core of your mind remained one 
little spark which would keep burning so 
long as your body were not totally destroyed. 

And, back on Earth, in the great central 
building, within the indescribable complications of a titanic machine, a connection 
was made. A great eye trained itself upon 
you and your steed, recording your journey. And a great brain trained itself upon 
the spark that remained burning in the 
core of your being, receiving impressions no 
less perfectly than did your own brain 
when awake. 

5T WAS not until you had returned ro 
Earth, and your full individual consciousness had been restored that you knew 
what occurred after you and the alien one 
had departed from Earth. You sat in the 
great hall, with all available members of 
the race to see records of this exploit, and 



you were no less a new spectator to these 
scenes than they. 

You saw the creature, your mate, and 
yourself plunging through the deeps of 
space to come at last to a small star, long 
dead. It was about the size of the moon. 
At one time, you knew, it had been a 
luminary, even as your own sun; then, ats 
it cooled, it had supported life, even as 
a planet, until, finally, devoid of atmosphere and light, it now drifted aimlessly 
in the void, dark and lifeless. 

You saw the space -creature, to whom 
the plunge into Earth's atmosphere had 
been as a man's plunge to the bottom of 
a deep lake to retrieve an object, finally 
come to rest" on its surface, saw there .1 
' ar g e group of similar creatures. And 
there, on the barren surface of the star, 
was a great building. Not only tall was 
it, but spread out, and the architecture 
was such that it suggested human construction. 

These creatures, you knew, regarded this 
building with a sort of reverence. 

You entered the building, along with 
the creature who had borne you here, an* I 
found it to be a titanic planetarium. Hen 
was a miniature solar system, though m . 
the solar system of the sun you knew. Their, 
was a central group of suns, and a familv 
of planets and satellites, moving in many 
different planes, unlike the orbits of your 
own sun's famtl). 

Trained on one of the central suns was 
what you at once recognized as a gigantic 
microscope. You peered into it and were 
amazed to find that there were living creatures on this little miniature, which could 
not have been more than twenty feet in 
diameter. For some time you gazed at 
them, fascinated, even though you, yourself, 
were not aware of the fact then. And 
you saw further that the space -creatures 
regarded this miniature as a special sort 
of deity. 

Now the space -creature was indicating 
what had happened. One of the moons 
had somehow broken away from its orbit 
and was heading for this sun. Eventually 
it would crash into the larger body, and 
the creatures feared that the life upon their 
revered star would be destroyed. 

No less than you were your fellow humans in the great hall on Earth, watching 
the scene, moved by this, for the beings 
who lived upon this miniature world were 
very similar to humans. You now beheld 



No Star Shall Fall * * ★ 43 



yourselves examining the mechanism which 
kept these artificial worlds in motion, far 
above the planetarium's Boor, finding at 
last a plan of the construction. Examining this plan carefully, checking with the 
plan against the controls, at last you found 
how to avert the catastrophe. By shutting 
off the motive power of this moon which 
had gone astray, it would settle slowly to 
the floor and all would be well. Since 
the whole system revolved according to 
plan, and individual power- leads, rather 
than gravitation, there would be no upset 
in the orbits of the other little worlds. 

And, as the space-creatures hovered 
around you excitedly, you shut oft the individual power-lead and the moon, even 
now dangerously close to the great sphere, 
slowly dropped to the floor of the huge 
building, idly rolling along until at last 
it came to rest. 

NOW that the danger was averted, you 
went back to the microscope to examine more carefully the sphere your actions had saved and the life upon it. A 
strange little world, indeed, it was, and 
a strange people, so much like humans in 
form, even for their stalk-eyes, their flowerlike heads, and a third arm projecting from 
the center of their bodies. 

Then the screen in the great chamber 
went blank as the being who had brought 
you to the dark star prepared to return you 
to your home planet. 

What was the purpose of this great 
planetarium? Why had no other buildings 
been observed on the dark star? Who had 
built the planetarium and what had become 
of them? How had life occurred upon 



this central sun-sphere? Had life also occurred on other of the miniatures? These 
were but a few of the questions that arose. 

Before the meeting had dispersed, an 
expedition to go to the dark star had been 
formed and you and your mate had volunteered to make a study of the space-creatures 
for the central archives of the race. 

You and your mate left the great central 
hall of Earth to prepare for the expedition, 
which would start in a few days. You retired to an abode of your own by the 
shore, leaving notices to all that you were 
not to be disturbed, for you wished to be 
alone together for a time before undertaking this new task. 

It was at this point that you awoke, suddenly, to find yourself in a darkened room. 
What had happened? Where was your 
mate? What were you doing in this strange 
place ? 

Then you knew. Yet, even as realization came to you, there came also the certainty that this was not merely a dream, 
such as humans experience almost at any 
period of sleep. You knew that this was 
real, that you had lived a small part of 
the future, a future wherein you dwelt. 

You could not forget this, you told yourself. It was all far too vivid and beautiful ever to forget. You wanted to set it 
down in writing at that very moment, but 
it was so pleasant lying there and thinking 
about it. Perhaps just a few notes would 
do. Besides, there was nothing to worry 
about ; you knew you could never forget 
it. So you lay back, smiling to yourself, 
until at last sleep claimed you again. 

Remember ? 



TARRANO the CONQUEROR 

Ray Cummings' Most Famous Novel 
COMPLETE in NO. 4 

Science Fiction Quarterly 

ON ALL STANDS 



STATION X 

Th*> Ay*t and Noti of Fandom 

(Yau are invited to sand your lettan of comment upon FUTURE FICTION, and science 
fiction in general, for publication in thi< department, te FUTURE FICTION, 60 Hudson 
Street, New York City.) 



Heigh Ha, Readers. Putting Future together is a lot like piecing a jigsaw puzzle, 
only in thiB case all the pieces do not necessarily fit into a given unit. We still recall the chagrin we felt when, after having 
to cut Lea Croutchs story out oE the August 
book, we found that we'd forgotten to cut 
the lutroduction out, too. Well, the old saying "it's an ill wind . . ." applies here because, since we shoved it ahead, we foun J 
that we could fit In au illustration for it by 
our new artist, Damon Knight. So everyone 
should be happy on that score. 

That leads up to the introductions for 
thia time. Starting oft. we see our old friend 
Hay Cutnmings with his most famous 'Tubby'' story. You'd never guess, we think, 
that it was written back In 1923 If you didn't 
know il was a reprint. And we suspect 
that if we hadn't just told you the date, 
you'd think it was no earlier a vintage than 
1930. We think that was the sort of thing 
Morley was driving at when he spoke of 
timeless stories, some time back. 

Fred Kummer. Jr.. is very much of an afla round writer. Hi3 science-fiction stories 
have appeared in nearly every magna) ne 
of that nature going, nor Is this his Hist 
appearance in Future. We've met fans who 
swear by Kummer and (ana who swear at 
Kummer — that's the kind of atoriea he 
writes: they don't just leave you indifferent. This story, we think, will put you 
Into the first above-mentioned type. 

Just in case you didn't get the Augu.si 
Future (If you didn't, you can still get one 
by sending fifteen cents to the publishers' 
address — same place to which you are invited to send your letters on this issue — 
and merely asking for it) we'll repeat that 
Leslie F. Croutch ia a Canadian, who's sold 
a number of tales for Canadian magazines, 
and this Is his debut In an American stf 
mag. 

A number of renders have suggested thai 
we use a bit of scientific fantasy. That is: 
fantasy which doesn't lean toward the supernatural side, but merely the great unknown and the super- physical, leaving tha 
outlet for some sort of scientific explanation. So here is Paul Dennis I-avond's little fantasy, "Something from Beyond." The 
drawing is symbolic, rather than actually 
Illustrating a scene. 

And Morley contributes the cover story, a 
tale which we think you will find unusual, 
to say the least. Morley reports, by the by, 
that the Banderanatch Club Is coming along 
very nicely, the newest members being 
Jimmy Wilson, of Wyoming, and Lillth Lorraine of Texas. That's their order of 
joining. 

Artists this issue Include Hannes Bok— 
whose cover for "Pogo Planet" brought down 
the house— on the cover, and Interior for 



"No Star Shall Fall," B. i. Dolgov. whom wa 
hope to use as a cover-artist some day, 
John K. Forte, another cover-man — we'll repeat him, too — and Damon Knight Damon 
the Demon, as he la called by those who 
know him. recently saw the error of his 
ways and came to live in New York; once 
here we pounced upon him and put him 
to work dm wing pictures. And if you like 
this sample, he has plenty more up his sleeve. 

You'll all be wanting to know about iha 
"A Million Years and a Day" contest. so 
here's the dope. Winners are (1) Basil 
Wells. Box 12, Spriugboro, Penna.. (2) Bob 
Studley. 210 Weai lOSth St., New York City, 
and (f) Carl G. Bishop, 418 Central Avenue, Williamsburg. West Virginia. Theaa 
winners received the Paul double-spread. 
Forte full-page and Forte half-page originals respectively. Three contestants came 
close enough to winning to be listed aa 
drawers of honorable mention: Isaac Aaiuoov, of Brooklyn, Virginia Combs of Crandon, Wisconsin, and i. V. Daniel of Now York 
City. Mr. Woods and your editor were the 
judges. 

As for the contest winner this time, the 
writer of what reaflon thought to be the 
most hit e res ling letter in the October Future—there haven't been many votes, but 
Antony Dirka is clearly ahead. So, Tony, 
It's the Bok original for "Man on the Meteor" for you. and let's see if you can repeat against the compel it Ion. 

Now for a word about the Quarterly. 
Science Fiction Quarterly, we call it, and not 
only does it look nest and natty, with Its 
M4 trimmed pages of Brat-rate science fiction, -sans advertising, but It features an outstanding science fiction novel in each iasue. 
This t'me, it's Kay Cummings' immortal 
"Tarrano, the Conqueror." which copa the 
Paul cover, and has an interior double-spread 
by Bok. Also in this Summer issue are 
"Mai tU Does Noi Reply." by Lawrence 
Woods, ( tllus t m tion by Do! bokov) , "The 
World '>n the Edge of the Universe," by 
Maftiu Pearson, (Illustration by Bok), and 
"Path of Empire," by Hush Raymond, (illustration by Dolbokov), Dolbokov, as some 
of you recall, is Hannes Bok and B, I. Dolgov 
working in collaboration; these are the first 
Dolbokov drawings to be published and they 
aren't half bad, readers tell us. As a rule, 
the Quarterly gives more than three ahorl 
stories per fame, but "Tarrano" is quite a 
long story and we knew you'd prefer to 
see fewer abort lales than to have this famous novel cut. So, If -you haven't a copy, 
may we suggest t hai you sound out your 
newsdealer right away. If he's sold out, 
then you may obtain a copy by sendlnff 
twenty-five cents to this office and asking 
for the Summer Quarterly. However, If 



44 



tfcfien X * * ★ 65 



you hurry, (hat extra wait may yet be 
saved. 

So, on WitS the show, and we start In 
with the winning - entries from the ".Million 
Years and a Day" contest. The first prize 
winner put his entry in the form of a continuation pi the story. So, here is 

BASIL WEILS 

David started toward her, horror and doubt 
battling fur mastery in his eyes. Had his 
wife doomed the world to resumed conflict 
that might hurl all mankind back into barbarle chaos, or had she chosen to wiue out 
the last of humanity — leaving but two of 
them alive? He swept the back of his hand 
across his eyes as though to blot out what 
he must see. 

Janice was smiling as she came slowly to 
him and ran slim finger* through his rumpled hair. 

"Had you forgotten that these controls 
operate only the broadcasting units in the 
Old World?" she whispered. "1 pressed the 
buttons that renewed the vibrations — but 
only over halt the world! The Old World 
is dead but the New World sleeps! 

"When we reach the controls in the Old 
World we can restore the sleepers to life 
again and there will be no war. Half a 
world is dead — tine — but the younger, more 
progressive civilization of the New World will 
live on . . . our people, David!" 

BOB STUDLEY 

So you want to know what buttons Janice 
pressed, do yon? Why, that's simple. Being 
in love with David and not wanting to take 
a chance of losing him to any possible future 
rival, she pressed Ihe buttons renewing- the 
sleep-vibration and ihey lived happily ever 
after. 

CARL G. BISHOP 

The finish to the story "A Million Years 
and a Day" is very obvious. Janice pressed 
the buttons which renewed the lite in the 
Old World because in doing this, she had 
the solution of the way to avoid both the 
annihilation of the human race and war and 
bloodshed. 

The Old World would awaken and would 
do as the New World had intended; Janice 
knew .that to kilt all the human race save 
Davia and herself would only have thrown 
back the evolution of the world a million 
years and destroyed all they had ever accomplished. She and David could have renewed the race but. could not have lived long 
enough to leach them the knowledge they 
should have had; when they died the world 
would have reverted to a savage state and 
all the arts and sciences would have been 
lost. 

Some might say that Janice did not renew 
the sleep-vibration because in so doing she 
would have put David and herself to sleep 
also, but from the information derived from 
this story, this was impossible: the vibration affected only those in the opposite plane 
from which it was operated. (It's amazing 
how many contestants overlooked this point. 
Editor) 

Janice and David could have awakened 
both the Old and the New Worlds at the 
same time, but each one having the sleepvibration, they wonld have stalemated and 
would have reverted to move primitive weapons in the attempt to conquer each other. 
What Janice did resulted In the lab lea being 
turned on the New World, but this was 



the only true bloodless solution she could 
effect. 

(Thus the contest closes, and we thank all 
readers who took the time to make It ini cresting for all by writing in. Sorry you 
all couldn't win, but there's still a chance 
for you on the current contest. Each issue. 
Future will send the original double-spread 
Illustration to the writer of what the other 
readers, by their votes, decide to be the moat 
interesting letter in Station X. Your vote 
must accompany a letter of critical comment 
upon Future. Editor) 

Now let's hear from 

F* SCHUYLER MILLEK 

The "different" quality of Hannea Bok s 
cover struck me as soon as 1 went into the 
news room this week, and completely justifies 
your trying him with color work. It at once 
set the magazine off from the other science 
fiction in the rack. His distinctive style will 
be a good trade mark for Future, as Paul's 
was for the old "Amazing." back in 132* 
and '27. 

The second surprise was seeing Cummings' 
"Man on the Meteor," for thereby hanga my 
own introduction to science fiction. I had 
teethed, practically, on some of Jules Verne's 
books — "Mysterious Island," "20,000 Leagues 
Under the Sea," and "Five Weeks in a 
Balloon," though not his more extravagant 
works— but being Isolated on a farm, had 
seen nothing else, unless you rate Tom Swift 
as an introduction to the boy marvels of 
modern science fiction. 

Then, one Saturday, just before coming to 
Scotia to enter high school, the Miller family 
went to town for the week's groceries. I was 
given a quarter for lunch, and started off 
to get it, but en route I saw Paul's portrait 
of a Martian on the cover of Science and 
Invention — and went without lunch. "The 
Man on the Meteor" was well under way — 
the third or fourth part, 1 think — in that 
issue, and it was my introduction to Cummings and to modern science fiction. But 
until now I have never, known how the 
story started— and I am not disappointed. It 
follows ihe Curamings -formula, true, but it 
is the strangest of all his tales, and 1 miss 
only the many bizarre illustrations by Paul 
which decorated the original serial. In 1926 
i was anxiously waiting for "Amazing Stories" to appear, and i have not missed an 
Issue of any science fiction magazine, although I am months behind on my reading 
and have been using this summer to catch 
up. 

"Out of Nowhere" seemed to me the best 
of the short stories, although "Pogo Planet" 
had its zany points, particularly in the character of its hero. The tragedy of "Forbidden 
Flight" seemed a bit forced and limping, but 
it is hard to make convincing at best. And 
Bok, whom 1 disliked on his first appearance, 
is definitely something. It is probably a 
quibble to object to Saturn's appearing in 
toto as viewed from a point beyond and well 
below the rings, when the story definitely 
places Nemo's meteor in the rings themselves, and such quibbles on points of fact 
seem to have gone out of fashion of recent 
years as more and more fantasy has shared 
the bed of science fiction. I don't, object to 
the combination, but I do hate to see the bars 
let down on science — and Future is far from 
the worst offender in this respect. I could 
point te a number of publishers who hoot 
louder about their accuracy and offend with 
more nonsense than those who go quietly 



M ★ ★ ★ hrtur* Fiction 



about the business of printing: goad sioi ios 
when and where they can find them. 

Incidentally, thanks Cor publishing a quarterly that is really a quarterly, l don't object to reprints of good stories, plainly labelled as such, though In a general science 
fiction magazine I feel they should alternate 
with modern Stuff, and when new illustrations are used for tlie reprint. I gladly buy 
it. no matter how many other versions 1 
have {always the perfect collector, you see/. 
But I do object to some things which have 
happened In the name of being quarterllea, 
and am willing to say so loudly whenever 
prodded, 

1 think you're wise in combining: there 
are too many science fiction and fantasy 
magazines. The result has been to make authors lazy: they will aim at the highest paying, and the harassed editor who is ahon 
a big fiction budget must buy rejects or 
develop new authors, which Is an unsure an.i 
nerve-wracking business, 1 am sure. 1 have 
been doing some editing in connection with 
my Job and know how it feels — and with you 
a deadline Is a deadline, and not somethlni: 
that will stretch when pushed. 

If I ever do get to producing, 1 hope i 
can land a yarn with you some time, if for 
no other reason than to see what your artiste 
make of the illustration. An author looks 
at his own story in a very different light 
when it is decorated (or occasionally marred) 
by an artist's conception of scenes he has 
described. 

At any rate, good tuck and more Eol. 
covers, Scotia, New York. 

Your last paragraph reads very nicely to 
us, Mr. Miller, because we've been one ot 
your fana since the days of "The Rpd 
Plague," "Dust of Destruction." and "Through 
the Vibrations." your earliest appearing stories. So we'll be looking for that tale, and 
have special lollypops foe Bok and/or Dolgov 
if all's well and we can give It to an artist. 
In regard to scientific accuracy — we areni 
so much hipped on the straight "educational" 
features of stf, and. while we don't want tu 
present anything ns a scientific fact which 
is not a scientific fact, still we're more interested In first-rate fiction, full of inspirational and "dreaming" qualities than having 
every phase of every story "scientifically accurate." In regard to developing new authors. It is nerve-wracking at times, but 
fun. Little by little, we are bringing up a 
circle of Future's own writers, and, when 
they are way up, we suppose they'll be trying other markets, too — that's the way things 
ate. But it'll be a real satisfaction, when 
that time comes, to know that they got theii 
start with us. Thanks for the well wishes, 
and you'll see more Bok covers. 

The gentleman we now present may not be 
well known to all of you. He, along with 
another science fiction and fantasy author, 
recently brought out an anthology of the 
famous stories of the late H. P. L,ovecraft. 
one of the finest writers of fantastic, weird, 
and weird -.scientific tales that America has 
produced. But let'3 quote from the leaflet 
accompanying the letter: "Two years ago. 
Arkham House published H. P. Loveeratt's 
omnibus of classic weird tales. The Outsider 
mud Others' at ?5.00 the copy; most of you 
to whom this announcement is addressed 
know without any further word what a flue 
book that collection made. , . . Arkham House 
is considering the publication of compact 
full-length books of weird tales to sell at (2 
the copy. The first at these books is sched


uled for publication October 1, 1941; it Is 
'Someone in the Dark," sixteen weirds by 
August Derleth, a book containing what the 
author considers the best among bis tales 
of the uncanuy. If 'Someone in the Dark' la 
successful. I. e„ pays the expense of publication, Arkham House will publish selections 
of weirds by Clark Ashton Smith, Henry S. 
Whitehead, and others." So, readers, here Is 
AUGUST W. DEKLETH 
The leaflet is the bearer of potential good 
news — if fandom co-operates. If we, as Arkham House, can sell only SOO copies of each 
book, printed at $2 the copy, we plan to 
publish the best shorts of Merrltt, C. A. 
Smith, Whitehead, Bloch, Kuttner, etc., anthologies, etc., weird and science-fictional material, at the rate of four boobs a year — all 
reprint material. Be assured we want to do 
it. and "Someone in the Dark" is a feeler 
In that direction; if that book sells well 
enough, we can go ahead with others in 
the list. I think Smith is down next. But 
the important thing to sell the fans is the 
necessity of their buying every book, as in 
a book club (and indeed, this is something 
like a book club) so that the books will move 
and pay for themselves. In short, it's a 
promise of a fli ;t rate fantasy library in a 
handy, beautiful, and expensive format that 
will match any book put out today — definitely 
out of the class of the average light fiction 
binding, for instance. — on condition the fans 
trust our judgment to bring out the books 
they want. We're open to suggestion; we're 
not going into this thing to make money, but 
only to break even. Will you do what you 
can to further this plan, and also let me 
know what you, yourself think of it? 

Ke your editorial in the new FF— most of 
us, Lovecraft et al, that Is, have always felt 
that fantasy covers the entire field of the 
weird on one hand, sf on the other, though 
pure fantasy in literature is the work of 
Stephens, Dunsany, et al, far removed from 
sf, and much closer to the weird. 

Sauk City, Wisconsin. 
We don't think it's necessary to urge that 
fana support this venture — all who received 
'The Outsider and Others" know what a 
splendid job of printing and binding wa> 
done. We do wish to suggest, however, that 
all interested take time off to let Mr. Derluth know which stories of Clark Ashton 
Smith, who is next on the list, they would 
like to see in a volume of his stories. Readers can also help by nominating stories for 
inclusion in an anthology of weird talcs, of 
fantasy, and of science fiction. And Mr. Derleth might be lntei ested in suggestions for a 
volume or two of the best stories of favorite 
science-fiction writers ... or of reprints ol 
outstanding science-fiction novels which may 
have seen print but once in some magazine 
now difficult, or virtually impossible, to 
obtain. 

The idea of a fantasy book club appeals to 
us very highly; if enough Tans were to write 
Mr. Derleth pledging membership and a minimum annual support, it might be worked 
out. In the meantime, Future will be happy 
to keep you posted on latest developments. 
Watch our department, Fututian Times. 

This one is short and sour. The writer la 

A. L. SCHWARTZ 

Yngvi Is not a louse. You are. What the 
hell is the Idea of using small type? Aincha 
got no consideration for our eyes? 

Insistently yours, 

529 Washington Street, Dorchester, Mass. 



Station X * * * 47 



Matter of fact, Mr. Schwartz, you are the 
only one, so far, who's complained about out 
new size type, while we've received a number 
of very nice compliments on it. Suppose you 
see if you can find a few thousand Future 
readers who agree with you. then we may be 
able to do something about it. Though, personally, we think it*3 pretty snazzy. Now. 
we present 

EABL BARK HANSON 

Congrats on the latest Science Fiction 
Quarterly and especially the October Future. 

Evidently you have access to the old Science and Invention flies. If able, bow a bout 
reprinting MaClure's "Ark of the Covenant," 
Fezandle's "Doctor Hackensaw's Secrets" (as 
a series), Cummings' "Around the Universe" 
(It's here. Editor), John Martin Leahy's "The 
Living Death," Cummings' "Into the Fourth 
Dimension" (almost forgotten) and some of 
his "Tales of the Scientific Club." 

Your fine new illustrations bring new jest 
to the old classics. 

812 SW 1st Street, Miami, Florida. 

We'll look up those suggested reprint stories. However, we're happy to say that w« 
"beat you to the draw on "Around the Universe" and — well, we may as well announce 
it now— The Quarterly's feature is to be 
"Into the Fourth Dimension." 

Now, here's a frank letter from 

J. S. K LI M ARIS 

Every once in a while Sheer desperation 
forces us to go tramping to the nearest newsstand to buy up the current crop ot* "science" 
fiction in the hope of finding something readably entertaining August Future Fiction, 
alas, was there too. 

Well, let's see what the record is. Fortes 
cover, very good. Must be a hangover Er-em 
1927, but the sight of winged rockets bombing 
a many-colored city still gets tne. 

Aa for the featured "novel." "They Nevei 
Come Back" — much could be said, but the 
less said the better. Nowaday? one can't 
be too particular about making a living, and 
if Friu Leiber makes a living dishing out 
such monstrous dung, who am I to tell him 
what to do? AH I can do is fervently prav 
that in the next issue ye editor finds something that someone who's passed his seventh 
birthday can read, 

"Topaz Gate" was another stinker. "Tht 
story Is so significantly parallel to Earthlv 
history." Haw! Mr. Blish is a humorist 
as well! But, like in the movies. I'm afraU 
that "any resemblance is purely accidental." 
Let's dismiss any comment upon the overly 
trite "power-mad ex-plumber" and the golden 
qualities of the beloved monarch, and, without another word, toss Mr. BHsh to the anxious and hungry lions. 

But cheer up, Mr. Editor, there are one or 
two things to commend you for. After all, 
In every editor's life, a little rain of acid 
must fall. 

If you expected only a little clrculationincrease trout Dn the end of the "Million 
Years and a Day" fine. I'm afraid that you've 
copped a pretty big whale. The idea of science fiction brain tensers Is a whopper. IT 
you guarantee something similar In every issue, editor, 1 promise to buy every damn 
issue no matter how god awful the rest of 
the stories are. i spent half the night trying to figure out which buttons to press, "to 
no avail. So instead of mailing in my entry, I think I'll let some other worthy gentleman take the prize. Bravo, editor! 



Morrison's "The Barbarians" was not only 
good reading but pretty interesting reading 
at that. I rate it the best story In the issue. 
If Morrison can duplicate it in quality, let's 
see some more of Ms stuff. Who's the gent, 
by the way? 

Saari's "Shadowless World" is an example 
of a fellow who tosses away diamonds in order to pick up a piece of wood underneath. 
He had a whale of a good story in the idea 
of Zeymo being responsible for the development of the world. But instead ot using It. 
he drowns it in a pile of nonsense about a 
millionaire playboy who's a genius In disguise. Why don't scienti Action writers learn 
to write? Why doesn't someone send them 
back to college to learn what makes a story — 
it might do some good, who knows? 

Your editorial on the weird and the fantastic was very good. Having defined science 
nation, ail that remains, Mr. Editor, Is foj 
you to explain it to your writers — perhaps 
we may see some good scientiSctlon, then, 
in the not-too-distant future. 

After filling up a page, Mr. Morey Snail v 
comes to the conclusion that the test of a 
science fiction classic Ls lis modernity. Well, 
well, well! Now, Mr. Morley, just what the 
hell is a "modern outlook"? 

"What type of writing has survived 
through the ageB?'* asks Mr. Mm ley, and 
then. "Exclude from this category all those 
items of classic fame which were stuffed 
down your throat during school days and 
whk-h you privately and frankly thought to 
be epitomes of utter boredom." 

What arrant nonsense! 

Exclude SfaatteBpeare? Goldsmith? Grey? 
Forget all about Stevenson? Poe? Scott? 
Tolstoy? What sort of bull Is this Morley 
throwing? Is he serious? 

The fault, dear Wilfred, was not in the 
classics which bored you when you studied 
them, but perhaps in your own inability to 
understand them at that time, or in the" Inability of your teachers to make them palatable to you. 

Science fiction can become classic only 
when it becomes living literature. And literature, dear Morley, Is alive when it is an 
emotional expression of human experience or 
human aspiration. Science fiction can become living literature when It fulfills that 
requirement. What true science fiction 
leader has not wept with Mary Shelley's 
monster that tried to win the love and understanding of Dr. Frankenstein? Who has 
not felt a lump in his throat as Nemo's Nautilus Anally sank beneath the waves after defying mankind and twenty thousand leagues 
under the sea? Who has not looked uneasily 
up at the strange stars after the War of 
the Worlds ended? Who has been able to 
sail calmly over a quiet sea after Poe's "Descent into a Maelstrom"? Who among us Is 
not a Faust or a Manfred? 

In the light of such living literature, and 
they ate also science fiction classics, Morley's 
words about "modern outlook" fade away into 
nothingness. 

46 Ten Eyck Street, Brooklyn, New York. 

We really appreciate your criticism, Mr. 
KHmaris. and will wait eagerly to see It 
current selections come closer to your Idea 
of good reading. Looks as if a controversy 
has been started over Motley's article, so 
we'll let him speak for himself. Here he te, 
Mi. KU maris. 

\VILFREJ> OWEN MORLEY 

it would seem as if I didn't have a leg to 
stand on, but I really think that the main 



It * * * Future Fiction 



difficulty lies in the interpretation of my 
phrase "modern outlook" and readily admit 
that a better one should and could have 
been used. Perhaps -universal," "timeless," 
or "progressive" would have been better. 

First of all, just for your private edification, Mr. Klimaris, I was by no means bored 
by Shakespeare, Stevenson, Scott, etc., when 
we studied them in suhool. Nor, unless they 
were all consummate actors, were the majority of the classes in which 1 studied, and 
they were a very good cross- section ot a 
large town, too. We acted out Shakespeare s 
"AtaeBeth," "Julius Caesar," etc., in the 
course of studying (let's not talk about the 
quality of the interpretations) and so far as 
1 know, English Lit. was one period which 
never lasted long enough for us. 

But there are a good many works, labelled 
"classics" by pedants, and often run in on 
otherwise innocent students, which are unutterably dull— and likely as not, the aftermath 
of these is enough to make the hapless student flinch at the name "classic" It was 
this sort of thing at which I was driving in 
the sentence which you dissected with such 
precision. 

These stories which you mention in your 
last paragraph all have the "timeless" quality 
lo which I refer. They are not bound up in 
the very local and limited concepts of any 
given period, even though the writing may, 
In some cases, be archaic. What 1 meant 
by "modern outlook" was this: read any oi 
those examples of "living literature" and you 
do not get the leeiing of being cramped into 
the obsolete concepts, superstitious, conceits, 
etc., of a long-dead age. There is something 
in them thai will be new and "modern" so 
long as homo sap remains as he is, essentially. Your letter admirably gives the 
substance of what I thought I was saying, 
and i appreciate your successful presentation of the subject, even if it does show up 
my apparent failure to get it across. 

Here's hoping I'll see many more of your 
stimulating letters in Station X. Oh yes, and 
here's an aside to you, Mr. Editor, Would 
you just as soon not publish my address? j 
haven't the time for correspondence. 

New York City. 

Okay, Morley, old fellow. We'll await remarks from Klimaris on your answer. And 

Y1KU1MA H. COMBS 

As for the most sensible letter in the current (Oct.) issue of Future, J think Antony 
DirUa's takes my vote. He seems to know 
what he wants and to have a mind ot his 
own. 1 like that. Being a female of voting 
age (just), I have very definite ideas myself. 

I liked this issue of Future a great deal. 
"Man on the .Meteor" is one of the best by 
Ra-; Cummings that 1 have read in a long 
time. Not that Mr. Cummings does not always do a good job, but I just can't read 
.his stories alone, and there are others that 
stand out in my memory and arouse the 
fondest recollections long afterwards. "Across 
the Ages" ranked second . . . good yarn , . . 
1 liked those descriptions of Mars. Station X 
comes next . . . heck, it's better than the 
others stories. (!!! Editor.) 

The others deserve no more than numerical 
rating. 4. "The Thought Feeders" . . . worth 
reading, odd idea. Fair. 5. "Forbidden 
Flight" ... I must say Conant got rid of 
'em In a hurry, it had the bitter Irony of 
truth. C "Pogo Planet" ... I have four 
brother*, so i have no illusions about them 



as wear the pants. Emperor A ja x is si > 
darned typical of conceited masculinity that 
I almost liked him. 7. "Out of Nowhere'" 
, . . I hesitated a long time before rating 
this, last, but somehow I liked the others 
better. But, it's good. 

Let's have more Pearson- Soon! 

Futurian Times rates as interesting, but 1 
don't care for it overmuch. Still, I think 
such a department is necessary . . . and 
this is the best of its type I've run across 
yet. 

Bok on the cover. Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhhh : 
Yum, yum. How does he do it? Turn out 
such delectable pix all the time, I mean. 
(We feed him regularly on Futurian ('hop 
Suey. That stimulates his imagination. Editor.) John Forte displays a refreshing clearness of drawing that makes him oustanding. 
Let's have lots more of him, too. 

Dolgov and Bok together are swell, same 
way by themselves, but together, it's like 
having ice-cream and watermelon for one 
meal. Box 907, C ran don, Wisconsin. 

Maybe we're more than usually dense today, but haven't you sort of contradicted 
yourself? You say that, outside of the first 
two mentioned, the rest of the stories deserve 
no more than numerical rating, but the comments you made on each, going so far as to 
rate the least of them good, somewhat belles 
that. 

However, we won't be anywhere near satisfied until a majority of readers write In 
and tell us that the last-ranking story was 
excellent. And that means a long, hard pull 
ahead tor authors and editor alike. 

Incidentally, w^ forgot to include a PS 
on Morley's letter, but it can go here just 
as well. He says: "Pardon the conceit, 
but, just in case it may be justified, please 
tell readers that I'm not in the competition 
for the prize double-spread drawing this 
time, or any other time," 

And, to bring up another side-issue, we 
notice thai, here and there we have made 
what appear some rather definite statements 
upon various authors and stories. These are 
just our opinions, subject to change on any 
number of fronts, your desires being one of 
them. We are not out to squelch any reader 
or to try to Impress our opinions upon you. 
so if you disagree with anything we say, 
don't hesitate to come back with both barrels. 
We'll publish your rebuttal if possible. Comes 
now a letter from 

DAMON KM<;HT 

Dear Doc, 

Okay, yon asked for It: 

Score 10 on the October Future's artwork. 
The Bok cover is definitely super, and the illustrations on the whole follow suit. 1 don't 
think it's an exaggeration to say that yours 
is now the best-illustrated stf magazine currently published. 

Score 10 again for (he editorial, blurbs, and 
departments. As I've said before, these leave 
nothing to be asked. 

Now start on the stories. 

"The Man on the Meteor" is a bad Cummings tale, than which there is conceivably 
no worse. Plot, characterization, and style 
are pure magoezelum — unadulterated hack. 
Give it 3. 

"The Thought Feeders" is cute; style and 
characterization are good, but the plot, as 
with much cf Winierbotham's work, annoys 
because of its harebrained metaphysical reasoning. S. 

"Pogo Planet" is best Ju the book — one of 



Statian X * * * 4? 



the two completely acceptable stories in 1h>' 
issue — not such a good hatting average, with 
the Cummings stinker filling up well over 
halt of the apace. Ajax Calkins is a very 
amusing character, and I'm looking forward 
to the next in the series. 10. 

"Across the Ages" smells U[> the issue, in 
its own way, even worse than "The Man on 
the Meteor." It is a fairly good failtas.v 
story, but stopped over wilh phoney scientific 
explanations to make tt read like stf. Thai 
anomaly is one which I abhor. 3. 

"Out of Nowhere" is the other completely 
acceptable story. In any other company, i 
suspect, it would be just an average yarn, 
but in Future it stands out head and shoulders. 9. 

"Forbidden Fl Iff tat" is bad only because il 
is incomplete. It po3e3 a question to which 
no answer, or even the suggestion of an answer, is ffiven. An incident In a longer 
story, it would nave been perfect. 3. 

Totaling up, you get 58 out of a possible 
80 for the issue. Roughly. 70%. Thai's with 
the Cummings tiling figured as one unit. 
Figured as it really ought to be. as something 
like five units out of twelve, it drags down 
the average unthlnkably. 

But despair not, Lowndes, we still love 
you! 

14$ West 103d Street, New York City. 

Weil, Damon, you're rather unique in 
your comments in that, to date, you are one 
of the two persons writing in who did not 
place "Man on the Meteor" first in the October Future, and the only one writing in to 
express dislike. We've beard personally from 
several people who thought "Pogo Planet" 
was best, but they gave the Cummings talilop rating, too. 

This doesn't nece-saa rily mean you're 
wrong, old thing, but that, do far as we can 
ascertain, the readers do not agree with yon. 
So it's more Cummings this time, and still 
more in our next issue. You mention Winterbotham'a plots as being fraught with 
"harebrained metaphysical reasoning." Now 
I'd like very much to have a bit of a discussion on that point, and maybe Mr. Winterbotham would like to make a few statements, too (all in the nature of good-natured 
debate). But we can't do this until you 
present your case more clearly: how do you 
define "metaphysical reasoning"? Do you 
mean that metaphysical reasoning, in itself. 
Is "harebrained"? Or is it just Mr. Wlnterbotham's use of metaphysical reasoning 
which appears to you to be at fault? How'a 
ahout a letter, Sir Knight, so we can get off 
onto the tourney? 

Thanks for jour remarks, at any rate, and. 
as a sort of winder-up at this broadcast, we 
present 

UHAHAM CONWAY 

Editor, Old Sock: — 

I confess I'm stumped. The new Future I* 
good'. Swelpme, it's true. It's actually readable all the way through! It's actually something a decent person wouldn't be ashamed 



to be seen with In public. The new title is 
very good, dignified, and yet just what it 
takes. Bok on the cover is a big jump from 
Scott, Forte, and even, in a way, Paul. 

Ray Cummings' yarn was a pleasure. I'd 
never read it before and I'll bet only one 
out of five thousand readers ever had, either. 
It's not in the Cummings rut. It's different; 
it's unique: hooray! Although I strongly 
disapprove of reprinting old stories, in this 
case I can allow it. Don't think reprinting 
Is fair either to writers or reader and hope 
yon don't make it a habit. 

"Pogo Planet" was a wizzer. a superman 
to end all supermen! And what's more, Ajax 
Calkins is a pretty good commentary on the 
Richard Sea tons and Adam Links floating 
around, too. Ajax is just honest about what 
he thinks he is. More of him! "Out of Nowhere" came next, followed by Win terbotham, who is doing good stuff for you. The 
Conant story was pretty feeble, jerkily written, and going nowhere. This Dom Passante 
thing must have been a hangover from the 
old smelly days. But even at that, its stench 
is less than the old Passante the garbage 
cans are familiar with. 

Your art work is now near tops. Keep up 
the improvement and maybe you'll have a 
toji-ranker magazine yet! 

Waterloo. Indiana. 

This, as you readers can surmise. Is pretty 
much of a shock. In fact, we are virtually 
speechless. So, we shall just thank you, Mr. 
Conway, for your kind words, gird up our 
loins, and put our nose back to the grindstone. 

Just one word more: we've found that, 
after we'd very carefully listed ratings of 
stories tor this department, and sent It off 
to the printer, a whole new batch of letters 
would come In, on the strength of which ratings would be shifted all around. And, due 
to circumstances, (here haven't been opportunities, the last two issues, to shove in a. 
final, corrected list at the last minute. So, 
this time, we're not reporting on the October book: we'll give you the dope on that 
next Issue. And, just for the records, here's 
how the contents of our April and August issues eventually came out. 

April: L A Prince of Pluto. 2. The Radiant Avenger, 3. Martian Guns. 4. Status 
Quo. 5. 30th Century Duel, and fi. Th* 
Genius Bureau. 

August: 1, The Barbarians, 2. Tho 
Shadowless World, 3. The Time Maker, 
4. A Million Years and a Day, 5. The Stone 
Men of Ignota. 6. The Topaz Gate, and 
7. They Never Come Back. 

Spring Quarterly: 1, Weapon Out of 
Time, 2. Callistan Tomb. 3. Cosmos Eye, 

4. The Life Jewel. 5. Rocket's Swan Song, 

5. Femiotiiwn, Mars and 7. Rescue From 
Venus. 

Apologies to all concerned for the errors 
in the first listings. From now on, the polla 
will be closed only when the issue following 
the one in question has reached the newsstands. Thanks for all your fine letters, and 
happy reading to you! RWL 



HAVE YOU SEEN 

CLOSE-UP? ,0 | TA L D A S LL 



DESTINY WORLD 

by MARTIN PEARSON 



tAmkm <Bj "Ff>go Planet," "Cosn 



Is one defeat enough to discourage the greatest men the human race has produced? 
A thousand times no, declared Ajax Callcins. From the debacle of Pogo Planet he arose 
to write another page in the history of the cosmos. 



I NEVER take no for an answer. When 
I made up my mind to become ruler 
of a planet of my own, 1 forged 
ahead relentlessly vowing not to halt until 
I had gained my way. Thus it was that 
my spaceship Deilniy II eased itseM through 
the tortuous paths of the asteroids towards 
my goal. Aurora! The world which was 
destined to be mine! Not a new world, an 
old one. But a planet over which the 
clutch of the Interplanetary Union had expired. 

Of course the I. U. did not know that. 
That was why their sovereignty had expired. While the Union was primarily 
made up of the inhabited planets, and those 
other regions where colonial or commercial 
habitation had occurred, it also claimed 
rule over e\ery region that I. U. patrols 
visited. But there was a strict order on 
these things— an old Terrestrial rule — and 
that was: if the 1. U. failed to patrol a 
region En a reasonable number of years, it 
could not claim sovereignty there. In ancient times the Canadian government in 
North America had had to send police 
regularly to mush over the barren regions 
of their far North. Not because there was 
anything to police, but merely to guarantee 
sovereignty. 

And I had found that the planetoid 
Aurora had not been visited by *he Interplanetary Patrol in thirty years! There 
were lots of tiny planetoids that had never 
been patrolled but Aurora was not a tiny 
fragment. It was a Grade B minor planet 
and at least 30 miles in diameter. 

I have always been aware of my difference from other men. I am not content 
with an humble tot as one of teeming billions. Others of history have gained empires for themselves; I, Ajax Calkins, legitimate Emperor of Midplanet, was determined to regain a world for myself. What 




Destiny World * * * 71 



mattered how small it may be? From little 
nuts, great trees do grow, 

AT LAST my ship eased close to the 
world of my choosing. I stared 
hungrily through the forward plates of 
the control room. Hungry, as much for 
fame as for the fact that my meals were 
irregular due to my tendency towards spacesickness. 

Down, through the void, and at last, 
landing with a slight jar upon the airless 
soil of my small world. I hastened to 
buckle on my space-suit and to hurry out 
the lock of my ship. My first eager step 
on the soil of Aurora and astonishedly I 
found myself flying head over heels upwards. The gravity of the planetoid was 
so light that 1 weighed a bare pound or 
two! And my tread had thrust me upwards with unexpected vigor. 

Falling gently downwards like a lazy 
feather on a Spring breeze, I surveyed the 
landscape. It was cold and uninviting, 
mostly slag and bare rock. Above, the 
cold stars shone down in the black sky 
of space. But all over on the surface there 
arose orderly hemispheres of glistening 
brown glass! 

I was startled! Pinsky's "Catalogue ot 
Minor Bodies" distinctly listed Aurora as 
an uninhabited world! How then could 
this be? Pinsky was never wrong; yet, 
these artificial glassine hemispheres, between 
which ran thin glassy roads, gave all the 
appearance of being those of a highly advanced culture. 

At last I reached the ground. This time 
I took great care to orient myself and adjust my belt-rockets. Under control now, I 
shot rapidly across to the nearest tructure. 

It towered over me some thirty or forty 
feet; it was smooth, perfectly finished, 
stone-glassy. Around it and from it ran 
roads, straight as dies, in all directions. 
And down several of them came the inhabitants. 

They were squat, slow-moving creatures, 
about the size of a big dog. They seemed 
to be hard shelled like insects and yet 
they lacked the intricate designing of insects. They were like crude unfinished 
models for ants. In place of legs they 
moved along on which seemed dozens of 
cilia extending a few inches beneath their 
bodies. I could detect no eyes, no mouth 
or nostrils. A single pair of antennae stuck 



out in front of them and jerked steadily 
up and down as they progressed. 

I braced myself and drew my para -ray 
preparing to fight it necessary. But the one 
that was closest to me. passed along the 
road by which I was standing without paying me any attention and passed into the 
hemisphere through a round opening. 

I stared after it, dumbfounded, until I 
remembered that they had no eyes or ears. 
Because I am unusually brave, I followed 
the creature into the dome. 

INSIDE a thin reddish light filtered down. 
There was still no air. There were no 
rooms, no furnishings save curious piles of 
greenish glass cubes. The creatures moved 
about on the polished floor, bumping into 
each other with a curious rhythmic pattern. I poked one; it paid no heed to me. 
1 pushed another, it was undisturbed. Try 
as I might, I could not get any of the 
creatures to acknowledge my existence. 

Then, like a flash, it came to me. These 
were not intelligent beings! These were 
si I icon- insects! There were a number of 
asteroids inhabited by these curious beings. 
They were not protoplasmic oxygen-breathers as we are, but were of a living substance in which silicon takes, the place of 
carbon which is the basis of Harthly life. 
They were literally rock-animals, made of 
a form of rock, eating and breathing rock! 
Their social structure was vaguely akin to 
that ol ants, they had no intelligence, only 
an instinct-pattern which caused them to 
build these silico-glass structures and roads. 

What had misled me is that 1 had never 
heard of them growing to this size before. 
On other airless worlds where they had 
been found, their size was scarcely ever 
more than a few inches in length. Here 
they were gigantic by comparison. 

Ignoring the creatures farther, I set out 
to explore Aurora. My first act was to 
stand in the center of the largest cluster 
of domes and proclaim myself King-Commander of Aurora. Although the insects 
ignored me, I felt it my duty to what 
was now my planet. 

Returning to the Destiny 11, I flew low 
over the small world, mapping out its terrain. It was covered with the siliconcreatures' cities. It would be impossible 
to land anywhere and not find them. 

I made my permanent residence, iny 
capital, at the place where I first landed. 
There I cleared away a deserted dome, and 



72 * ★ * Future Fiction 



transferred some of my belongings. In a 
few days I had sealed all the entrances but 
one and made it airtight. Air from the 
ship's tanks made it habitable. 

IT WAS not comfortable but we empirebuilders must- allow for discomfort. 
1, Ajax Calkins, had at last my own planet. 
From here I could advance to greater 
things. 

So it was that 1 sat there several weeks 
later, on my throne (it had originally been 
a ship's barber-chair) listening to swingsing records. I love swing-sing records; 
they were the rage on Earth when I had 
left and I had stacked several dozen of 
the marvelous music spools, composites of 
Occidental swing with Oriental tones and 
scales. 1 had just played my favorite 
"Razzmatazz on the Gobi-Gobt' for the 
tenth time when I idly turned on the radio 
receiver of my player. 

Instantly I heard the voice of RadioJuno ("The Voice of the Asteroids") giving the latest news. Idly I listened to the 
reports of the latest events of the major 
asteroids when suddenly the name of 
Aurora was mentioned. I sat bolt upright. 

Radio-Juno said that the Interplanetary 
Union was sending a small fleet of ships 
to establish a fueling and trade-control station on Aurora. On my Aurora! On my 
own planet ! I, Ajax Calkins, King-Commander of Aurora! That, to me! 

1 sat stunned for a few minutes. I had 
not expected a showdown with the I. U. 
for a long time. But this now! I must 
think. 

Then 1 had it ! I knew how I could 
drive them away without risking a drop of 
blood. Hastily I gathered all my swingsing records and counted them. There were 
enough for my defense; I set to work. 

For three days I built tiny crystal piayerbroadcasters, little simple affairs made of 
wire and glassine crystals easily obtained. 
Each was equipped to play endlessly a spool 
of song record wire, but to play them 
backwards. 

For three more days I rushed around the 
planetoid installing these players, each with 
its reversed record, in the center dome of 
rock-ant cities. The rock-ants ignored me 
as they always did. Soon the entire planet 
was covered with the players, from every 
quadrant and pole, the reversed tunes were 
endlessly broadcasting. 

At my capital, 1 rigged up a speci al 



record and a large broadcaster of my own. 
Then I waited. 

A short time later, Radio-Juno announced 
that the fleet had left for Aurora. I kept 
carefully searching the wave-bands fo: 
sound of the fleet's communications and 
finally I heard them. I listened in on the 
conversations between the various captains. 

Already they were discussing the etheric 
disturbances that had increased as they 
came nearer Aurora. One remarked how 
like it was to the radio increase you note 
as you approach a major planet. I smiled. 
My plan was working. 

At last they hovered near Aurora, uncertain and confused. I knew what they 
were hearing. From every section of my 
little globe, broadcasts were coming. Weird, 
strange, incomprehensible voices and unearthly music. 

DID you ever play a record backwards? 
Spoken English sounds like Hawaiian; gay tunes sound like Gypsy laments; 
everything is unearthly and puzzling. 
That's what they heard. The sounds of 
a completely alien planet, densely populated, 
with innumerable radio conversations going 
on in totally unfamiliar patterns. 

I heard one captain say to another that 
Aurora was supposed to be uninhabited and 
here it seemed that it was very heavily 
populated, totally outside of the Interplanetary Union. That was my cue. 

I started my special record. On it 1 
had recorded one part of a conversation in 
broken English in a deep harsh voice. To 
this conversation, I replied in as sinister a 
tone as I could. All this was broadcast 
outwards towards the fleet so that I could 
be sure to be overheard. 

What the fleet commanders listened in 
on was a conversation between a supposed 
general of an unknown invading army from 
the star Polaris and a leader of a hitherto 
unheard of band of Solar system pirates. 
The subject discussed was how Aurora had 
become the main base of a simply terrific 
army, of how that army was so much more 
powerful than anything the Interplanetary 
Union could offer and how completely fatal 
it would be for the I. U. to dare attack. 
It was quite terrifying and impressive. That 
was because I, Ajax Calkins, am a brilliantly ingenious man. No, let us not say 
man, let us say with an eye for scientific 
accuracy, superman. 

It worked. It worked too well. The 



Destiny World * * * 73 



I. U. fleet heard. The I. U. fleet fled 
without landing. 

For the next few days I gloated over 
my triumph and proceeded therewith to 
establish and award myself the Order of 
the Shining Star of Aurora. Then I happened to listen in on Radio-Juno again. 

The voice of the announcer said that 
the I. U. was not going to risk a ship. 
The voice said that the I, U. was simply 
going to move a couple of larger Grade C 
asteroids from their orbits so that they 
would suddenly and unexpectedly crash 
into Aurora from opposite sides. Aurora 
would be reduced to its component atoms 
in a fraction of a second after the impact 
and the menace of the terrible invader base 
completely annihilated before the enemy 
knew it was attacked. 

I nearly jumped out of my skin when 
1 heard that. My plan had worked too 
well. I had not merely stared the fleet 
away, I had overscared them, t had brought 
about the doom of Aurora! 

I fled precipitately from my capital, not 
daring to rescue my property. NX/ho knew 
when the planetoids would crash? 1 dashed 



into my space-ship, slammed the air-lock 
and fired the rockets. Discretion was better than valor now. 

As the Destiny II left Aurora behind, I 
stood facing the stars in my control room 
and, placing my right hand in the front 
of my jacket and my left hand behind me, 
stared ahead coldly into the black of space. 
Napoleon too, had had his defeats. 

But like a Phoenix, I too would rise 
again. Destiny! Ah, destiny! 



If you enjoy a bit of light 
reading in pictures . . . 

Get a Cop/ of 

JACKPOT 

COMICS 

10c Everywhere 



A Success 

*52 




I found : 



_. _Tiy opportunities aa a real estate 
salesman ^-really Hmiied. Luiiff hours — worry 
over the uncertainty of income were too much 
for me. Then 1 answered a Lewis advertisement. 
At first frankly skeptical M.out '!i:.im-iii(; professions a.t my age, J finally enrolled. Immi din t' l;> 
after graduation I became Clerk of n Westi-rn 
hotel. Now I have advanced to thin well-paid 
Front Office position in a beautiful Ofttifomifl 
club. My success is due to Lewis Leisure-Time. 
Home Study Training.'" 

STEP IIVT© A WELL-PAID HOTEL POSITION 



How I Stepped 

.„♦.* BIG PAY 
Hotel Job 



Newspaper It out p Mhd, Who 
Knew Not hint: About Hotel 
Work. Now Stewjard 




■•Having- nothing to look forward to but hard, 
monotonous work, long hours and poor pay in 
my job as newspaper route man. I enrolled In the 
Lewis Schools. Shortly rn'ter irradu.ilton, the Ltwin 
Schools placed me in a fine resort hotel in Wes'ern 
Pennsylvania. IVhen our senson was over the 
manage i- :>sl;ed me to no in Miami Bench to take 
a similar position in their Florida hotel. Now 1 
am Steward in a Pennsvlvfiniii hotel. Lewis 
Id it!" 



From poart in cmul Lewla-tf allied men and women its 
vrinnlne suecess in tlx 1 hotel, clu>i, reslmirant and Institutional field. They're "waking ro,hJ" as managers, assistant 
managers, houeeltini.crs, ln..ilJ>*sea. [iiiivlK.;iii|{ agents and In 
B5 other types of well- mil. 1 in...i li-iiLi. N.™ ill? Government 'a 
TOD-mlllion-dollar defense ta>«l. ln.iisltia and recreation program means critter oiir"irtnnitiea than ever before. For 28 
yean the succts* of Lints graduate* has proved previous 



experience, unnecessary In this l>jsine.«a where you're iv>t 
dropped Iierause yn are M. Hither business, home, professional or grade school back.:rmind. plus Lewis Training. 
Qualifies yon II lt.>nie, hi leisurr dm.', I.'. union hrlnna FREE 
book which tetli ho» to uoallfv for a uell-puld position; etplnuia bow you are re^islcrrd JTIKK .if etlra coil, in L«»il 
National Platens rri Sanice. Mall if NOW! 



■ Clifford Lewis, Pres. 

■ Lewis Hotel Training Schools, 

* Room ZW-2525, Washington, D. C. 

I Send me your T*Tee Tlool; and details as 

■ to qualify for a well-paid position, at h 
I leisure time. 



Name | 

■ 

Addro3* ■ 



City State.. 



DAY OF THE TITANS 

by FREDERIC A. KUMMER, JR. 

(Author of "Dny of the Comal," "Lorelei of Space," etc.) 

Their one chance of rescua lay in the time-cone; through it they might find some sort 
of weapon against the hostile Tiramans. But they didn't reckon upon plunging into a 
deeper mess than the one they had left behind them. 



CHAPTER I 

THE rain dripped down steadily upon 
Titan's bleak, cheerless surface, sluicing over the rocks and sand, drenching the tall white fungoid growths. The 
air, almost unbearably heavy with carbon 
dioxide, was saturated with moisture from 
the ceaseless drizzle until it seemed that 
one breathed it in lumps. Mark Vallard 
pulled his feet from the mud with a sickening squelch and swore softly. 

"Worse than Pluto," he muttered. "Eh, 
Doag ?" 

"What price archaeology?" the big Jovian 
grunted. He sucked at the small oxygen 
flash he carried, grinned under the heady 
influence of the stuff. The atmosphere on 
Saturn's largest satellite didn't require space 
suits, but what with the unbelievable humidity, the large percentage of free carbon dioxide, a whiff of oxygen every so often was 
gratifying. 

Vallard glanced about the desolate scene. 
They were in the middle of a vast plain, 
covered for the most part with pallid, mushroom-like vegetation. Here and there io 
the white jungle, smoke from the villages 
of the primitive Titans rose, and an occasional huge worm, blind and harmless for 
all its size, writhed through the forests. 

The two men stood on the edge of the 
mound from which the expedition had excavated the ancient ruins of Titan's early 
civilization. An immense masonry dome, 
of which only the outline remained, had 
attracted them; and the diggings within it 
had proven fruitful in clues to the longlost civilization of the satellite. Sodden 
archaeologists were busy pawing through 
mud and sand, studying the inscriptions on 



various fallen blocks of stone. The Stellar, 
base-ship of the First Titan Archaeological 
Expedition, lay perhaps a quarter of a mile 
off. rusty and mud-spattered from long 
weeks of inaction. 

Vallard sighed in sheer depression. 
"Where' re the diggers, today?' he said. 
"Another of their everlasting holidays?" 
The expedition used workmen from the 
tribes of uncivilized Titans who had no 
love for labor. 

"Looks like a permanent holiday this 
time." Doag shrugged his massive shoulders. "They decided we were profaning 
the resting place of the ancient ones. And 
just when we were uncovering the most 
interesting inscriptions of all. Hello, there's 
Fowler !" 

In the middle of the ruins a large tent 
had been pitched. A wizened little man 
with the pompous air of a cock-sparrow 
had stepped out into the eternal rain, was 
rubbing grease from his hands. Vallard 
and Doag moved toward" him. 

"So Achilles has quit sulking in his 
tent?" Vallard said genially. "I suppose 
it might interest you to know that all our 
diggers have up and quit." 

"Diggers?" Fowler continued to scrape 
grease from his hands. "Quite immaterial, 
ray boy. Science has other means at her 
disposal." He swelled importantly, started 
back into the tent. 

"Wait a minute!" said Vallard. "Don't 
you think you've been playing Indian chief 
long enough? You're nominally in command of this expedition and all you've 
done since we've been on Titan is stay in 
this tent and work on your mysterious invention !" 

"True." Doag nodded gravely. "You 



A COMPLETE NOVELET 



75 



76 * * ★ Future Fiction 



carry strange machinery into this tent, hammer away, and no one even knows what 
you're making." He chuckled. "Mad 
scientist lurking in tent. ..." 

"Your attempts at humor," Fowler said 
portent ion sly, "are proof of your immature 
minds. But genius always has to contend 
with such ignorance, I suppose." He disappeared once more into the tent and the 
sound of hammering was resumed. 

"A hell of an expedition." Vallard 
glanced at the dripping scientists knee-deep 
in mud about the ancient ruins. "Rain and 
more rain, the diggers quitting, Fowler having one of his brainstorms, and...." He 
broke off, staring. "Look, Doag ! The 
Titans!" 

»OAG stared through the mists in the 
direction of the Stellar. In the mud 
and muck about the ship, small, ugly figures were moving. Titans, for these creatures, was the most classic misnomer in the 
solar system, Scrawny arms and legs, big, 
pot-bellied bodies, pendulous ear-lobes and 
webbed fingers, round red eyes .... and the 
whole surmounted by a mop of hair that 
gave the appearance of a chrysanthemum. 
Savage, ugly, treacherous, they were about 
as titanic as a space-rat. 

Vallard watched them move toward the 
Stellar; from their waists hung vines 
weighted with stones, like bolos. He 
remembered what Doag had said about the 
Titans believing that the expedition was 
profaning the ancient ones. And there 
were only two men left as guards aboard 
the space-ship. 

"Hey! Campbell, Walker, you others!" 
Vallard called to the group of men about 
the excavations. "There's a bunch of natives heading for the Stellar! We'd better 
see what they're up to! I don't just like 
. . . Good Lord !" 

The Titans about the ship had moved 
suddenly, their webbed feet keeping them 
on the surface of the mud. They were 
swinging into the airlock of the spaceship, 
and in the gloom Vallard could see the 
flash of heat-guns behind her portholes. 

"Quick!" Doag drew his gun. "They're 
fighting aboard her! Come on!" 

He and Vallard raced toward the Stellar, 
but already the firing had ceased. The two 
guards, unsuspecting, had gone down after 
only a brief struggle. Vallard swore softly 
and the big Jovian beside him drew a bead 
on the ship's airlock, fired . . . but at that 



distance his aim was poor. The other 
scientists were running forward to join 
them, but for the most part they were 
unarmed. 

Suddenly from the ship's airlock the ugly 
Titans began to emerge. And they were 
armed with heat-guns from the Stellar's 
supplies. Scores of them, racing across the 
mud on light webbed feet. Vallard fired 
and two of ihem toppled to the ground,' but 
more pressed on. Flashes of light were 
rising on all sides as the heat guns, inexpertly handled by the natives, missed 
them. Wherever the beams struck the mud, 
steam rose to mingle with the mist, and 
the Titans were rapidly drawing so close 
that they could not fail to miss. 

Doag fell flat in the mire to avoid i 
shot aimed at his head; the lurid beam 
passed above him like a white-hot lance. 
When he arose, he was hard to tell from 
the mud. His answering shot checked the 
Titans momentarily, but Vallard could see 
a party edging around, to cut them off from 
the ruins. 

"Got to get back ... to excavations," 
he muttered. "They can move faster than 
we can out here!" 

Doag nodded and the two men, bending low, dodged in and out of the white 
fungi of the plain. Now and again flashes 
of gun-fire would light up the rain-swept 
terrain but they ploughed steadily ahead, 
trusting to the Titans' poor marksmanship. 
Scrambling ever the crumbling wall of the 
ancient ruins, they rejoined the other members of the expedition. 

"Safe?" Walker nodded. "We couldn't 
help. Only two other guns besides yours 
in the whole damn diggings. Weren't expecting this." He peered over the edge of 
a cyclopean monolith, ducked hastily as red 
flame spat above him. 

"Looks like we're in for a seige," Vallard 
said grimly. "Is Sitting Bui! still in his 
teepee?" He moved toward Fowler's mysterious tent. "If this doesn't bring htm 
out of his pipe-dreams . . ." 

HE PAUSED as the tent -flap opened 
and Fowler emerged. The little 
archaeologist favored them with a superior 
smile. 

"Finished !" he announced. "They 
laughed when I returned from Pluto...." 

"And now you're the life of the party," 
Vallard concluded. "Would it interest you 
to know that the Titans have raided the 



Oay of th. Titans * * * 77 



Stellar, scuppered Wells and Donnelly, and 
are now besieging us here . . . armed with 
our guns?" 

' 'Titans ? Besieged ?' ' Fowler's ai r of 
triumph fell from him like a cloak. "At 
a time like this!" 

"I don't see what the time has to do with 
it." Doag watched the flickering rays, like 
heat-lightning, dance along the rain-wet 
stones. The rest of the expedition was 
seeking shelter among the crumbling ruins 
of the ancient structure. The Titans seemed 
content to draw their fire in return, wait 
until the four heat guns in the earthmen's 
hands were exhausted, before trying a rush. 

"So." The big Jovian picked off a spindly-legged figure that showed itself too 
clearly among the pallid waxy growths 
'Three hundred or more of them .out there, 
And at least eighty guns. Twenty of us, four 
guns. Simple mathematics. We'll last two 
days with luck. No way to reach the ship, 
no way to get help. And archaeology's 
supposed to be a peaceful science!" 

Fowler stared out at the rainswept plain, 
the lowering clouds. Suddenly he straightened his shoulders. 

"Give your guns to Campbell and Walker," he said. "Then come to the tent." 

The two men did as he requested, ducking from rock to rock for cover. When 
they returned, the little archaeologist was 
waiting for them by the canvas shelter. 

"You've been wondering what I was up 
to, these past weeks," he said slowly. "Remember our experience on Pluto?" 

"I'm not iikely to forget it in a hurry,' 
Vallard grunted. "I've been called the 
biggest liar in the solar system whenever 
1 mention that time-machine." 

Doag nodded in assent. 

"The greatest experience any three men 
ever knew," he said. "Going backward in 
time! And the world refusing to believe! 
If only the machine hadn't been wrecked, 
archaeology would be able to . . ." 

"Come here." Fowler entered the tent. 
"Look |" 

Vallard drew a sharp sibilant breath. In 
the center of the tent amid a litter of tools 
and machinery, rose a transparent cone, 
some ten feet tall. At its apex was a 
tangle of wires, beneath which a control 
board rose. In one side of the cone was 
a small air-tight door. 

"The time-cone!" Doag's big craggy face 
lit up. "But it was destroyed! We saw 
it blasted by a ray-gun. . ." 



"True," Fowler nodded. "But when we 
returned from Pluto I had the remains sent 
back to earth. For three months J studied 
them, checking every part, trying to remember how each wire went. I didn't tell 
anyone what I was working on. Not even 
you two, because I knew what they'd say 
if the story got out. They'd want tu put 
me in a nice padded cell. Time-travel's 
supposed to be impossible."' 

"Right," Vallard nodded grimly. "I 
know. Just like trying to convince people 
back in the twentieth century that a rocketship wasn't a dream. You think it'll work?" 

"What odds?" Doag shrugged. "Yesterday we could have made the greatest 
archaeological discoveries ever dreamed of! 
Not trying to piece out history from old 
inscriptions, but actually seeing, living, the 
past. Now, with ihose mad Titarfs besieging us. . ." 

^"Look!" Fowler was deathly serious now. 
"The time-cone saved us on Pluto. From 
-starvation. We know the people who built 
these ruined buildings were powerful. Their 
inscriptions show them to be scientists, 
warriors! Why not go back and enlist 
their aid! The aid of men dead ten thousand ye^rs!" 

"But" . . . Vallard glanced out of the 
entrance of the tent. . . "how about the 
others? We'll have to tell them. . ." 

"Nonsense!" Fowler shook an impatient 
head. "Time is our servant. We can return 
at the exact moment we left! This moment! Kven if we stay away a week ... a 
year. They won't know we've been gone 
an instant! Como on!" 

The two men stood motionless, listening 
to the drumming rain, the hiss of heat 
guns, the fierce shouts of the Titans surrounding the ruined city. Suddenly Vallard nodded. 

"Right!" he said. "It's the only chance." 
He stepped into the time-cone, followed by 
Doag. "Do your stuff, Doc!" 

Fowler moved to the controls, his normal 
pomposity returning. 

"Thus does genius triumph over all obstacles," he announced. "The name of 
Fowler shall be among the immortals of 
science! I. . ." 

Vallard never heard the rest ot Fowler's 
modest tribute, for at that moment the little 
man threw the switch. A blue light broke 
from the apex of the cone and in another 
moment they were lost in the abyss of time. 



78 * ★ * Future Pleticn 



CHAPTER II 

IT WAS like the time on Pluto all over 
again, Vallard thought. The black 
swirling mists, the sensation of eternity stretching away on all sides, the staggering terror of infinity. And his two companions standing like ghosts beside him 
while the unknown cosmos beyond the cone 
writhed with alien life. 

Then suddenly the darkness about them 
took on a greenish hue, and Doag, leaning 
forward, gave a surprised grunt. 
"Look!" he said, pointing. 
Vallard sured. The time-cone was completely surrounded by a thick swirling 
greenish vapor ... a vapor alive with queer 
misshapen birds, strange lizard-like creatures, great strips of livid vegetation. The 
door, air-tight, prevented leakage, but they 
were entirely surrounded by the thick green 
luminous mist. 

"A nice time-era you pick!" Vallard 
grunted. "We're in the middle of a gascloud!" 

Fowler frowned. "This should be the 
period when that ruined city was at its 
peak," he said, fingering the controls. "I 
don't just understand. . . Look!" He 
pointed. "That's where the green smoke 
came from!" 

Doag and Vallard followed his gaze. Beyond the glowing mists the walls of a large 
room were visible; and at one end of the 
loom a circular bronze door, through which 
the vapor poured, was closing. 

"Locks of some kind," Doag grunted, 
"We seem to be in the middle of a prehistoric gas-works. And, say . . . isn't the 
vapor getting lower?" 

"Right!" Fowler nodded in satisfaction. 
"Must be heavier than air! Draining out 
through gratings, holes, in the floor!" 

The three men peered through the transparent walls of the time-cone. As Fowler 
had said, the green luminous gas was draining off, leaving a litter of queer vegetation, grotesque birds and beasts that 
gasped like fish out of water, on the stone 
Boor. Then before their curious gaze they 
saw a small door open at the end of the 
room, and half a dozen odd, semi-human 
figures appeared. Tall, muscular, bronzed, 
they would have been rather earthly in 
appearance had it not been for their pendulous ear-lobes, and bushy shocks of hair. 
They were, it seemed, a refined, less degenerate edition of (he savage Titans of 



the era the time-travellers had left. Dressed 
in close-fitting garments ol shining red, they 
carried long, fork-like implements in their 
hands with which to spear the beasts flopping upon the floor. Sight of the timecone seemed to fill them with wonder and 
alarm. 

"I think I've got it," Fowler muttered. 
"This room is a sort of fisherman's net. 
After draining off the green gas, they 
gather in a haul of animals, vegetation. 
Only they hadn't counted on landing us." 

"A nice spot you picked to set up the 
cone!" Doag growled. "We . . . look! 
They're coming this way!" 

The red -clad figures, after one long look 
at the time-cone, were advancing toward 
it, their pronged spears raised. 

"Think fast, mastermind," Vallard rapped 
out. "Do we try a morejiealthy time-cycle, 
or take 'em on unarmeo.'' 

"This," said Fowler airily, "is merely a 
matter of impressing them with our superior mentality. Thus!" He opened the 
door at the side of the cone, stepped out; 
drawing himself up to a triumphant iivefoot-six, he extended one arm in dramatic 
dictatorial salute. 

FROM that point on things happened 
fast. Far from being impressed by 
Fowler's "superior mentality," the bushy 
haired men sprang forward, bore him to 
the ground. 

"Come on!" Doag shouted. "Got to 
help!" 

He and Vallard leaped from the cone, 
empty-handed. Stooping low, the big 
Jovian picked up one of their attackers, 
slammed him into the group, sending three 
of them skidding into the litter of vegetation and gasping lizard-like creatures. Vallard followed this success with a hard right 
that sent another of their attackers sprawling. He sprang forward to pull Fowler to 
his feet, but a hand clutched his ankle and 
he slipped on the polished floor. The fall 
knocked the breath out of him, and when 
he picked himself up, Doag was hemmed 
in by a circle of pronged spears. 

"just a matter of impressing them," Vallard said sarcastically. "Eh, Fowler?" 

The little doctor swayed to his feet, 
glanced about; the tall beings, spears ready 
for the first threatening gesture, were jabbering among themselves. 

"Listen !" Fowler exclaimed. "Their 
speech is like that of the Titans! A little 



Day of th» Titans * * * 79 



different, but basically the same!" He 
drogped into the rough gutteral dialect they 
had picked up during their explorations in 
the other time-cycle, but their captors refused to answer his questions. With a curt 
gesture, they urged their prisoners toward 
the small door at the end of the big room. 

As they stumbled through the doorway, 
Doag gave a grunt of surprise. 

"Look!" He pointed upward. "Roofed 
in!" 

The others followed his gaze. The outline of the dome they had observed among 
the ruins of their era, now became clear 
... for a vast half-sphere of massive masonry rose over the city beneath. Streets, 
tall buildings, small grass plots, all were 
sheltered beneath the dome, Gazing about, 
Vallard drew a sharp breath. The vast 
dignity, the hoary age of the city was somehow breathtaking. Large ultra-violet projectors, like street lamps, gave ligh> revealing the eerie beauty of the place. For 
the motif of the city was the globe . . . 
rounded buildings, spherical minarets, 
globe-shaped dwellings in tiers stretching (o 
the top of the dome. 

"Remarkable!" Fowler nodded. "Makes 
one feel like an ant in a heap of marbles! 
An unique architectural system! I must 
make notes on this for my brochure on 
Titan's early civilization . . ." 

"Optimist," Vallard grunted. "Better get 
that 'superior mentality' to work on these 
mugs first!" 

Their captors were taking them through 
narrow streets, from which curious passersby stared at them. Vallard caught the 
words, "Teleite" and "zirkon" often repeated among the crowds. He and his three 
companions didn't make imposing spectacles, he realized. Fowler's pompous air 
was marred by a promising black eye, while 
Doag, although his size and Jovian solemnity were impressive, was still torn and 
muddy from the struggle with the Titans. 

A vast globular building loomed before 
them; they passed through the massive 
doors with some misgivings, made their 
way along a maze of corridors. Guards, 
armed with copper shields and swords, admitted them into a large hall at the top 
of the globe. 

"Gods of Jupiter!" Doag muttered. 
"Look!" 

The room itself was no novelty, for it 
contained only a bronze table and chairs. 
But in the center was a hole opening, via a 



circular staircase, into the floor below. Here 
was machinery . . . huge complicated machinery . . . and glass pipes through which 
the green gas flowed, emitting an eerie 
glow. The weird light, pouring from the 
hole in the floor, gave an unreality to the 
bizarre murals on the walls of the upper 
room until it seemed a witches' den. 

As the three prisoners and their guards 
waited, a man and a woman toiled up the 
ladder from the strange engine-room. 
Young, muscular, though seemingly tired, 
only the large earlobes and bushy hair differentiated them from earth-beings. Both 
were clad in brilliant scarlet. 

"Failure, Tama," the man was saying. 
"Always failure. But we must find out. . ." 
He broke off at sight of the three captives. 
"Who . . . who are these beings?" 

WT^XCELLENCIES!" The leader of 
M.A the guards bowed first to the man, 
then to the woman. "We are workers in 
the admission chamber. The zirkon had 
been let in as usual, drained off for the 
power stations" ... he motioned to the 
masses of machinery below . . . "as it always 
has been done. When the chamber was 
clear of zirkon we entered, to obtain food, 
and found a queer cone, containing these 
beings. At first we thought it was some 
trick of the Teleites, but these are a new 
race." 

The tired young man nodded, studied the 
archaeologists with keen curious eyes. 

"I am Kahl, headman of this dome," he 
said in the rough Titan dialect. "Who are 
you? Where have you come from?" 

Vallard shot a glance at Fowler. "Start 
impressing cm," he said. "You got us 
into this!" 

The wizened little doctor stepped forward. Choosing his words carefully, using 
synonyms whenever the young man seemed 
puzzled, he explained the time-cone. The 
slender girl beside Kahl frowned. 

"Men from another world?" she said. 
"From a time in which we are long dead? 
This is some Teleite trick . . ." 

"Let us listen, Tama my wife." The 
young ruler turned again to Fowler. "If 
your story is true, you must be a great 
race, and powerful. Why have you come 
to our poor city?" 

"The Titans . . . savages . . . are besieging our expedition in our time-era." 
Foster was gaining assurance now. "W* 
want warriors, weapons, to defeat them." 



80 * ★ * Future Fiction 



"Here there is no help for you." Tama 
shook her head. "We are almost savages 
ourselves. Through ease, lack of necessity, 
we have lost the great learning of our forefathers. There is no science in this dome, 
or in any of the others, if they still survive." 

Doag glanced down at the maze of machinery below. The scarlet-clad Kahl fol 
Jowed his gaze. 

"You think the machines below are proof 
of our power?" He shook a disconsolate 
bead. "They were built in the old days 
before the zirkon came. And built too 
well! Everything was foreseen by our ancestors; they made the domes so perfect 
that there was no need for us to work, 
think, improve. So we have forgotten their 
science, leaving everything to the automatic machines. Someday the machines must 
break, wear out . . . and we will be helpless ! So many times Tama and I have gone 
below to study them, but their principles are 
beyond our grasp ! Unless we learn, this 
dome is someday doomed." 

"But" . . . Big Doag studied the two 
young people . . . "you mentioned other 
domes. And what is this zirkon?" He shot 
a glance at his companions, Fowler nodding, 
making mental notes, Vallard staring at the 
machinery below. "We may be able to 
help." 

Kahl and Tama reflected a moment. The 
green light pouring from the circular hole 
in the floor cast weird shadows over their 
sombre faces. The armed guards who had 
brought the three prisoners into the room 
were silent, immobile. Then suddenly the 
young headman of the dome spoke. 

"This is the story o^ our people as my 
grandfather told it," he said with deep 
solemnity. "Centuries ago we on this 
satellite you call Titan were a peaceful, 
happy, civilized race, and endowed with 
great science, vast learning. Then one day 
our astronomers noticed one of the rings of 
the parent body, Saturn as you have named 
it, was expanding. Within a few years, 
they calculated, the great ring would en 
velop Titan. Studying the ring they discovered it was no circle of dust and tiny 
meteors, but a band of strange and deadly 
gases, charged with ions of free electricity 
which made it glow. This gas was zirkon." 

Kahl paused, gazing at the green glow 
from the pit below. When he resumed 
speaking, his voice was low. 

"Our forefathers decided to exert all 



their power to protect themselves from the 
deadly gas. But there were two schools of 
thought. One was to build these domes 
as protection, the other to remain in the 
open and accustom themselves to the zirkon. 
These latter groups knew that the change 
would come gradually and hoped for a 
biological evolution such as the evolution 
of fish to men. Each of the two schools 
thought the other wrong and went ahead 
with its plans. We are the Dome-men and 
those who conditioned themselves to the 
zirkon are the Teleites." 

"1 begin to understand," Fowler nodded 
intently. "Highly interesting, psychologically. And you mean that outside this dome 
there's a ... a sea of this electricallycharged gas?" 

IN ANSWER the girl Tama moved to 
one side of the room, drew back heavy 
metallic curtains. The building in which 
they stood was set against the outer dome 
and the heavy glass bullseye permitted a 
glimpse of the world beyond. 

"Great Cosmos!" Vallard swallowed 
hard. "It . . . it's like a window into 
hell!" 

His companions made no answer; their 
eyes were glued to the scene before them. 
It was, as Vallard said, like an opening 
into the inferno. Heavier than air, the 
zirkon lay in a luminous green layer, covering everything like a deep glowing sea. 
The queer light from the suspended ions 
of electricity gave a weird mephitic look 
and Vallard felt as though he were gazing, 
hypnotized, into the depths of a great emerald. More, there was life in the sea of 
zirkon, queer, teeming, alien life. Vegetation, strange leprous stuff, writhing in the 
manner of a nest of serpents, its groping 
tendrils twisted into a thick jungle . . . and 
animal life, grotesque, leathery birds, giant 
slugs, and lizard-like horrors creeping 
among the tangle of vines and fungi. The 
surface of Titan, beyond the dome, was a 
horror of rampant, unreal life, monstrous, 
repulsive, an inferno worthy of a Dore's 
pen. 

"So," Tama said softly, "the world outside has evolved to suit the atmosphere of 
zirkon. The gas is full of carbon, and 
plants thrive. And all life has become semireptilian . . . even the Teleites." 

"Amazing!" Fowler nodded. "In some 
respects it corresponds to the mesozoic era 



D«y mf tk« Titanf * * * 81 



of earth! What do you inside this dome 
do for air, food, and power?" 

"All that was figured out by the ancients," Kahl muttered. "The admission 
chamber in which you were trapped, gives 
us food. We bait it with scraps of meat, 
and the creatures from outside enter. When 
enough are inside, we close the door, allow 
the zirkon to drain off. The beasts die in 
the air, like fish out of water, and supply 
us with food. Our water comes from ponds 
beneath the dome. Then, as to power, the 
green gas flows into this room below" . . 
he pointed to the machines in the room 
beneath . . . "and in some way the free ions 
of electricity are collected, utilized. This 
power runs the ultra-violet lamps, necessary to our health since we are cut off from 
the sun, and also the air regenerators. And 
from the zirkon other materials vital to our 
existence are obtained. Salt, carbon, similar 
chemicals, For the zirkon is a composite 
of heavy gases, which bring death by 
strangulation." 

"Like the deluge of water on earth," ValUrd grinned. "Only here it's this zirkon 
gas-mixture. And the domes are sort of 
Noah's arks. But there weren't any of those 
Teleites on earth!" He turned to Kahl. 
"Ever see any of your Tcleite friends?" 

"A few have been caught in the admission chambers," Kahl gave a look of revulsion. "They died in our air. But before 
they died, they killed many of our people 
with their terrible powers." He made a 
weary gesture. "And now you know all 
there is to our dome-world. Sameness . . . 
eternal, unchanging. The machinery goes 
on, life goes on. No way to reach the 
other domes, because of the zirkon, the 
fierce creatures outside. No adventure, no 
excitement, no deviation from our routine. . ." 

Doag glanced about, nodding. The 
dreary sameness of the dome-world offered 
no help. 

"Better go back further," he muttered. 
"To the days before the zirkon came. The 
men who built these domes ought to have 
weapons, brains. And with the expedition 
surrounded by those damned Titans, we 
better step on it . . ." 

"Right. Come to, Doc!" Vallard gripped 
Fowler's arm, shook him out of his archaeological day-dreams. "We've got to go 
back further in time to get help! You can 
study this civilization later!" 

"I shall go to the admission chamber 



with you," Kahl said. "The sight ot your 
transition should prove interesting. So little 
ever happens here . . ." 

EVFN as Kahl spoke, his words were 
proven false. Shouts sounded in the 
corridor, excited dome-dwellers burst into 
the room. 

"Kahl! Kahl!" came the rising cry. "The 
Teleites! Entering through the admission 
chamber! Wearing masks so that our atmosphere docs not harm them ! Quick !" 

"Teleites! But this is impossible! Never 
in our history . . ." The young ruler 
snatched up an ornamental bronze sword 
and shield. "Rouse the dome! Hurry!" 

For a long moment the three time-travellers stood stunned. Vallard reached for a 
heat gun that was not there, swore. 

"First excitement in a thousand years," 
he grated. "And we have to land in it! 
You're a jinx, Fowler! The admission 
chamber, too! Where the cone is! If 
they smash that . . ." 

"Come on !" Doag's face was grim. 
"Can't get marooned in this era! Got to 
fight!" 

Then they were racing after Kahl, 
through winding corridors, toward the 
clamor outside. Mad, Vallard thought. 
Quite mad. Even on Pluto they hadn't 
run into anything like this. Panting, he 
followed Doag through the doorway of 
the globular building. 

The streets of the dome-city were in a 
turmoil of confusion. The dome-men, armed 
with bronze swords and shields, poured 
into the streets, shouting furiously. But 
coming from the admission chamber at the 
far end of the dome were beings who 
made the bushy-haired dome-men handsome 
by comparison. Scaly, hideous, they emanated a queer glow, like phosphorus. The 
result of breathing in the free ions of electricity from the zirkon, Vallard realized, 
and absorbing the strange current. On their 
backs were small copper tanks, with masks 
covering nose and mouth. Conditioned to 
the heavy gases, they could not now breathe 
air, and were like divers, carrying their own 
atmosphere in tanks. The Teleites were 
unarmed, yet were driving the dome-men 
back with great slaughter and the latter 
were near to breaking. 

At sight of Kahl, his people rallied. The 
young headman forced his way through the 
throng, sword in hand, followed by the 
three strangers. Along narrow streets, in 



82 * * * Future Fiction 



the shadow of great spherical buildings, 
they raced, faces white in the pale light 
of the ultra-violet lamps. As they neared 
the admission chamber, they could see the 
glowing Teleites, bodies exuding a greenish 
witch-fire, pushing onward with fierce cries. 
Motionless, inert dome-men lay upon the 
stone street, their still figures unmarked 
except for queer burn-marks. Doag snatched 
up a bronze sword and shield, and the 
others followed suit. 

"Don't know what we're up against," 
Vallard muttered. "But we'll soon find 
out!" He grinned at little Fowler, brandishing a sword nearly as big as he was. "Attaboy, Achilles! Come on!" 

They were in the front rank now, beside Kahl. A group of the scaly, moistskinned Teleites sprang forward, the green 
light from their bodies giving a weird glow 
to the scene. 

"Extraordinary phenomenon," Fowler 
panted. "Common among certain types of 
marine lite, but unknown to homo sapiens! 
Ah!" He threw up the bronze shield as one 
of the Teleites hinged at him with bare 
hands. The glowing fingers touched the 
shield and Fowler gave a sharp gasp, 
writhed as though in pain. The sword fell 
from his hand, he slumped to his knees, 
fell flat. 

"Fowler!" Doag leaped forward, mighty 
muscles tensed. In one terrible stroke his 
sword bit through the Teleite's scales, all 
but sheared his body in two. A fearful 
blow, it brought death to the glowing warrior . . . but Doag, gripping the swordhilt, went rigid. The weapon was buried 
deep in the queer creature's side, yet Doag 
seemed unable to move, even to relinquish 
his grip on the hilt. 

"Charged!" he muttered through 
clenched teeth. "Like . . . electric eels! 
No hope of . . ." He swayed as the dying 
Teleite, in a last spasm, poured his deadly 
charge along the sword. Then with a 
crash Doag, the mighty Jovian, toppled to 
(he ground. 

Vallard understood now. Through 
breathing the zirkon, the invaders accumulated a tremendous potential. Like, as 
Doag had said, electric eels. The bronze 
and copper shields, far from being protection, merely made good conductors. And 
every sword-stroke meant death to its wielder. He glanced about. Kahl was down, 
the street was littered with still figures, and 
the remainder of the domt-mtn were throw


ing down their arms. From the corner of 
his eye Vallard saw two of the glowing 
Teleites rushing toward him. Whirling, he 
threw the sword at one of them, saw him 
slump to the ground. The other, unchecked, 
reached out and gripped Vallard's wrist. 
The earthman stiffened, as the surging current tore through his body. Through dark 
mists he saw the Teleite's eyes burning over 
the top of the mask that brought zirkon 
to his nose and mouth. Then Vallard's 
limbs seemed to turn to water and the 
domed city, the rounded dwellings, the 
eerie glowing figure, all faded into black 
oblivion. 

CHAPTER 111 

VALLARD came to feeling as if he'd 
been on the rack; every muscle 
ached and his wrist was burned 
where the Teleite had gripped it. He rolled 
over, sat up. 

At the other side of the little room he 
saw Fowler and Doag, heads together in 
conversation. Fowler looked up, grinning. 

"Ah," he said. "Our hero revives. How 
d'you feel?" 

"Like hell," Vallard grunted. "And that 
guy Kahl said nothing ever happened 
around here! Where are we now?" 

"In one of the rooms of Kahl's palace, ' 
Doag said gravely. "The Teleites are in 
full control. They're avenging the death, 
so they say, of some of their people who 
got caught in the dome's admission chamber. Kahl and Tama and the rest of the 
dome-people are penned up in the admission chamber right now." 

"While we are kept separate," Fowler 
said. "The . . . ah . . . assailants have 
not failed to recognize our superior mentality." 

"A little less of that superior mentality 
and we wouldn't be here," Vallard growled. 
"What about the time-cone?" 

"We don't know." Doag shook his massive head. "But it isn't likely they'd tinker 
with it just now. What worries me is the 
thought of Walker, Campbell, and the rest, 
hemmed in by those lousy Titans . . ." 

"A mere bagatelle!" Fowler snapped his 
fingers. "Once we get out of here, it's 
■simple. Have you stopped to consider 
closely these electrical beings ? For instance, why don't they lose their charge 
with every move they make?" 

"Why doesn't an electric eel?" Doag said. 



Day of t*# TltoM * * ★ II 



"They're completely surrounded by water, 
an excellent conductor!" 

"Splendid." Fowler nodded like * 
pleased parent. "You show the glimmerings of intelligence. The answer is, of 
course, that the eel only generates electricity when attacked or frightened. So with 
these Teleites. When they want to knock 
someone out, they turn on the juice. The 
charge passes through their hands into the 
person they touch, through the ground and 
back into the Teleite to complete the circuit. Thus they shock by touch, with their 
hands, or where, as in Doag's case, a swordblade touches their bodies. So much for 
applied logic. I will now show you what, 
with admirable foresight, I brought along 
in case of repairs to the time-cone." He 
reached into his pocket and, with the air of 
a magician pulling a rabbit from a hat, 
produced a roll of copper wire. 

"So what?" said Vallard suspiciously. "I 
don't see . . ." 

"Look," Fowler said patiently, "you lie 
down there and pretend to be dying. Or 
crazy. Or both. Only raise enough noise 
to attract the guard. And leave the rest 
to me." 

"When it comes to acting nutty, I'm 
hardly the one," Vallard began. "It seems 
to me . . ." 

But Fowler wasn't listening. Very carefully he bound his hands with dry cloth 
torn from his coat, to form a crude but 
effective insulation. Over the cloth he 
wrapped the copper wire, taking care to 
leave a long strand dangling from each 
wrist to touch the damp floor. 

"All right," he announced at length 
"Yell!" 

They did. The shouts echoed through 
the cell, the corridor outside, like the wail 
of doom. With a clatter of footsteps one 
of the tall glowing figures appeared in the 
passage, his face half-hidden by his zirkon 
mask. 

"He's dying!" Doag motioned to Vallard, 
doing a realistic bit of writhing in one 
corner of the room. "Insane! Put him out 
of his misery before he attacks us!" 

Warily the Teleite opened the door, 
stepped inside. And as he did so, Fowler 
sprang from the shadows to face him, fists 
drawn back. 

There was a contemptuous look on the 
guard's countenance as he whirled to meet 
this attack. His hand shot out, crackling 
with blue sparks, toward Fowler's face. One 



touch of that highly-charged body and the 
little archaeologist would have been out of 
the fight . . . but with a quick motion he 
caught the thrust with his left hand. Sparks 
shot out as the Teleite's fingers touched 
the copper-bound hand. The cloth insulation smoked ominously, but the current, following the line of least resistance, ran down 
the wire that trailed upon the stone floor, 
sparkling violently. The wire was a lightning rod, diverting the current from Fowler's body, grounding the charge. 

"Some powerhouse!" Vallard, standing 
helplessly alongside Doag, watched the 
Teleite lash out again . . . and again Fowler caught the thrust with his copper-bound 
hand, grounded the charge. In spite of 
the trailing wire, the cloth insulation, some 
of the charge entered his body and he 
winced, but stuck to his task. 

"Go to it, Doc!" Doag clenched his big 
fists, cursing his own helplessness. But one 
touch of that glowing body, unless 
grounded, or insulated, meant sure shock 
. . . perhaps death. 

FOWLER and the guard were doing a 
wild dance about the cell. The Teleite, 
now that he found his thrusts were turned 
aside by Fowler's "lightning rods," was 
rushing his opponent, in hopes of bringing 
his body into contact with that of the little 
archaeologist and thus ending the struggle. 
But always a blow from Fowler's copperbound fists hurled him back, kept him at 
a distance. Onct the guard kicked out with 
his foot, and only a quick leap backwards 
kept the leg from touching Fowler. A 
miracle ot skill it seemed, that, using his 
hands as twin shields, he was able to avoid 
being touched elsewhere on his small figure. 

The Teleite was worried, now, his eyes 
showed fear. He could not quite understand why his electrical charge had failed 
him. Moreover, it began to appear that 
this charge was weakening. The sparks 
were growing less, it seemed an effort for 
him to produce the needed power. And 
with the zirkon mask over his mouth, he 
could not shout. It was at this mask that 
Fowler now aimed. With one sharp blow 
he knocked it from his opponent's face. 
Gasping, choking in the unaccustomed oxygen, the guard slumped to his knees, striving to replace the mask, get a breath of his 
life-giving zirkon. The green glow of his 
body had faded away, and no more sparks 
leaped from his hands. 



•4 * * ★ Futurt Fiction 



"O . . okay!" Fowler grunted. "He's 
too weak to generate more juice! Tie him 
up. you two!" 

Doag and Valfard lashed the queer figure 
with their belts. The best lie could put out 
was a mild charge like that of a run-down 
battery. In a moment the two men had 
him securely bound. Vallard lifted one of 
Fowler's bound hands above his head. 

"The winnah, and still champeen!" he 
grinned. " 'Mastermind' Fowler, the kayo 
king!" 

"A rudimentary application of practical 
physics," Fowler began, swelling perceptibly. "'"Thus does genius triumph over . . ." 

"Hadn't we better get going?" Doag cut 
in. "We've got to reach the time-cone, go 
back further in time, get help from the 
people who built this dome! The expedition, surrounded by those Titans . . ." 

"First," said Fowler importantly, "we 
must overcome these Teleites, free Kahl 
and bis people. Then . . ." 

"What!" Vallard gasped. "Why . . . 
why you dried up little goat! Let Kahl and 
these walking generators light their own 
feuds! Don't you realize the expedition is 
fighting for its life! 'Fhat it we don't get 
help, quick, it's doomed ! There's nothing 
in this time-cycle that can overcome the 
heat-guns the Titans got trom us! What 
good are Kahl and his sword -and-shi'eld 
gang against flame-guns ? You can't do 
this, Fowler! Can't! We've got to get 
help . . 

"You can't handle the time-cone," Fowler said blandly. "And I can. So you better stick with me. Coming, Doag?" 

The Jovian shrugged helplessly, followed 
Fowler from the room. 

"Okay," Vallard said bitterly. "You win. 
So now we fight for the dear old domepeople while the rest ot the bunch back in 
our time -cycle gets knocked off!" 

Fowler vouchsafed no reply and the three 
men made their way along the corridor, 
walking sottly. The u. v. tamps still shed 
their cold light and the stone wails gleamed 
queerly. They were, it appeared, in the 
main building, where Kahl had received 
t hem be f o re the in vasion . 

"This way," Fowler muttered. "I want 
to have a look at those machines in the 
lower level." 

Vallard grunted disgustedly, followed, 
his shadow looming grotesquely upon the 
wall. This was, apparently, the dwelling 
quarters, for there were tables, stools, 



benches, in the big rooms. Queer frescoes 
covered the wv'ls until it seemed they were 
surrounded by ghostly legions, and the 
silence within the great spherical building 
was eerie. Once they passed a window that 
opened onto the green, zirkon-laden world 
beyond the dome, and sight of the teeming rampant life outside made them think 
of some nightmare jungle where life fed 
upon life and the luminescent green mists 
hid a thousand horrors. Small wonder the 
Teleites, denizens of this outside world, 
were merciless, savage. Once, too, they 
passed a window that gave view of the 
streets of the dome-city and here they 
could see the Teleites looting buildings, 
roistering through the broad avenues . . . 
silent, since the zirkon masks covered their 
faces to enable them to breathe. But from 
the way many of them stood hand touching hand it seemed that they had a code of 
short and long electric charges that permitted them to communicate. Two, quarrelling over a looted jewel-casket, gripped 
hands, drawing electric energy from each 
other until the weaker, drained of his 
charge, collapsed. 

AH this the three men noted in a glance, 
then tiptoed on through the empty rooms. 
At the entrance of Kahl's reception room, 
Vallard suddenly gripped Fowler's arm, 
pointed. Ahead of them, standing motionless, was the glowing figure of a guard. 

Fowler nodded, started forward with his 
copper trailing hands, poised, but a motion 
from Doag stopped him. The huge Jovian 
bent, picked up a heavy wooden footstool. 
It scraped the floor a trifle as he picked it 
up, but the Teleite's hearing, accustomed to 
the heavy zirkon which conveyed sound bet 
ter than air, did not hear. Doag threw 
back his herculean arm, let fly. 

The footstool spun through the air, 
caught the guard at the base of the skull. 
One frightened flurry oi sparks flew from 
his fingertips, then he fell to the floor, unconscious. 

"Nice pitching," Vallard said. "A perfect strike!" 

"Quiet!" Fowler waved him to silence, 
led the way into the large room where they 
had first seen Kahl. The queer light still 
poured through the circular opening in the 
floor and the massive machinery below 
hummed unceasingly. Face a set grim mask 
in the ghastly illumination, Fowler motioned to the ladder leading to the mschine-room below. 



Pey t f fhc Titans * ★ ★ 85 



VALLARD, swinging down the circular 
iron stairs, gave an admiring whistle. 
The machines there would have done credit 
to the most elaborate factory on Terra. 
They were, to be sure, alien in design, and 
he could nol figure out their use . . . but 
the mere sight of them was somehow aweinspiring. Huge glass tubes, as big around 
as a man's body, led the glowing green 
zirkon from the admission chamber to great 
copper tanks, wreathed in coils of tubing. 
Here the free ions were converted to electric power, the carbon dioxide, methane, 
and other heavy gases broken down into 
carbon products for food, and the arcs of 
the u. v. lamps. Other chemicals, too, were 
obtained in smaller quantities but without 
analysis Vallard could not tell just what 
they were. In addition to the machines, 
there were supplies to make repairs of all 
sorts. Great sheets of glass, bars of copper, 
strips of tin, tools of every type. The 
builders of the dome had provided for 
every contingency except the one which had 
occurred . . . that their descendents would 
abandon learning, science, grow lazy and 
allow the great knowledge to die out. 

"So," Doag said somberly. "Here is 
everything. But the machines I do not 
understand. It would take weeks, months 
of study, to learn their principles." 

"Weeks ? Months?" Vallard grated. 
"And the Teleites'Il discover our jail-break 
any minute now! Better go back in the 
time-cone and fight with the rest of the expedition than stay prisoners here!" 

Fowler was examining the great vats of 
carbon and other products derived from 
the break-down of ihe zirkon. 

"Carbon," he muttered, frowning. "Ammonia could be made from it. And they 
must have iodine. Living matter needs 
small quantities of iodine. Nitrogen tetraiodide isn't a terrific explosive, but . . ." 

"Nitrogen tetra-iodide?" Doag nodded 
reflectively. "It'd take time to make. But 
there's a chance . . ." 

"That's what you ibink!" Vallard cried. 
"Look!" 

Fowler and Doag went rigid. The flow 
of zirkon through the great tubes had 
ceased, leaving only the light of the u. v. 
lamps. And through the big pipes, each 
over three feet in diameter, dark forms 
were sliding, shooting down until the first 
figure was stopped by a strainer in the 
tube; the others, sliding into him, were 



strung out inside the huge pipe like beads. 
And they were dome-men ! 

In one bound Doag had snatched up t 
heavy bar of coppei swung it above his 
head. Then, with a crash, the massive 
glass pipe shattered, the score or more figures slid to the floor. 

"Great Cosmos!" Doag exclaimed. 
"Kahl!" 

i franHE three strangers!" The young 
M- ruler shook a wondering head. 
"The gods are good! Those fools confined 
me and these of my guard in the admission chamber. There we stood, up to our 
necks in zirkon, helpless. But when all 
of the gas had sunk through the pipes, we 
lifted a grating and followed, sliding down 
the pipes 'til we got here! With this" 
... he held up the great diamond he wore 
about his neck ... "I planned to cut open 
the pipe! Your methoo was quicker!" 

Several of Kahl's followers had rolled up 
their cloaks, stuffed them into the pipe in 
case more zirkon were admitted from outside. This done, they turned to the three 
strangers, as though awaiting orders. Fowler glowed at this tribute to his leadership. 

"You and your men will hold the stairs, 
Kahl," he directed. "I haven't checked 
over this apparatus thoroughly, but I'm 
willing to bet I can produce an explosive, a 
weapon of some sort. . ." 

"But there is no time!" Kahl shook his 
head. "The Telcites took pains to tell me 
that they're going to make this dome a 
fortress! Going to let in the zirkon, release all the air inside! Then when it's 
full of zirkon, they'll be able to take off 
their masks, be at home! And all my people will die! Unless we act at once, there 
is no hope!"" 

"You . . . you say we haven't time?'' 
For once Fowler was taken aback. "But 
. . . without time even the simplest reaction 
can't . . 

"Never mind the science, Doc!" Vallard 
grinned. "This is a fight !" His gaze shifted 
from the shattered glass of the pipe to the 
sheets of the stuff among the supplies. 
Snatching up a hammer, he began to break 
it into rough oblongs. 

"Here!" Vallard slid two ot the pieces 
of glass toward Kahl. "Tie these to your 
feet! Like sandals! It's thick enough not 
to break easily, but walk gently!" 

"Ah!" Doag stared at the half-inch thick 
pieces of glass and grinned. "Insulation ) 



94 * * * Putur* Fiction 



And without our being grounded they can't 
hurt us! Nice going, Vallard!" He bent 
to help chip the thick glass. 

Kahl and the dome-men bound the 
clumsy sandals to their feet with strips of 
dry, fibrous cloth. 

"Not a bad idea," Fowler admitted 
grudgingly. "But what about weapons?*' 

"Plenty of 'em lying in the streets from 
the first fight," Vallard stood up, moved 
clumsily on his insulators. "Teleites haven't 
bothered to pick them up. They don't need 
weapons . . . usually." He shot a grim 
look at Kahl. "All set? Then let's go!" 

Up the stairs they went, and through the 
rooms above. They walked heavily, and 
nothing could muffle the clank of the glass 
insulators. Before they had reached the 
entrance of the building, half a dozen 
Teleite guards were running toward them. 

Vallard swung from somewhere in the 
region of his ankles, caught the foremost 
glowing figure flush on the chin. He felt 
a mild shock, no more, for with the circuit broken, thanks to the insulators, he 
couldn't be grounded. But the Teleite was 
grounded ... in quite another fashion; 
Vallard's blow stretched him out cold. 

With a shout, Kahl's men, who bad been 
hanging back to observe the results of the 
glass shoes, sprang forward, confident. With 
tools, bars of copper, and other odds and 
ends they had picked up in the machinerooms, they fell upon the remaining guards, 
and bowled them over. Then, brandishing 
their improvised weapons, they clattered 
out into the streets, where the fallen bodies 
of their comrades, killed in the earlier fighting, supplied them with their familiar 
swords and shields. The entire group had 
armed themselves before the Teleites attacked. 

The tall glowing shapes were pouring 
from the buildings, bewildered, some laden 
with loot, but all converging on the group 
about Kahl and the three time-travellers. 
Clattering forward on his crude insulators, 
the young headman gave a shout, raised his 
bronze sword. 

To Vallard, the next few moments were 
sheer madness. The dome-men, now they 
had lost their fear of shock, poured in with 
a savage rage, their reddened swords cleaving through the press of glowing bodies, 
Vallard had fleeting remembrances of dark 
butchery, of feeble shocks as the insulation 
prevented complete grounding, of hacking 
at scaly forms with a bronze sword. He 



remembered Doag, towering above the 
melee like some legendary giant, wielding 
a massive bar of metal, he remembered Fowler discoursing learnedly on the theories of 
animal electricity between strokes, he remembered how the blood of the Teleites was 
luminous from the charge it had absorbed 
from the zirkon and dripped like phosphorus upon the stone street. 

As suddenly as it had begun, the struggle 
ended. The Teleites, finding their sole 
weapon, their electrical potential, to be useless, were seized with panic. Cut down in 
droves by the triumphant dome-men, they 
fled toward the admission chamber, leaving 
a trail of dead and wounded behind. Into 
the massive locks they raced, hotly pursued, 
and so to the green hell of ztrkon outside, 
where they were tree from chase. But of 
the hundreds who had entered the dome, 
less than half escaped. The great covered 
city was free. 

CHAPTER IV 

FOWLER straightened up from his examination of the time-cone with a 
satisfied nod. 
"Okay," he announced. "Not harmed 
in the slightest." 

"Then let's get going!" Vallard growled. 
"I've been down checking over that equipment in the machine-room. Explosives' re 
out of the question, Fowler, in spite of your 
hopes! Not enough apparatus. And when 
I think of the expedition, fighting for its 
life against those damned Titans . . ." 

"True." Doag nodded gravely. "There 
are no weapons in this time-era. Perhaps, 
further back, in the days of the builders 
of this dome, we may find science, forces 
powerful enough to overcome the heatguns." 

Kahl, standing beside Tama, shook his 
head. 

"Good luck to you, strangers," he said. 
"May your battle be as victorious as ours 
has been!" He turned to Fowler. "My men 
are bringing what you requested. "It's little 
enough to give after all you have done 
for us." 

Doag and Vallard gasped. Half a dozen 
of Kahl's men were approaching the timecone . . . and they were carrying one of 
the big, powerful ultra-violet lamps that 
lighted the dome. 

"What's that for?" Vallard said suspiciously. "Another of your brainstorms?" 



Day of Mm TlfoHf * * * 87 



Fowler motioned the men to place the big 
lamp within the cone. 

"That," he said with chilling dignity, "is 
the weapon that will overcome the Titans! 
Through sheer genius 1 have evolved . , ." 

"Weapon?" Vallard howled. "U. V. 
rays? I suppose you aim to sunburn them! 
Good Lord! Look, Fowler, let's be serious ! Walker, Campbell, Derrickson, all 
the rest, are battling for their lives! You 
can't . . ." 

But the .little scientist had already entered the cone; one hand on the controlJever, he was waving farewell to Kahl. 

"Come," Big Doag shrugged. "We cannot remain in this time-era. Fowler has 
brought us through so far." He squeezed 
into the cone, followed by the protesting 
Vallard. 

There wasn't much room in the timecone, with the big o. v. lamp taking up so 
much space. 

"All set," Fowler warned. "Here goes!" 

He turned the dials, and once again the 
queer writhing blackness engulfed them, 
and the rushing sound, like wind wailing 
through infinity, met their ears. Vallard 
braced himself against a sensation of dizziness, and then the dark abyss vanished. 

Once again they were in the tent, and 
outside they could hear the hiss of heatguns, the drumming of rain, the wild shouts 
of the Titans. 

"Here!" Fowler snapped. "Help me 
with the u. v. projector!" 

Vallard and Doag obeyed, doubting; the 
three of them managed to carry the big 
lamp out into the rain-swept ruins. The 
beams of the Titans' stolen heat-guns played 
in lurid fury over the ancient masonry, turning the driving rain into clouds of steam. 
They were, it seemed, creeping steadily 
nearer, and the weak answering fire could 
not check their advance. 

Walker, muddy, hands blackened by the 
back-spit of his heat-gun, glanced at the 
three men. 

"Decide anything in your huddle?" he 
demanded. "And what's that gim-crack? 
The machine Fowler's been working on?" 

For a moment Vallard frowned, wondering why Walker wasn't more surprised at 
their long absence; then he realized that 
Fowler had brought them back to within 
a few moments of the time-era they'd left. 

Others of the beseiged expedition were 
moving toward them, dodging from stone 
to stone. Derrickson, the stocky radio op


erator, glanced at the projector, nursing a 
badly-burned hand. 

"Looks like a big u. v. lamp," he grunted. 
"We'll need more than that ! They're getting closer every minute! Can't hold jut 
much longer!" He ducked as a fiery beam 
tore at the ancient stones. 

"Quick!" Fowler was adjusting the wires 
of the u. v. lamp. "Here, Walker, give 
me the power-pack from your gun !" 

Walker obeyed and Fowler connected it 
to the projector. Under the power of the 
little atomic pack, a bluish beam cut the 
heavens like a searchlight. Keeping the 
ultra-violet lamp well behind a massive 
stone, Fowler swung its beam up on a 
long slant over the besiegers. The Titans 
at once replied with a barrage of rays, fearing some new weapon, but upon finding 
that the beam was pointed only at the rain 
and mist above their heads, hurled mocking 
shouts at the earthmen. Slowly, imperturbably, Fowler swung the beam in circles, 
above the ring of howling natives who 
surrounded the ruins. 

"All right!" Vallard exclaimed. "So 
what? When you've finished playing antiaircraft searchlight, we can use that power 
pack in Walker's gun! Don't you see 
they're edging closer every minute?" 

"Keep your shirt on," Fowler said dryly. 
"And leave this to me." 

VERY methodically he swung the bluish 
beam in circles, piercing the foggy, 
carbon-dioxide laden air. The fire from 
the Titans was growing fiercer, and two of 
the expedition fell, seared, blackened figures 
among the ruins. The three remaining 
guns within the enclosure stabbed the gloom 
in answer but their assailants, edging from 
rock to rock, drew steadily nearer. 

Doag shifted uneasily from foot to toot, 
glanced at Vallard. The latter frowned, 
staring at Fowler. Beneath his banter he 
had a deep respect for the little archaeologist, but this madness of trying to defeat a crowd of well-armed Titans by pointing a u. v. beam into the air above them 
was too much. 

"All right, Doc," he said harshly. "Call 
it insubordination, mutiny, or anything you 
like. But I'm taking that power-pack and 
putting it back into Walker's gun. Another 
five minutes and those ugly devils'H be close 
enough for a rush! And we'll need every 
gun to try and beat 'em off! Not that 



83 * * * Future Fiction 



there's much chance of succeeding but at 
least we can kick off knowing we've done 
all we can!" 

"Dramatic," said Fowler caustically. 
"Very. If you ever used your head . . ." 

"Sorry," Valiard grated. "We're getting 
that power-pack! Now! Come on, Doag!" 

The two men bore down on little Fowler, were about to tear the power-pack from 
the machine, when Walker, peering cautiously over a block of stone, gave a cry 
of wonder. 

"Look !" he shouted. "The Titans! 
They . . . they're going nuts!" 

"Nuts?" Valiard straightened up, peered 
over the massive rampart . . . and gave a 
startled gasp. The grotesque beings were 
shouting, dancing with pain, clutching their 
eyes. Many of them seemed suddenly 
blind, for, dropping their stolen guns, they 
were blundering about in the gloom, groping their way with cries of pain into the 
tall white forest. Fleeing in wild disorder, 
they stumbled away from the mined dome, 
were soon swallowed up by the mists. 

"But" . . . Doag couldn't believe his 
eyes. . . "but what was it? What in the 
solar system . . ." 

Fowler smiled in his most benign, tolerant manner, like a teacher addressing children. 

"The u. v. rays you were so scornful ot, 
he said. "So simple . . ." 

"But they weren't pointed at the Titans," 
Valiard barked. "You pointed the projector 
into the fog above their heads!" 

"Exactly," Fowler grinned. "The air 



here has a high content of carbon dioxide. 
So much so that you can hardly breathe 
it. And the fog, the rain, give water. Consider what happens if carbon dioxide and 
water react under energy, as represented by 
the u, v. rays. You get formic aldehyde." 

"Formic aldehyde?" Doag muttered. 

"Otherwise known as formaldehyde," 
said Fowler airily. "Plants, vegetation, 
utilizing water, carbon dioxide, and Sunlight, manufacture formaldehyde in one of 
the intermediate steps toward making 
starch. We didn't carry on the process that 
far. Formaldehyde was what we wanted. 
One of the strongest antiseptics known. On 
the mucuous membranes of the throat, nose 
and lungs, it's not pleasant. T n the eyes 
it's blinding. That's where -ve got them, 
mostly. The stuff was suspended in the 
mist, in tiny particles. Must lave burned 
their eyes like fire." He chuckled. "Catch 
on? When I saw those u. v, lamps in the 
city, I figured it out. Decided if we could 
help Kahl in his nght with the Teleites, 
he'd be glad to let us have one of his 
precious lamps. Any further questions?" 

"You win!" Valiard swallowed hard. 
"You win, mastermind!" He held out a 
lean hard hand, grinning. "Thus does 
genius triumph . . ," 

"... over the feeble intellects of lesser 
beings," Fowler finished. "Eh, Doag?" 

"There will be only one Fowler," the big 
Jovian assured him gravely; but his gaze 
caught Vallard's above the little man's 
head, and one of his eyelids closed in a 
slow, amused wink. 



INFORMATION PI.EASK! 

As you can see, we have combined our two magazines. SCIENCE FICTION and 
FUTURE FICTION into one book — FUTURE COMBINED WITH SCIENCE FICTION. 

It is our intention to give you the best features of both magazines, without an increase in price — one the contrary, the new, neat, and smaller-size type used in 
FUTURE is the equivalent of adding pages to the book without an increase in price. 
But we need your help in making FUTURE conform to your wishes. We need information which only you can give. 

What do you think of our combining the two magazines? 
Do you like the prasenl title: FUTURE? 

What kind of stories would you like to sea in forthcoming issues? 
Do you like our covers and artwork? 
You can help us by writing your answers to these questions and mailing them in to 

FIJTIJRK « tOlltlMl* WITH SI It'M li FICTION 

40 HUDSON STREET, NEW YORK CITY 




By the 
Rev. A. H. Tyrir 

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS 



LATEST SEX FACTS 



• Th* Eti SMe *f Marriaie
• 8>i Or»*n*— OaUHa. 

• Dl*a»**lntad Wive 

• Need t«r S*tlafMt*ry So Lit* l« M*rria« r _ 

• »»« BIlM* at Marriad Cw|lu. 

• Tha Final* lex Orion*. Ih MyiMi. Marrlaae, 

Manitruatiatt, 

• TIm Mali %*t One**. 

• 8tnaa,ti*R-*y*vtdini Ar*a*. 

• Winn to r*w*r Fillt. 

• Seiual Dreama. 

• Ideal Stx InttrMliri*. 

• Eff.it an Wlfi; *lt Huieand. 

• StJt IMirHurt* Mutt B* L*arn«d. 

• Inleremirit Durlni PfMBBMK 

dj Wh«» Hll*k«ad and Wit* UrM INI P«* 

• Frtqumty if I nt* rt< hk
• Tha RUM lo FJltwi*. 

• PrtfniHty. 

aj wiiin ■ child it w*nt*d. 

• InterMurM After th* CK*m* *f Lit*. 

• Truth Ah*ul Birth Central. 

• So Adjwtewnti Batar* Matriai*
• a*Hlil Car* *f iu Oraint. 
« Tamiariry Lett *f Sex Paver. 

• Valu* *f L«»-PI»y. 

• Driving On*'* L*v*r lot* th* Ami *f Afltmer. 

• fiouil 8l*wn*H In Wsmtn. 
t) Sexual Stimulation Metfteda, 

• Mil* *f Sh Dealr*. 

• Th* Unr*>p«nal** Wife. 

• Th* Bridal Night. 

• Ov«re«mlni Sex Monetooy. 

• PnUaiini So Uniwi. 

• C*ltva Wllhaut Driaim. 

4 Magturtatlan: AmM| Ecya, An«i| Girl*. 

• Impotent*. 

• Th* Frifld Wll*. 

• MWIng Ih* Htntymeen Lari F*r*v*r. 

• 8*xe*l JaalMty. 



Fred is telling Jim about "Sex Satisfaction and Happy Marriage." "Yes," Fred ifi saying, "I laughed, too, when a friend ef 
MINE told me to read a good booh on Sex. I, too, thought f 
knew it all. And I, too, had the same sexual problems that 
worry you right i 

"Not until I read *Sex Satisfaction and Happy Marriage', did I 
realize how much joy my wife and I had been missing. NOW 
she no longer nags me, nor do 1 snap at her — because we have 
found HOW to obtain perfect happiness from each other! 
"There's a dollar and cents side to this, too. My promotion at 
the office is a direct result of our gloriously happy sex life at 
home." 

LOVE IS NOT ENOUGH 

Many husbands and wives hesitate to talk frankly to 
eacfil other about the meet Intimate side of married life. 
These couples are advised to read "Sex Satisfaction 
and Happy Marriage" TOGETHER. 

TELLS WHAT TO DO AND HOW 

This brand-new book telle exactly what to do before, durinar 
• ad after sex intercourse •■■ that no married couple need 
any longer remain Ignorant of juet how to happily carry 
out their sexual dutlee. 

" — deacribea wlih completeness and frankness the marital 
relations m their ><-..■■.. y aspects." — The Caaadjam Doctor 
<M*dlc«4 Journal). 

"A book at laat containing the vital Information." — Dr. *T. 
D. Griffin, <M. D.), «f Committee for Mental Hygiene. 

**. . . ml enthusiastic disc use I on of tho technique of sexual 
intercourse . . . plainly and simply written, with anatomical diagrams."-— Public Health KorsiDg. 

"This book Is tho one to recommend." — Ohio State Medical 



READ FIRST -- THEN DECIDE 

E- DA Y MONEY-BACK GUARANTEE 

Return the coupon and read "Sex Satisfaction and 
Happy Marriage" FREE. Then, if you do not think 
it is worth DOUBLE the price you paid, return it 
within 5 days and get your money back. 



SEX CHARTS & EXPLANATIONS 

fio that you may know exactly how the 
organs work there are detailed pictures of 
sex anatomy <male and female sex organs) 
to illustrate the text. These show clearly 
what is important for each partner to 
know about own and other's sexual makeup. The Illustrations are scientific and 
accurate. . 



MAIL THIS COUPON NOW/ 
- i 

■ HEALTH CRAFT, INC. Dept. 636-B, ■ 

■ X47 West lSta St., New York, N. v. I 

* Send me "Sea Satisfaction and Happy Mar- I 

Z Mage." by the Rev. A. H. Tyror. in plain I 

5 wrapper marked " Personal." 1 will pay (1.98 | 

■ end a few cents delivery chsvrge. I 

I MUST £B DELIGHTED or I will return I 

! book within 6 days and you will refund pur- I 

J chase price. (I am over 21 years old.) I 

! Name I 

■ 

J Address I 

g f^=-i CHECK HERB if you wish to enclose I 

■ P_ J only J1.9S with coupon, thus saving de- ■ 
' I livery Chorees. 

(Seme ■ t \. Guarantee, of Coarse) ■ 



SEND NO MONEY 



Futurian Times 



FUTURE FICTION'S UNIQUE DEPARTMENT 



As reported In our last Imsub. 
JL.it ■ tli Lorraine of Bos 8:l-l>'. Ko-Jte 
8, 3an Anionfo, Texan, Id head Of 
" alon Poetry Shi 



rill 



11 ry 



pool 



Here 

HKHE CGMhlS MB. JOftUiN— A 
C\iium\>la Picture. Joe 1'tudleton 
i ■: >'i ■■. M er) i, a prize
fighter, uui'iiui^lly dies In a plant 



the Itei 

in.'luled will be a volume of weird 
and futuristic or fantastic poetry. 
The contents of tills volume Mil 
be selected as follows. Each contestant Is to submit what they 
consider t heir beat BlaglS items of 
scle.ice-flclk.n, or fantastic, aud/or 
weird poetry. There are no restrictions as id form, style, lens'li, 
or specific Uieme. Poems will tie 
Judged on the standards of originality, universality, emotional power, beauty of wording and perfection of technique. 

Any poet, an> -whci e. published 



All 



inquired to submit a very brief 
biography, giving name, p+nnaine, 
address, data aa to whether tuey 
ere married or not. dale and nla ■« 
of birth, names of children. If any. 
approximate number of poenin published, names of national mosiilnea of verse or prose in which 
but poems appeared, if poet has 
been published before, hobbles, politic*, religion, literary affiliations, 
yueslions should be answered in 
order given, utid entire Information 
as brief as possible. 

Each compel! to'- moy en ter ma ■ 
tsriiil for every corneal, providing 
he enters it till at one time and 
not later lhan April I, 191^. Baoh 
contestant, In submitting malarial, 
must enclose 23 cents in stamps 
(or mailing out his work to the 
various judges. He mtwt place his 



3 JduS 

sBagcr 7013 (lidivard Everett Hurlonj to Mr. Jordan, the Heavenly 
Dispatcher (Claude Rains). Discovering tlirough the records thai 
liie Messenger has made a mistake and that Pendleton has fifty 

to earth to be replaced In his body 
—only to And that he ha* been 
cremated during the Interval by his 
manager (James Oleason). He 
uum up a squawk tor a new body 
aa healthy as Ills former one. so 
he and Mr. Joidan scour the earth 
looking iver "last years crop." 
- ■ ■ - 1 settling on a rich man, 
Brnoa t'armwoi th, who lias Just 
been murdered by his wife and secretary. Just an Pendleton becomes 
accustomed to lite aa tarns worth, 
aud fvati falls in love. Farns worts 
kt murdered again! We won't go 
on any failhar— just see Ihe rent 
for yourself: lt'<* nifty. Don't mis* 
It. 

DR. JKKYl.L, AND Mlt. HYDEMUM Picture. Revived tor tile 
third time an the screen, Steven■oa's Immortal classic of split personality features Spencer Tracy, 
lugrld Bergman, and Lana Turner 
leading roles. A rehash 



nil 



but 



If 



. . left hand corner, 
so that It can be cut off ant replaced by a number as poems go 
anonymously to the .fudgNi. Only 
one poem (for each contest : the 
science Action and fantasy content 
ami the weird poetry contest apparently are lumped together Into 

rial must be typewrit len. 

Your editor has been r in h 
chief Of the committee to Judge 
the sclence-liclion poetry submitted, 
while the well-It uov. n nnlaiy fan, 
Donald A. Wollheltn. will head the 
committee Judging the weird poelry. The fantastic poetry will 
be sent to either your editor or 
Mr. Wollhelm, all depending upon 
whether It leans more to the futuristic or the weird side. 

Full information upon the aii'ira 
panorama of the contest* revolving around the time capsule anil 
the Avalon Poetry Shrine can lie 
Bfttalfied by wrltine Mis.* Lorraine 
at the address given above. 

FANTASY FILMS 

Hollywood seems at laai to have 
realized the potentialities of fantasy films and hoe. in thi- Summer 
'11 seanon alone, produoad mora 
good pictures of this type than 



... made ot Tracy's 
suporb and unusual portrayal of 
both Jekyll and Hyde (a iar cry 
Irani Fa;uer Flanagan!) and also 
■ji the modern photography. fe «lurlug shots of the change from 
one personality to another. Mi«s 
Turner t Beatrix, fiancee of Dr. 
Jekyll) and Miss Bergman (Ivy. 
Loudon barmaid j furnish the necessary feminine pulchritude, and the 
cast is well rounded out by C. 
Aubrey 3mi[U, Ian Hunter, Donald 
Crisp, and Barton Maciaue. Definitely a must. (Ed. Note: We've 
lien ra conflict Ins reports on this 
one. Anyliody wanna argue?) 

TUPS RELUCTANT DRAGON— 
R.K.Q. Picture. Funnyman Hob 
Beocbley tours Walt Disney's Hollywood studios, viewing Ihe various staged Of production and. aa 
a result, seeing Ave anlmale.l 
slmilrt— a Donald Duck carloon. a 
Uh.py Dav.g cartoon, "Casey, Jr.,' 
■'Ba'iy Weems" and the feature, 
"The Reluctant Dragon. - ' A combination of black-and-wlille lilm. 
technicolor aud cartoon*, this 
movie (ihaush not «i Eood as tho 
other full-length Disneyai is an 
interesting Insight Into oariooumaKPin— ii'i-l iIik slimls HK>ne mi' 
worth toe. price ot admission. Recommended. 

TOM DICK, AND HARRY — 
R.K.O. Radio Picture. Though 
only paeudo-faniaay, this picture 
features several fantastic shots 
worth viewing. Miss Rogers plays 

90 



the part of a telephone operator 
in the curious pi u-lioament of being engaged t> three men at onca. 
l-iavini; to ■il^i.-i.k- i>>- morning which 
of the three ebo wltl marry, the 
fantasy scenes occur when she 
dreams of married life with eacb: 
Tom. the auto salesman (George 
Murphy). Dick, the garage meihonlc (Biirgeii Meredith) and 
Barry, a rich playboj- (Alan Marsiiaii). To reveal her cnolce would 
be >o give the story away. Light 
eomtdv ami good enterta lumen l. 

—BILL STOY. 

BOOK KKVIKW 

THE OTH ER WORLDS — Ail 
AAthologT. Wilfred L'tinl;, New 
York. J2.30. It's too Had that 
bluru-wi iters ami antbolo&ista COO't 
get together aometimes. The publlcltv men proclaim Phi! Slong, 
culprit In the case of this volume, to be "the foremost authority on BClence-lietlon and fantasy 
In the country'' while our Mr. 
Bteng ably disproves It. Mi. Stong 
in sunpoaed to have claimed thai 
stf and weird tales are His hobby; 
this we can believe by the way he 
rides it: blindfolded, wJLh spuri. 
and, we presume, a big black 
whip. For we have seen many a 
gitriollc attat-'i upon stf and fantasy by (hose who claimed to do■piae its very guts, but none ao 
complete'v hypui-HMnnl find cyntral 
as friend Stong's iulroductory re
Not'one Item among: the many 
storiwi considered "classic" by the 
multitude of readers and enthusiast* of science fiction appears In 
this anthology. As a matter of 
fact, most Of Ihe HelftClloni are 
wolrd stories of varying m.-rt'.-icniy. 
The few exceptione only prove the 

A yeat'3 subscription to any 
re ;ularW appeai'inrt sclei>c»-ik-l ifin 
inauaiiiiie will Minn yon more 
worth for youf money than thle 
Dims malodorus. 

FANTASY FICTION MK1.D 

Mention of stilence and wird 11cliun classics brings to our mind the 
subject of old copies of science hclliiu and weird macaques, whloh 
are rather hard to get lues* days. 
In jnaiiv roses. There are a number of science fiction fan3 who do 
a bit Of part-time dealing In 
bark Issiifs. '<i>1 ri.Temnst amonn 
these Is Jullua linger bf 1KB 
Dahlll P.oad. Brooklyn, New York. 
A card to Mr. Unset wlr beenro 
for you his current pr'ce list, 
whlfh a(.pe'n., imv mid (hen In 

FANTASY l-'ICTt'-'N KIFLD II,l.rSTliATIil'' M':'.\ ii WKKKIjY. 
This, In addition In corrylnc dope 
upon stf magazines. NH'ka, mcerpts, and whatnot, obtn inn Me 
ihroush Mr. imger's service, is lha 
only.'poieiice Action neivsiveekly r 



it 



QUARRY 

by MALLORY KENT 

He had the sensation of being huntedl 



HE AWOKE with the half-formed 
consciousness that a battle had 
been fought and lost. Very dim 
and indistinct were these first waking impressions, but they filtered through the 
basking warmth of the August sun so that 
he lay shivering as he wrapped the flimsy 
summer sheets tightly about him. For a 
long time he lay there, eyes tightly closed, 
willing desperately for a return to sleep. 

No respite here. The dread was a 
lighter garment than any he could don, and 
the mindless force of it beat against him 
until he leaped from the bed in an ecstasy 
of fright. For an instant ht stood there 
naked, his lean body quivering as bis eyes 
darted from one corner of the room to another, then, momentarily exhausted, he fell 
back upon the pillow. Mechanically he 
reached for a cigarette, lit it, and blued the 
morning air while reason raced madly to 
thrust its finger into the breached dikes. 
What was this thing he feared ? 
He discarded the possibility of madness 
after a brief inventory. Insanity, he assumed, not considering physical defects and 
disease (and he was free of these, he knew) 
was a method of escape. And what motive could he have for wanting to escape? 

Perhaps it would be best to consider 
them in order. First of all, there was the 
question of economic security: well, he was 
as safe as most people, more so than some, 
perhaps. So long as he could continue to 
turn out a not-too-high minimum of tunes 
and lyrics that suited the popular fancy, 
his income was assured. He would never 
become wealthy, barring freaks of luck the 
consideration of which never bothered him 



anyway. As for the war — there was little 
he could do about it outside of taking the 
limited constitutional action open to him in 
the best manner he knew ; he'd voted, convened, and discussed all in the way which 
seemed best for his own interests and those 
of his friends— it things got worse despite 
all that, sufficient unto the day . . . 

Social position? He had his own circle 
of friends and acquaintances, got along well 
with some and not so well with others. He 
didn't feel particularly frustrated in that 
line. Women? No kick there; some liked 
him; some didn't. So what? He weighed 
his love life in the balance and found it 
wanting little. 

Was there any responsibility he was trying to dodge? None. There was at least 
one girl he knew who wouldn't be not having any thanks if he proposed — perhaps 
more than one. Debts? Nothing staggering. Sensitive spots? Well, he didn't exactly relish being called Oscar — Richard O. 
Manton was much nearer to his taste, or 
Dick to friends. But someone had thought 
that "Oscar Manton" was a much better 
trade name, so it stuck. 

No, there was no reason why he should 
be going mad. 

Was it the hangover of some nightmare? 
Slowly he dressed, as the first panic receded, leaving only a highwater mark of 
dread in his being. But even as the mellowing sun caressed him, he knew that 
the tide would return; it had not entirely 
forsaken him. 

The dread was now a thing withdrawn, 
lurking subtly behind the facade of a2ure 
sky and [he outlines of familiar things. 



11 



92 * * * Future Fiction 



How thin, how thin was the barrier? Would 
he have time to learn the nature of it 
before it carne again ? 

How much time had he? A ripple oi 
the terror splashed over him as the familiar 
words "it is later than you think" formed 
in h is brai n . He mad e his way to the 
lavatory wondering it he were the last man 
alive on a suddenly stricken earth, finding 
ominous tokens in a lack of noise from the 
street. Just now, he didn't cjuite dare look 
out the window. Later . . . later . . . 

Suddenly he laughed, then paused to 
listen to his laughter. A rather weak 
laugh, a tired little laugh, but no signs 
of crackup yet. He darted hack to the 
radio, turned it on. An instant as the 
tubes lit up, then the familiar voice of 
an announcer introducing a soap opera. 
Carelessly he flicked it off, picked up the 
fallen towel and soap and completed his 
interrupted rendezvous with cleanliness. 

rjflHE incoming wave of dread drenched 
him for a second time just before he 
was leaving the apartment tor a downtown 
appointment. It was to be a semi-holiday, 
lazing with prolonged lunch and small 
talk with his publisher, the delivery of 
completed mss., and winding up with Joan 
and a matinee. Complete agenda tor evening to be worked out later. The dread 
lanced through his being like a bolt of 
lightning, held him irresistibly. 

He stood there, brain freezing, his heart 
bartering its way to the open air, or so it 
seemed. For the veriest fragment ot an 
instant, he thought he saw through the 
world, saw into the dread spaces which were 
not entirely empty. Frantically he seized 
the door, clung to it; he would not be 
drawn into that abyss . . , Then the vision 
passed and the world resumed its solidity. 

But the dread remained. And the fear 
of being caught here in this semi-dark 
apartment, caught like a rat burrowing beneath the ground, made him plunge for 
the stairs, race madly down the hall out 
onto the welcome street. He sat upon 



the stones steps, panting, his eyes wandering gratefully about him, resting upon the 
housewives, the superintendents, and the 
drivers of cars rolling by. 

He sat, staring ahead of him trying to 
think. What was after him - -hunting him? 
Abruptly he shook his head. He mustn't 
stare into nothingness like that, because it 
he did, he would begin to see through 
again. The hands on a nearby bar-clock 
caught his eyes. He arose, dusted himself oft, and started down the subway. 

But when he entered the little terminal, 
the dread arose. No, no, he didn't wart 
to be found away from the sun and the 
sky and the clean air. Yes, he knew that 
the air here wasn't exactly clean, but it 
was sweet to him, the air of the city, and 
he wanted to breath it, smell it, bathe himself in it so long as he could. 

He would try to escape above ground. 

Escape? His heart sank within him at 
the thought. Could he elude them? Or 
was there merely one; could he escape it? 
It was seeking him, groping for him with 
indescribable fingers. 

And the dread witihn him waxed and 
waned as it approached or veered away, 

TMffE stepped away from the subway entrance, walked a few blocks to a bus 
stop, saw with relief that the vehicle approaching was well filled. He eased himself into a seat by the window, found comfort in the passing Broadway pedestrians. 
Doggedly he kept thinking to himself: if I 
can only stay hidden until noon, if I cpq 
hold it oft until high noon; he clamped a 
subconscious censor upon himself and refused to consider what might happen after 
twelve o'clock. 

His breathing took on a slow, steady 
rhythm; he leaned back against the leather 
seat, intent upon conversation between a 
couple ot girls behind him, grateful for 
the diversion. The nervous tension had 
tired him; things began to blur before his 
eyes and a weariness was yammering aviay 



C worry * * * ?3 



at him. The sights and sounds about him 
began to taper off, taper off . . . 

No! He sat bolt upright. He mustn't 
go to sleep. It was in sleep that it had 
spotted him, marked him for its quarry. 
Perhaps // would tire could he but hold 
out longer, tire and seek easier prey. Almost anyone in this bus would do — or 
would they? Perhaps only humans with a 
higher than normal sensitivity could be 
spotted. After all, he thought, this is 
such a tiny planet, and even the greatest 
of us so small. He shook his head again, 
pulled the cord lor stopping the vehicle. 

If there was ever a time when drugs 
were excusable, this was it; he needed 
something to keep him starkly awake and 
aware. He entered the store, realizing 
that his walk was almost a shamble, leaned 
against the counter and told of his needs. 

The druggist gave him something guaranteed to keep him awake for twelve hours 
at least. He read the instructions carefully, then went over to the counter and 
took a stiff dose of the stuff. 

The dread had pretty well receded now. 
He strode down Broadway toward the corner where Bently would meet him, wonder 
ing how many of the people passing him 
were real. Was he real ? Yes, that much 
he had to take foi granted. 

But that man passing by, stiff, sedate. 
Was he real? Was be actually there in 
full dimensions, or was he but a projection, 
a temporary replacement pending his removal, his final removal from the scene of 
Terrestrial affairs by "death?" The drug 
had stimulated his thoughts enormously; he 
exulted in the clarity of them, the facility 
with which he seemed to see things for 
the first time. 

Suppose there were hunters, beings from 
some other plane of existence who sought 
specimens of humanity for their trophy collections, just as men seek game or fish to 
mount. It wouldn't be as easy game, he 
thought. And they wouldn't want to spoil 
it by letting the hunted become aware of 



what was going on, or permitting them to 
know just how many were taken, constantly. 

Wouldn't the simplest thing for these 
hunters to do be to replace the victim with 
a three-dimensional projection, which would 
meet some sort of fatal accident shortly 
after the actual person's removal? He halfsmiled at these thoughts because, for all 
the mad logic of them, even his limited 
intelligence (limited in comparison with 
that of the hunters) could pick flaws in 
such a procedure. 

What projection, no matter how cunning, could stand up under the incessant 
scrutiny of fellow humans, or, most of the 
all, scrutiny by trained physicians attending death. No, it was all nice fantasy, 
but it wouldn't stand up in the cold light 
of logic. 

there was nothing to bo afraid 
WW' of now. He stopped and leaned 
against a store front, staring fixedly at the 
building opposite him. He wanted to discover if he could see through the way he'd 
done this morning. 

Smiling, his eyes bored into the edifice, 
but it trembled not nor wavered. He 
thought he detected a flicker, after awhile, 
but that was clearly an indicatioa that his 
eyes were getting tired. He looked at 
his watch. Hell, there wasn't time to walk; 
he'd be late. Very well, then, the IRT was 
only a block awav. 

Striding along at an easy jaunt, he passed 
under the noses of zipping taxis and merited 
the frown of one of the city's finest. Grinning he slipped his nickle into the slot, 
and swung" himself through the turnstile 
with a gaiety he hadn't felt in weeks. His 
eyes roved over the headlines on the station 
newsstand and he invested in chewing gum. 

Once within the car, his attention was 
captured and held prisioner by a coppery 
haired wench who didn't seem to mind the 
summer breezes playing with her skirt. She 
went so far as to return his interest with 
a smile, then deserted him at the next station. 



Don't Go Through Life 
Handicapped! 

Improve Your Appearance 
by wearing an 

Imperial 
Health Brace 



Makes you feel stronger and more confident in undertaking any work, whether 
in a factory, office, sfora or home. 




FOR MEN 



FOR WOMEN 



iters, expands the 
railucei the want ant 
compels deep and proi>a 
hreatlUn* which assure; 



ALSO FOR CHILDREN 

to give Da the fol


When ordering, be 
lowing information 



Boy . . 
Height 



, .Woman 

.out ... 

..Waljht 



IMPERIAL HEALTH BRACES have been 
on the market for over 25 years. They were 
formerly sold at $5.00 and $6.00 each. Our 
Special Price P. P. 
prepaid is 



.$1.50 



M. L SALES CO. 

Room 315, HO W. Broadway. Dapt. 12, N.Y.C. 



Future Fiction 

When he emerged from the subway, a 
clock was beginning to strike twelve. He 
stood still waiting for it to finish. 

Without knowing exactly why, lie glanced 
up at the eastern sky. His jaws ceased 
mauling the gum. "What an illusion," he 
murmured to himself, noting with the corner of his eyes that the people around him 
did not see. 

Of course; how couid they see an illusion which was his alone? 

But it looked real, all right. It really 
did look as if the sky up to that section, 
were being torn slowly, as if something 
were poking through the tear. 

What that something was, he could not 
be sure. He wished that illusions could 
be more explicit. All he could be sure of 
was that he seemed to see something reaching down, down out of the eastern sky, 
down between the towering Manhattan 
structures, down into the street, reaching 
Out for him. 

There was no dread now. He closed his 
eyes and tried to imagine what it would 
feel like when /'/ caught him. 

Bentley looked worried as the familiar 
form of Manton hove into view. "You're 
late, Oscar," he chided. 

The other looked somewhat confused. 
"Am I? Awfully sorry — guess I miscalculated . . ." 

Bently nodded. "Don't be so apologetic, 
old thing. Have you the stuff with you?" 

"Stuff? Oh — oh yes, of course." 

The publisher peered more closely at his 
companion. "You're not yourself to J ay, 
Oscar. Have a bad night, eh? Well, I 
didn't sleep any too well, cither; damned 
heat! Better have a drink with me before 
we talk, eh?" 

He took the other's arm and sturted for 
a nearby bar. 



SALVAGE JOB 

by LESLIE A. CROUTCH 

Beetle was the best undersea worker on Venus. But Beetle loved the bottle. Not wisely And much too well. Hogan thought he had the problem nicely solved until the 
time came when Beetle would go down into those boiling waters sober and come up 
stewed to the gills. A little tele to tickle your funnybone. 



^"MT OW REMEMBER, you little 
i» squirt, you may think you're 
Jl. v good, and you are, but, by 
God, you pull any of your shenanigans on 
this job, and, so help me Hannah, I'll bust 
you so flat they'll think a steam-roller ran 
over you!" Hogan, the salvage boss, spat 
forcibly on the dirty deck, and glared at the 
smaller man, as if he could, by main force, 
drive his threat home. 

The other grinned, and cocked a pop-eye 
at him. He wiggled bis ears derisively, 
chuckled deep down in his scrawny throat. 
That always got the other — wiggling his 
ears that way. 

"And you quit wigglin' your ears, you 
little imp of satan !" roared Hogan, expelling the bedraggled weed with a sound like 
a cork popping out of a bottle of kick. "You 
tend to your work this trip, and get them 
firestones up without any funny business." 

The crew chuckled. They enjoyed these 
perpetual tiffs between Hogan and his 
diminutive diver. 

Percival Selwyn Brewster, London born, 
motioned for the men to place the helmet. 
Lugubrious he looked, in the bulky suit necessary for diving in the warm Venusian 



seas. Seas that would almost boil a man 
red as a lobster but for the protection of 
the special Bergen suit. 

Over the side, standing on the little metal 
platform, they swung him, and he started on 
his long trip to the sunken wreck below. 
Hogan leaned over the rail, watched the 
descent with a practiced eye. 

The clump of a heavy foot behind him 
drew him from his reverie. Turning, he 
spied his first mate, who halted, made a 
perfunctory salute, and handed him a suspicious-looking black bottle. Hogan snatched 
it with a growl. 

"Why the little rum-guzzler!" he 
growled. 

Hogan sniffed at the bottle. "Hmmm, 
the little mutt's got taste, anyway! Good 
kick, this. Costs like the devil!" 

He tilted the bottle, and let a delicious 
drop dribble down his throat. The mate 
watched him with a slight grin, and two 
of the crew nudged and winked. Hogan 
lowered the bottle, and roared. 

"Well, what are you all starin' at? Get 
to work!" 

He hurled the bottle far out into the 



T5 



« * ★ ★ Future Fiction 



sparkling sunlight, to fall in the heaving 
depths of the hot sea. 

"Just wait till I get my hands on that 
little rum-hound," he threatened, striving to 
keep from noticing the smirks of his men. 

"Listen, Riley," he said, turning to his 
mate. "You keep a watch on him. We'll 
keep that little runt sober if it kills him — 
at least, until the fire-stones are all hauled 
up, then he can drown himself in the junk." 

Riley grinned, draped himself over the 
rail, to stare pensively down into the murky 
depths. 

A diver can stay down only half an hour 
at very shallow depths in those treacherous 
waters. By then his suit feels hot enough 
to fry an egg on, ano the inside isn't much 
cooler. Many men pass out under such 
working conditions. That is why Brewster, 
or Beetle, as he is called, because of his absurd little round paunch, spindly limbs, and 
beady eyes that make you think of some little black bug, is a regular jewel in uncouth 
form. He can stay down, and be the most 
active of any man on Venus, where strong 
men are the order of the day rather than 
the exception. 

The half hour was up, and they were 
hauling Beetle up with a will. 

THE water broke, and the rounded expanse of Beetle's helmet came into 
view. Something about the way the diminutive diver held onto the stays caused the 
boss of the salvage crew to order haste. 

"Looks like he's caved in this time," he 
exclaimed, as Beetle staggered off the platform, and sat down heavily: 

With great haste, they unbolted his helmet, and lifted the unwieldy thing off. 

"Are you all right, man?" demanded Hogan, anxiously. If anything happened to 
Beetle they were sunk, figuratively and literally. He was the best man on Venus, by 
the time another had come out from earth, 
it would be well righ impossible to s. Ivage 
the treasure below. The powerful convection currents of the mighty oceans would 
have broken up the hulk. 

Beetle opened his eyes, stared at the other. He smirked, wiggled both ears, and 
closed his eyes again. 
Hogan shook him. 

"Allsh shright!" Beetle murmured, in a 
mushy tone. "Feelish goodsh. Ver" 
goodsh !*' 

"If I didn't know he couldn't be tight, 



I'd swear he was!" Riley muttered, paradoxical ly. 

Hogan grunted. "Probably too much 
oxygen. They get that way sometimes." 

Riley snorted. "You know damned well 
it's not too much oxygen, Hogan. You're 
just trying to side-step the issue." 

Beetle stepped from his diving suit. He 
staggered, tried to do a ludicrous step-dance, 
which ended up with him in a pretzel-tangle on the deck. From there he surveyed 
his feet with great intensity, then tried to 
get up. He failed miserably; so he just 
lay back, and broke into a ribald song. 

Hogan leaned down, hooking his fingers into the other's collar, jerked him to 
his feet. He shoved his not too insignificant nose into the other's face, and sniffed 
deeply. 

"By all the little imps, he is drunk. Riley! 
Smell his breath." 

Riley did, and voiced the verdict. 

"But, how could he, sir?" He wasn't 
drunk when he went down. He couldn't 
get a drink down there. So how can he?" 

"I dunno. But he is, or else we're tight! 
Here—" to one of the men. "Put him to 
bed. Sweat this outta him if ya gotta kill 
the little gutter snipe!" 

They searched Beetle's siu't for a hidden 
pocket holding a hidden flask of the forbidden. But no luck. They searched him 
when he went down the next time. Still no 
luck. But when he came up the second 
time, he was drunker than he was the first! 
Hogan swore, the crew heard a few choice 
epithets they'd never even suspected existed, 
let alone heard. 

Down Beetle went, sober. He'd work 
like a beaver the first fifteen minutes, and 
the firestones came up by the bucketful. 
Then Beetle would be very quiet. Up on 
the salvage ship they would wait, and wonder. Hogan would roar, and spit bechewed 
cigars about until the crew complained about 
the filthy condition of the deck. Then, up 
would come Beetle Staggering, singing, 
reeking of Venusian kick, a nickname given 
a vile mixture derived by squeezing the 
stem ot the giant Venusian carnivorous lily, 
and then allowing the collected sap to ferment. 

"I'm fed up," roared Hogan one day 
when the job was about finished. "I'm going down this time instead of that little bottle-sucker. I'm goin' to find out what happens down there or — or — " As he didn't 
know what he could do, he shut up, rather 



So Iv« 5 e Job 

than incriminate himself by making threats 
he couldn't keep. 

HOGAN took the first trip down that 
day. They had to dig up a larger 
suit from the hold, as Beetle's was many 
sizes too small for his huge frame. He sent 
up his share of the uncut stones mined on 
the Venusian blue mountains. Then he 
hunted, and searched ; and he swore. Final 
ly, his half hour up, he sent up the signal 
for them to haul up the platform. 

It was just as his helmet was breaking 
surface that it happened. One of the men 
let loose a yell, and pointed excitedly to the 
east. Riley whipped up his glasses to see 
what was breaking the surface of the sea. 
He stared a moment, then, his face paling 
above the thin black moustache that graced 
his upper lip, he whirled, and, barking 
forth orders, ran for the long-barreled automatic cannon that was carried as protection 
against the fierce denizens that haunted the 
seas. 

In their haste to haul Hogan up in the 
least possible time, they snarled the cables 
and the blocks jammed, leaving him standing in the sea up to his neck, helpless. 

Riley sighted the gun and fired. There 
was no report, as these were the latest 
things sent out from earth on the last supply ship. Working by super-heated steam 
under immense pressure, they fired a slim, 
dart-like projectile that was about the only 
thing that seemed at all effective against the 
tremendously tough skin of the finny things 
that swam the deep. 

Suddenly an ugly head reared above the 
water. Serpentine in appearance, heavily 
scaled for a short distance down the neck, 
it looked somewhat like the old-time seaserpents that allegedly had haunted the traffic lanes in earth's oceans. A long, forked 
tongue shot in and out, and— something no 
self-respecting snake ever had — several 
long, gleaming fangs that reflected the 
light. 

Hogan, seeing the excited pointing and 
glances of the crew, had turned clumsily; 
now he, too, could see the approaching 
monster. Awkwardly, vainly, he tried to 
climb the cables to the ship's deck, but his 
weight was too great for effective movement above water. 

Riley was firing steadily, but apparently 
without much effect, if any. Several of the 
men had rushed to the rail, rifles in hands, 
and were taking aim. Leaving three to at(Continued On Page 98) 



Let Me Make YOU A 
FLUORESCENT EXPERT 

FOR LESS MONEY THAN YOU CAN EARN IN 
I DAY'S WORK IN 1HIS NEW EXCITING FIELD 




• Yes! Its true) it i c*St to tow you'll fcaroTy believe It, you 
— expert In this neat new industry. RlgM rowing Is taking place. Tlie Fluorescent Industry 
-million dollar business. Each rlay sees, tola 
young giant rinrndiiig . . . changing Out tlia lighting requliao til* siuulliti town (n the largest Pits. A* 
ial change -over, developments in tales and 
Installs! it ns tic ICiimig uay ahead of tlio man-power necesaary 
to serve !ne trimi-mlcus -i.-m;* denUMl Hieli or.nurtunitic! awa.lt 
those who ln:.,w II..HV i. ; „il Kt.jt „ -scent . . . u ,j W HAT Installation* to tell! <jicuril K*-r ..iiRitLnlll.s that can lead to fortunes 
are swaltlnr nji-n »U U:-<'- (he "Inside secrets" of Fluorescent 
nhlrhntw a UhIu.k I l. .1. ^-ml Engineer Is reads to pass on to you. 

LEARN HOW ID TURK A SMMl SALE INTO A LARGE PROFIT' 

'ledge to be r alM .1 



§ZTJ01tE«CF,NT 
SALESMEN 

Did you tier come away 
from a tale where you 
knew sou should have told 

turn, but didn't 1 Hale 
sou ibuuld have made heally needed the amazing 
advantage if Fluoiiseent ! 



JtW 



.' tola 



man's secrets, may well spell the 
difference between the profit on » 
small sale and on a aale netting you 
an enormous profit! Earning* of men 
already engaged In this fssclnallns 
new Dullness ara reaching f it u tout 
figures. The man who will profit 



Ij the 1 



inttall and service this 
" lighting. "~ 



ion to Mil, 



TBS 

1- U OJtKKCENT EXPERT IS 
TOlTt LOCALITY. National Fluorescent Institute ofTers you an opportunity to know Fluorescent frtni the 
'nside ... a few minutes ■ day foe 
* few days, spent light In your own home going 'behind tn* 
tunes" and learning easily and fluidity the "whya" and < , howa «f 
Fluorescent will lay bare to i<m the lecrels of getting the blggeel 
artftra from the biggest prospect*] At a cost 10 amatlngly low w 



I already telling Fluorescent — er hoping 



B*IiM»*ectnt Distributers and Special la. ■ 

for the full particulars. They're FREE I Then sou ha the Judg*l 



the Seld— 
out ahead of I lie crowd *• 
take jobs with Electrical ot 
continue telling . . . and 
open their own office* aa 
Send no money. Just _ write 



SEND NOW ICS OUR SFECIAl INTRODUCTORY OFFER! 




Complete Kit 
1 poslag/e 

Tube JO eentt extra. Chromium plated end • 
Whit* enamel tody. Price includes iwiteh. 



Our Illustrated ciUlcyue of wn .W) of America's finest Fluorescent futures will be s-eiit abwlately fieo. It pass to sell the heal; All Nattlonal FiiHires are euulrt'.li mm ..1 i-:i. eti ic ijailasts and tubea. 

NATIONAL FLUORESCENT SERVICE, 

SMI N. Wella St., Dept. 28, Chicago 



n 




Let VICTOR H. LINDLaHS 
show you how to eat your way to 
slimness on 3 square meals a day 

Just think ©I it! Kasily— airickly— safely, you 
can lose as many as 10 pounds in 10 days, 20 
pounds in 20 days, SO pounds in 30 days! Vou 
eau do this without, starvation dinting, without 
drugs and without monotonous exercise. 
Follow the famous Lindlaiir Plan and you nv 
duce by eating plenty — 3 square meals a day — 
of tempting, appetizing, healthful foods that are 
rich in minerals and vitamins, hut which are 
very low in sugar and starches and practically 
without fat. 

Results Begin to Show in 48 Hours 

Thf retftroine iwnDS tn Hi* find
lahr B.vHtem are no scientifically iHNE^nfVjYjYjYAV 

•rr»n B w] that eicesa fat ju-<t jBBwM^MB 

to uiflt ftwnjr. Result-* in HB^^^^^V^H 

mast caarn becin to Bhatv in 48 ^HKwC9BS 

tionro. Thousands have report"*, an iV^S^B^^BBH 

*Y* rn ?* lotM «f 10 rouNiKs in id SsH9a^BBH 

HAYS. Many have reportsd weiirht ■ffl^Ba 

Inmi or is, 13, 15, ami mm t6 wffiSHBJ 

pound? ilurioc the same ti.-ri.ni! 
Would inn like to ln?t|> yourn*4f kSHhU^UmbH 

to pi 1'n n new faealth, and *enei-ffr ^BUU^''.'-; 

to burn?" Would you tike t» t-nioy WB|pjBjl 

life more, indole* in eport*. work ij^mWilmBBBfBBk 

harder and accomplish one ban- VI . TAA u 
drvd and one thin** ron limdlVmb" 
«h.M.eht. possible while burden** ""l<irt 5 

With overwright? Tliro crt a OPJ rf, t |,j 0a i Nutrition 

»f EAT AND RliI»U<:i:t by Victor ™ MI 2i 

If. Lindlahr and bet-iu iuiiu«dl<*t». 

%j ioeios excess weight— *b 3 square meals, a day. 

10 DAYS OK LINDLAHR PLAN DRAMATIC PROOF! 

This nartutl rt^ord of Cliwtered Reports la reproduced 
from the JOURNAL Of LIVINtt. It eriYfis «■ eroHSsrrtion of thoniuMids of similar report* of pernmns 
who have followed Victo* U. Lindlnbx'rj "Kb. and Ee
duco" rl » n = ^ Day. waltM Weight Net 

Name OaDl«t BBforo After Leu 

W. Brooklyn, M. *. 10 1*5 175 1© 

A S^TCnion City. N. JT. lO 1*2 182 10 

Mrs^ H. M<- 1... Laurel Spfiaga, - 13 

E It. P.. Broiw. N. V. lO 1SS 1« lO 

Mr*. M. B . Bid'gewood. «• 10 1*5 174 11 

T. J. P., Newark, N. JT. _ 10 20S 192 13 

Mrs. P., Newark, N. J. lO 19© 18* 10 

Make This 70-Day Tesf yourself.' 

So urt are we that your first 10 day* «a the Undfahr reducing 
Dili uill show you .-imiiifiij r*;ults. that *e invito you to try it 
it our risk Union the Lindtahr -yitom works at wonrf-rfully for 
you as for thousands, ot other*, unless you ors immsilia'ely convinced that you, too. can lose an aerugo of 10 POUNDS IN 10 
OAYS. simply return the book and the to-day test costs you 
nothing. Remember, tho burden of Projf Is en lis. Why not take 
advantage ol our no-risk olier right now? 

LOSE WEIGHT M.fW J*9™J"JSl. 

r PRENTICE-HALL, Inc. J 

Dept. EB-33, 70 Fifth Ave., N. V. C. I 

Pleas* send me a eopy of EAT AND REDUCE f t en* ? 

(!:.■.» S2.00, in full payment, with (fin unitarstandlng: If, ■ 

after 10 days trial ot Victor H. Lindlahra cat-and-r*. ■ 

duce system I do not artuiliv l»J» weight as promised. I | 

may rclura Ihs book and you mill refund my money. I 

NAME i 

■ AD»BJ38S I 

j CITY STATR ■ 

I Chetk her* II yoa nrslar C. O. D. shiament. In •hten * 

a ea^a you pay few rant* extra for iw.mjj a.vl cMrgot, ■ 
I SAME MONEY-BACK OUATIAbTTBEI 

98 """" " 



Future Fiction 

(Continued Prom Page 97) 

tempt the untanglement of the snarl at the 
blocks, the remainder were making ready 
to lower a makeshift affair, somewhat like 
a basket-seat, to the helpless man on the 
diving platform. And, all this time, the 
fantastic thing was steadily drawing closer. 

It hatted. Had a dart finally taken effect? But, no. It had sighted the man, 
and, lowering its head, was edging closer. 

Hogan stumbled back, almost fell over 
the edge of bis support. Riley, sweat bedewing his ashy brow, was firing steadily. 
Darts from the rifles were churning the sea 
about the monster, now moving in an erratic manner and throwing their aims off. 
The temporary seat was being lowered aJ 
rapidly as was possible, but tt was plainly 
manifest that it would not reach the doomed 
man in time to effect his rescue. The 
blocks were still jammed. It was evident 
that, unless a miracle happened, Hogan was 
doomed. 

Suddenly, through the air, flashed a 
round, white body, legs splayed out and 
arms bowed, looking like an immense frog 
diving into the cool depths of its- own private pool. 

THE figure disappeared into the sea, to 
reappear immediately. Shaking its head 
to clear its eyes, it started to swim not away, 
but toward the approaching ulth, for such 
it was. Riley suddenly depressed the barrel 
of the cannon, and shouted to the men to 
halt their firing. 

"It's Beetle! - " someone yelled. 
"Going to his death to save a friend. 
Boozer or not, he's got guts, and plenty of 
them!" 

Beetle was carrying something in one 
hand, which slowed up his speed somewlmt. 
Riley whipped up his glasses to ascertain 
what manner of weapon the little diver was 
risking his life on. 

"Damn— is the man crazy? Carrying a 
bottle to fight an ulth?" 

Man and monster were within a dozen 
yards of one another when the former halted, and, treading water, managed to rise up 
in a lunge, and throw the black bottle 
straight at the oncoming thing. Then with 
out waiting to ascertain the results of hi:: 
attack, turned, and began swimming back to 
the ship. 

Riley gasped, and stared unbelievingly. 
Forgotten was Hogan; forgotten the litth. 
man risking his life in the hot waters which 
would likely give him a good broiling. For 



Salvage Job 



the bottle, sailing through the morning air, 
had struck the monster, whether by luck or 
remarkable aiming, squarely on the head. 
It burst. For a moment nothing happened, 
then the ulth reared, shook its head blindly, 
leaped high into the air Jtnd disappeared 
into the depths, to reappear x moment later 
swimming away in an erratic fashion, exactly as though attempting its escape from 
some unseen enemy. 

They helped poor Beetle up before they 
did Hogan, for the latter was protected by 
the suit. The diminutive diver was a lob 
ster red ; the doctor hurried him off to the 
sick bay to treat him for extensive scalds. 
The man was literally half-cooked from 
end to end! 

Hogan came into the radio shack the other night. He was grinnin' like the kitty 
that'd licked up the spilt cream, and ate the 
canary for lunch. 

"I was down to see Beetle, Sparks," he 
said. "He told me a few things that will 
make the crew chuckle when they a hear 
them." 

I pricked up my ears. "Yes, sir?" I 
asked, respectfully. 

"Yeah." He smiled, reminiscently. "He 
was telling me about the kick, and the 
ulth." 

I pricked up my ears at that. I was wondering, as was everyone, about how Beetle 
had got drunk, and what was in the bottle 
he threw at the ulth. 

"Yeah. Beetle says he found a case down 
there in the captain's cabin. Swears he 
smelled the stuff on the way down." 

"I don't doubt it," I grunted. "That guy 
could smell liquor for a hundred miles 

"Yeah, that's why I believe him when he 
said he found it so easy. Well, it seems 
when the boat went down, there was a lot 
of air caught in the cabin. The pressure of 
the water kept it prisoned there. Beetle 
swears he'd open his helmet, and drink a 
bottle or two, sittin' on the table with his 
head in the air!" 

I stared at him. 

"He— what?" 

Hogan grinned. 

"Hard to believe, isn't it? And then the 
ulth — remember where those lilies grow 

"Sure, in swamps— say — you don't mean 
those ulths hate kick that bad? They'll run 
from it like I would from a skunk?" 

He nodded. "Well, son, I never saw 
you run from a skunk, but that's the general idea." 




THE EASY WAY TO 
POPULARITY 

Here Is a Complete Education 
tor Just a Few Cents 



Swing Stepa 

How to Be a Detective 

How to Dance 



Tip Top Tapping 
Police Jiu Jitsu 
Scientific Boxing 



Qet These Profusely Illustrated Books 
at the Special Price of; 

35c EACH — 3 FOR *1 .00 



OR 



FOR 



1.75 



M. L. SALES CO., Dept. 12 

Room 315, HO W. Broadway, N. Y. C. 

I enclose f for which please send me 

the following books (check tho3e you want). 

□ Tip Top Tapping □ Swing Steps 

□ How to be a Detective □ Police Jiu Jitsu 

□ How to Dance □ ScientlSc Boxing 

Name 

Address 



SOMETHING FROM BEYOND 

by PAUL DENNIS LAVOND 

(Author of "A Prince of Plul«" "CtUlhtan Tomb." tie.) 
Out of space it came to prey upon the men who rode between worlds. 



Foreword 

ALLACE GREY was bom in 
200*), some thirty years after 
Harley Graeme made his first 
moon flight, in Norwich, and was schooled 
in Laurie Hall nearby, later attending Norwich University. 

Although not nationally known, Norwich 
University has a fine, solid reputation for 
turning out acute, liberally-minded men, 
men who are neither too idealistic to adjust 
themselves to the harsh practicalities, nor 
yet too ait and dried to see beyond their 
noses. There are compulsory courses in 
subjects the mere mention of which would 
bring ridicule in other schools; they teach 
the occult and delve into what is known as 
Black Magic. Yet never do they permit 
their students thus to lose their grip on a 
world which denies and derides these things. 
The purpose of these courses is lo instil into 
the student a love of truth and the unknown; they seek to make them like those 
sturdy scholars of a distant past who were 
willing to search through innumerable haystacks of falsehood for the needle of truth 
therein. Norwich men have always been 
the last to snort and cry "impossible" when 
the unknown occurs. 

Shortly after graduating, Grey turned to 
anthropology for his vocation, but found 
the recognized authorities in the field to be 



grey-headed dodderers with a distaste for 
unorthodox views. In a fit of despair, he 
joined the Space Patrol, then popularly 
thought lo be a glorified suicide club, nothing more. After a few months, his state of 
mind improved; but instead of buying his 
way out, as easily he could have done, he 
set about forging ahead in the Patrol. He 
was the first commissioned officer to rise 
from (he ranks and there is no doubt but 
that he would have gone far, made a name 
both for himself and for the Patrol had not 
his career abruptly been terminated. 

Grey was found dead, along with two 
other members of the crew, in the Patrol 
ship he commanded. The circumstances of 
his death were unusual inasmuch as the 
bodies of the three men were frozen, although the ship was quite warm. These 
bodies could not be thawed, yet gained heat 
rapidly upon arrival at Earth until the temperature was almost that of living men. 
An investigation brought no light upon the 
incident ; there remains only Wallace Grey's 
journal, extracts from which we give below. 

From the journal of Wallace Grey 

i < WJB7HATEVER our scientists may 
WW say about the lifelessness of 
space, I cannot help believing that the void 
is indeed a harbor of life, even though it 
may not irsemble the life we know. Per


100 



Something From Beyond 



haps such life is so alien that the very word 
itself cannot be applied, so different that 
by no stretch could the most plastic imagination conceive it. Yet, we have this word, 
and it signifies anything which possesses 
consciousness of being; to that we add 
growth, power of ingestion, reproduction, 
motion, and thought. Perhaps there are 
vortices of pure thought here in space. . . . 
But there is something out here which we 
cannot see, hear, taste, touch or smell. Yet 
we do sense its presence; we know it is 
here. 

"It .... I cannot call the thing by any 
term more definite than 'it'.... is watching us, or, should I say, it is aware of us; 
it may not possess what we know as sight. 
It is aware of us and has been following us 
for the last few days .... perhaps longer: 
we cannot tell how long it may have been 
hovering over us before we became aware 
of it. Perhaps a considerable length of 
time in its presence is necessary before any 
suggestion of its being can permeate us; 
Awareness has come, but not through the 
customary channels of perception. I wonder, though: is it conscious of us?. . . .Are 
trees conscious of the birds and animals 
that nest therein, of the little boys that 
climb them, of the men who come at last to 
hew them down?.... No, trees are still 
strange to men, even though men have 
known and dealt with trees as far back as 
Our racial memories go. Even yet we do 
not know whether or not the tree has a 
consciousness of being, an awareness of 
other life-forms about it. ... Imagination, 
psychological delusion, wishes that father 
thought. . . .we cannot be certain about anything; our greatest positivism can only be 
relative. Yet, I say that I can feel that 
this is a living, malevolent entity; but how 
do I know it is not my own emotions telling me this, my emotions which color my 
every act no matter how diligently I try to 
whitewash? It is only natural that we distrust what we do not know: all that we 
know is full of danger, pain, disaster, and 
death for us. We cannot trust ourselves: 
how, then, can the unknown bring other 
than apprehension to us?.... 

"1 think that I am aware of this. . . . 
phenomenon .... more than Orloff or Jac; 
yet Orloff has been acting queerly for a 
number of days. He always was more than 
a little absent-minded; now he seems completely dazed. Ever since he and Jac repaired the blast-tube, Orloff has been.... 
(Continued On Page 102) 



Spare Time Training 
that helps you 

SERVE and PROSPER 

in this national crisis 

YOU want to serve your fullest in this Defease 
situation, do your utmost to help our nation. 
You want also to advance yourself in position and pay 
—win promotion and more money. 
You can do both at the same time. 
Our nation needs many more men for specialized 
and supervisory positions — to help defense production 
and business growth. Thousands — scores of thousands—must fit themselves quickly for these better 
payint; jobs in offices and stores and factories. They 
must train as accountants, salesmen, managers, foremen, traffic managers, general foremen, office managers, inspectors, etc. 

If you wish this advantage, simply mark on the 
coupon the rield of bu^ini'Si in which you are most 
interested. We will send you full information about 
the opportunities in that lield. teil you how our complete success -building program helps you plan your 
future, trains you in your sjKire time, and works with 
you all through your career. Send the coupon NOW. 



USAILE EXTENSION UNIVERSITY 
A Correspondence Institution 

D=pi. CHICAGO 

Please send me full inform a 
marked with an X T below. " 
□ Business Management: 
fkial, Managerial, Sale] ; 



riding the 
I hav, 



1 Depart mental 

□ Modern Salesmanship: Training for position js a-.,'.:* I- I-.HU-.-. Salesman, Trainer. 
Sales Promotion Manager, and all positions 
In retail, wholesale or specialty Belling. 

□ Higher Accountancy : Training for position as Auditor. Comptroller, Certified Pub
Coat Accountant, etc 



Manager, Rate Expert. Freight Solicitor, etc. 

□ Law i LL. B. De(ree. 

□ Modern Foremanshlp: Training for position* in Shop Management, such as that of 
Superintendent. General Forem 



□ I 



Silb-Forcma: 

rial Management: 



Industrial" Ensltn "" 

□ Modern Buslaens Cor re toon denco 

□ Kipert Bookkeeping 

□ Commercial Law 

□ CP. A.C 

□ Sten 




101 




10 SILK DRESSES SI 

Mid; vjlet. ■Morted ilwi uily. -lightl* used. 
Swiil sue dfpreit, balenrt COP fhif |iOElage. 
S.,-I.^:.r(i„ri Biiaranlftd 1 Sou) f',t FREE CATALOG clothing ramily of 3 fur J4. 50— ..hoea, hats, 
suils, arruy i-lothti, (if. 

Eunice Mall Order House 

197 Dlviiion Si.. Dipl. Yt. N. V. C. 




ENS 




Know the Truth about 
Now Vork'ii Niirht Ute. 
Be an "Insider." Know 
all the rope » 1 

NEW YORK 
BEHIND THE SCENES 2Sg.*i. 

Lt* Martin tr EdltieH 

Pulls no punches! Ripe the 
mask off what goes on behind 
the "white lights" of Broadway. Gives amazing, uncensored peeks backstage — telle 
real story of night club life — 
truth about chorus girisdance-hall elrena — c abare 
gold-digger*. 

INSIDE INFORMATION 

Sensational exposes or petty 
rackets. An eye-opener tnatJS 
will astound you. Lays ' 
secrets of sucker-traps— 
spots — shows how to avoid 
pitfalls of the Big Cityhow to get "most for 
your money." 



LIMITED EDITION— ORDER NOW! 



Get your copy 
coin. Receive 1 
Canada, 35c. 

HERALD PUBLISHING 00. 

22 K. 17th St., Dept. NX-;; New Tork. N. T. 



ANY BOOK IN PRINT! 



luthois. new book*, popular Kill ion.-, flcitoo. 
ewe, medical. BMHanl children's books. 
■H at luixsnteed aivinea. Send card now far 
ClnrkHVi'* 1042 OuVok. 

free s'" ^™"n;s.s?i 

biDiiu guirtc of 300.000 hook •lovers. The ■ 
to vour ChrHtmo mil piolil-m. FREE II 
wrl'o NOW — TO D A V 1 

CLAHKSON PUBLISHING COMPANY 
Out, OAI. 1153 So. Wabuh Ave,, Chle»|o 




Quit Using Tobacco! 




fii You Want Romance 

Ej Bl A " affectionate sweetheart, worth* 

H_ H while and generous, write me. All lcttera 
answered and held confidential. 

MART LEE, Box 445-B, HOI, LA. MISSOURI 

102 



Future Fiction 

(Continued From Page 101) 

different. He speaks very little, and, when 
he does, it is almost with an effort, as if 
he did not know the language he was trying 
use. His voice, too, seems to have 
changed and the inflection is weird. I can 
see that Jac is puzzled; he asked me a few 
hours ago whether I thought Orloff might 
be developing some form of space-dementia. That is possible. I have tried to speak 
to Orloff several times, to see if he is in 
pain or feeling sick; he evades me and does 
not seem to understand what I am saying. 
There is, however, no fault to be found with 
his work; he does, true, perform his duties 
a trifle more slowly than before, but his efficiency has increased noticeably. He was 
always somewhat timid at the controls, fearful lest he make a blunder which would be 
disastrous to us all; now he handles them 
with confidence, does so well that I need 
not oversee him. He spends nearly all of 
his spare time staring out the portholes into 
space, although he does not appear to be 
watching anything. His eyes, I have noticed,' are somewhat glazed as he stands 
there and, after he has finally turned away, 
his movements, for a few seconds, are incongruously stiff and awkward. Can there 
be any relationship between Orloffs eccentricity and it? I must look into the Song 
of Yste again. . . .How out of place that 
ancient book seems aboard this ship, on the 
dark side of Luna, some quarter-million 
miles from Earth. Did those olden probers into the unknown, I wonder, ever dream 
of the day when men would leave the Earth 
physically?. . . .Yet, there is a vast amount 
of truth in this volume! I am told, by 
friends, that it was once declared pernicious, 
blasphemous, accursed, and to be destroyed 
on sight. A few copies were handed secretly 
from generation to generation lest they be 
discovered and burnt. (I wonder sometimes just how grandfather obtained it. Did 
he find it in a tomb, as he claimed, or was 
it obtained by other methods?)" 

Later; 



itj—T^RLOFF has been given a full phys™i_Fical examination. I can find nothing wrong with him." 

Later: 

"Something has happened to my copy of 
the Song of Yste. I am positive that it was 
packed among other, more orthodox, vol


Something From Beyond 

umes when we left Earth; yet it is not there 
now. I am sure Jac would not be rummaging around my things; even if he were, 
what possible interest could i book like that 
hold for him. And Orloff . . . .but how 
could the lock on my chest be tampered 
with without traces being left? Moreov 
of what value could a copy of this book be 
to other than myself? It is in cipher, 
most ingenious cipher. It took grandfather 
ten years to work it out, and another five 
to prepare the volume I now possess. But 
the mere possession of the key would be 
of little value, for even then one uninitiate 
could not read it. Each page holds a dif 
ferent variation of the cipher, the clue to 
which lies in the little sketch heading the 
page. Grandfather told me before he died 
I mention this to point out the difficulty of 
reading a volume like my special copy of 
the Song of Ysle and to draw attention to 
the high improbability that two people 
the same ship, two members of the Space 
Patrol, further, would have the required 
abilities. Yet, Orloffs condition leaves him 
open to grave suspicion." 

Later: 

"Orloff has taken a change for the worse. 
He is unconscious now: Jac found him lying 
on the floor when he went below to see 
why Orloff did not respond to his signals. 
For a moment, he appeared to revive; his 

eyes opened yet 1 would swear that it 

was not Orloff who looked at us. He is 
lying on the couch in the next room; Jac 
and I are sharing his duties. I took advantage of the emergency to search Orloffs 
room. Of course, it is within my authority to demand search at any time but I had 
been reluctant to use my power in this case 
as I was not sure that perhaps the blame 
was not mine. But the search proved my 
initial suspicions to be correct: it was in 
his room, and he had been reading it. I 
found figures on a sheet of paper in his 
desk which prove conclusively that he knew 
the cipher, was computing the variations for 
specific pages. When I am free, I shall 
determine just what he was reading: perhaps it will shed some light upon this gruesome state of affairs." 

Later : 

"We are functioning under automatic 
controls, such as they are. ... I have been 
reading that portion of the Song of Ysle 
(Continued On Page 101) 



WANTED 

MEN and WOMEN 

Work For The GOVERNMENT 
Salaries $1700-^2600 Per Year 

No Layoffs! Vacations With Pay! 
Regular Raises! Good Pensions! 

A LIFETIME JOB 

★ RAILWAY POSTAL CLERKS * 

* nit* Miii /%„„„; * Clerks — File Clerk* 

I 22 5E2 c " riers * Stenographers — 

* Post Office Clerks Typists 

* Rural Mall Carriers * Inspectors of Customs 

* Patrol and Immigration Inspectors + 



Pay for Course Only 

After You Are 
Appointed & Working 



So sure are we that our simplified Interstate 
Home Study Course of coaching will result in 
your passing the government examination and 
being appointed, that we are willing to accept 
your enrollment on the following basis. The 
price of our complete 10-weak lesson course 
is $30, plus $3 Examiner's Fee. 

We are willing to give you the course 
with the understanding that you are to 
pay for it ONLY AFTER YOU ARE 
APPOINTED AND WORKING. 
Should you take the examination and fail 
or not be appointed for any reason whatsoever, the loss will be ours, and you 
will not owe us one cent for the course! 

GET READY IMMEDIATELY! 
FULL Particulars FREE! 

'"Clip and Mall This Coupon NOW!"" 
' INTERSTATE HOME STUDY ACADEMY 
■ 901 Broad St., Div. DA-12, Newark, N. J. 

'ma RUSH 1o me FREE particulars — without any sblinltlanhew to Qualify for l government )«&. 



Tint PUinly la p«aci| B 



103 



GETTING UP NIGHTS 
MAKES MANY FEEL OLD 

Do you feel older than you are or suffer from Getting 1>P Nifihtr, Backache. Nervouwnesp. Leg Pains 
Dizziness. Swollen Ankks, Kheumatlc Pains, Burning, 
scanty or frequent passages? If so, remember that 
your Kidneys are vital to your health and that these 
nymploms may be due to non-organic and non-svi<lemic Kidney and Bladder troubles — In such cases 
CXSTEX <a physician's prescription) usually gives 
prompt and joyous relief bv helping the Kidneys 
flush out poisonous excess acids and wastes. Tou 
have everything to gain and nothing to lose in trying 
Cyntex. An iron-clad guarantee wrapped around each 
package assures a iefuntl of your monev on return 
of empty package unless fully satisfied. Don't take 
any Kidney medicine that is not guaranteed. Don't delay. Get Cystex 
<Siss-tex) from your druggist 
today. Only 35c, The guaran
Helm Flush Kidneys ' CC 3 



c iiancus . 



Cystex 



Quit Using Tobacco! 



THE NEWELL COMPANY 

78 Cl«yt.n SLti.n St LmI). H*. 





Send 

NO 
MONEY 

GLASSES by MAIL 



$095 

™ OP 

COMPLETE 



NEWEST STYLES 
WE GUARANTEE 

SATISFACTION 
OR MONEY-BACK 




BROKEN GLASSES REPAIRED 
FREE Catalog A Information. WRITE T0DAY1 

UC EYE-GLASSES CO., Dept. C-A40 
• 1557 MILWAUKEE AVENUE, CHICAGO, ILL. 



Parfum D'Amour 



(Perfume of Love) 

Money Back if Not Satisfied 
fluDUflt perfume of irresistible Man, cltneIrjg for hours with Ineffable, fascinating fragrance, 
lust • drop ■> tnwfi. One bottle, fl. C. O. D.. plus postaee. 
r vaa Tell me your birth date and I nil! also scad you jour *rIlCB uologtcal telecast. iMlde In V. fl. A.) L. HAMILTON, 
o-ii'.. OA. 126 Lexington *.c, N. V. C. 



SONG POEM 



s WRITERS:^ 

Bit Lew, 8«tred. Patriotic, Comic or' any lubjett 
for our plan and FREE flhymine Dictionary «t one*. 
RICHARD BROS., 14? Woods 11 nil dins, Chicago, in. 



Let m help Tou 6nd real happiness. Join our old reliable 
club. 42 rears of dependable, confidential service. Correspondeois most every where. Many with means, seeking congenial mates. Proven results. Photos, descriptions free, 
STANDARD CLUB, Box C-40, Grays Lake, III. 

104 



Future Fiction 

(Continued From Page 103) 

which seemed tc be of so much interest to 
Orloff: it is damnable. Now I know what 
it is which has come out of space to dog 
our heels; ] know why we feel so cold and 
the reason for Orloff 's curious condition. . . 
We are completely helpless. . . .If I seem a 
bit reluctant to state what I know, it is 
because of the stark, objective closeness of 
the thing which stuns me. It is one thing 
to delve into the unknown and learn of 
hideous and alien secrets with which the 
cosmos is filled. That is one thing, I say, 
and it is a thing more than many minds can 
endure. But to face the actuality of these 
things is another matter. To those not 
afraid of thought, the Song of Yste is not 
so utterly horrible. . . .bizarre, grotesque. . . 
words, words, words, but what can they 
mean, what can ihey mean when the reader has nothing in his own experience to approximate them?. . . .Imagination always 
paints a fascinating picture, albeit how 
gruesome, attaching glamor to the unknown 

and alien but the reality. .. .la, Nyag
ghogtta! Shub - Nigguratb! Nyarlatbotep! 

Nyarlatbotep! Nyaggoghua, dissolver of 

space. . . .K'haikruf . . . . 

'Orloff' s condition is unchanged. He is 
still in a coma, apparently. But there are 
no wounds, no concussion, fractures or 
symptoms of shock. Jac does not suspect 
his true condition .... but I know.... I 
know!" 

"This is my last entry. // has come 

out of space .... for us. A short time ago 
I heard the call. .. .within. Weird piping 
sound ending in a piercing shriek. We. . . 
felt it rather than heard it. Jac did not 

know what it was 1 tried to explain 

something natural 

Orloff has arisen.... at the call. He 
stood in the doorway for a moment, looking at us, and, in his eyes a blackness, a 
vast shape of inconceivable power, malevolent power, lhat glared out at us. We are 
rooted to our seats. . . .though I cannot see 
what manner of resistance we could make 
were we free. 1 suppose // prefers us alive 
. . . .though could I reach the wall, none of 
us would go to it alive. 

'We both feel very cold, although the 
instruments show that the temperature has 
not dropped a single degree. The cold 
comes from. .. .within. Orloff is moving 
slowly toward the space-lock; I sit here frozen to my seat, writing furiously. .. .Must 



Something From Beyond 

try to put down what I read in that ac 
cursed book last night. . . . 

" 'Let not the hearts of men dwell too 
pleasantly upon escape from this earth to 
worlds of strangeness and glamor beyond 
the veil of night for without lies horror 
and madness and that which no human 
tongue or pen can describe. Vaster by f, 
than the might and malevolence of those 
demons that plague and befoul the earth is 
that which comes out of space to feast upon 
the souls of men; yet, indeed, U is but a 
lesser manifestation of the evil which dwells 
beyond the stars. This out of space may be 
known by the coldness it brings, a coldness 
which no fire can abate, and by its unholy 
piping by which it summons its victims to 
sacrifice. For of old is it known to send 
itself into the living bodies of certain creatures so that they appear bewitched and 
know not themselves, shunning the day and 
the radiance of the sun which is baleful to 
it. Many and multiform are the prodigies 
it performs, for it may enter a city and blast 
all within into frozen corpses, yet, when 
these are discovered, there will have been 
no sign either of cold or of its point of 
entrance. Many and multiform are the 
prodigies it performs for its own amusement and contempt for men. And the 
crowning foulness of all . . . .' 

"I may write no more. The space lock 
is opening. . . .Orloff. . . ._" 

ENTRY in the log of the Space- Liner 
Majestic, Earth-Mars voyage EM 206 
(From File .0078, Derelicts, Report of, foi 
the year 2027, Record Rooms, Interplanetary 
Transit Building, N'York, Terra.) 

"December 9, 2027. Discovered derelict 
space-patrol cruiser. #SP-070 R3, reported missing August 24, 2027, drifting in 
and parallel to Band 5. Found bodies of 
three men in cabin. Two in their official 
places; a third lying on the floor in such 
a position as to assume he had been placed 
there after death. Although ship was entirely warm and instruments showed no variation in room temperature, the corpses were 
frozen. Ship's log, found in cabin, was 
dated August 5, 2027, no entries after that 
date being found. Journal of Commanding 
Officer, Wallace Grey, Lieutenant, SpacePatrol, hereby forwarded without comment. 
Lt. Grey was found, pen in hand, in the 
act of making entries in aforementioned 
journal." 




BRAND 
NEW 
SYSTEM! 

Founded or 



/ LAI wT KEVIttP EDITION^ 



tost simple and practical principle 
lot self tuition with 
Complete English pronunciation of every word 

latest revised edition 
35Ceach-3for $ 1 00 -5for*15«» 



M. L. SALES CO., 160 W. Broadway, N. V. O. 
Dept. D-12 

Enclosed find $ for which sand ma the follow
ng books: 

□ Spanish □ Polish □ Italian 

□ French Q German 

Name , 

Address 



FOR SALE! 

Indian Relics, Beadwork, Old West 
Photos, Books, Minerals, Fossils, 
Stamps, Coins, Bills, Old Glass, 
Dolls, Miniatures, Indian Jewelrypottery-baskets and rugs. Weapons, pistols, cartridges. Gem Opal 
15c. Confederate Bill 15c. U. S. 
2c piece 15c. Bird Point 10c. 
Arrowhead 10c. Spearhead 15c. 
Catalog 8c. 

VERNON LEMLEY 



Dept. D. A. 



Osborne, Kansas 



THE END 



105 




SPACE EPISODE 

by LESLIE PERRI 

So little time was left; quickly their ship wet plunging toward the looming Earth. And 
still the two men sat entranced. 



SHE STARED at her two companions 
for a moment and then a sickening 
revulsion replaced fear, the fear that 
held each of the three in a terrible grip of 
inertia. Her slim hands bit hard into the back 
of one of the metal seats. The tiny rocket ship 
was plummeting to destruction, careening 
dizzily through space. Here, in the atmosphereless void, their motion was negligible 
to them, but instruments told a grim story; 
unless they could blast the forward rockets 
very soon they would be caught in the 
Earth's titanic grip and drawn with intensifying acceleration to its surface. They 
would come screaming down like some colossal shell and the planet's surface would 
become a molten sore where they struck. 
And now, while precious seconds fled, the 
three of them stood transfixed, immobile. 

What had happened ? A simple thing, 
an unimportant thing in space. They had 
encountered a meteor swarm, one utterly infinitesimal in the sight of the looming 
worlds about them. But it had left one of 
its members jammed in their forward rocket nozzles, the tubes which determined 
whether they would land safely or crash in 
a blaze of incandescence. They had turned 
off their operating power rather than wreck 
the ship completely; with no escape for (he 
rocket-blasts, their motors would be smashed 
to pieces. 



The first they knew of disaster, striking 
unheralded from space, was the ear-shattering impact of the meteor. No sound; just 
concussion that was worse than any deafening crash. Then the power generator dial 
shot to the danger line; the ship began to 
plunge, leleplate showing the universe seemingly turning fast somersaults as their ship 
careened end over end. The truth was evident at once; that impediment must be removed from the forward tubes. One of 
them must volunteer to clear away the obstruction, or all were doomed. 

A time for heroics, this, but none of them 
felt like heroes. Erik and Michael stood 
side by side, a sort of bewildered terror on 
their faces — a "this can't happen to us" 
look. Neither had moved or spoken a word 
since the first investigation. Erik, upon discovering that the outer door was gone, had 
flung his space suit to the floor with an 
impotent curse. For that shorn-off door 
meant that whoever left the ship now could 
never return ; it was a one-way passage. 
The taller of the two men played with the 
instalments, spinning them this way and 
that, then stood waiting. Waiting for 
heaven alone knew what miracle to happen. 

Lida found her confidence in them, that 
fine cpnfidence she had known up to now, 
dissolving away, leaving her with an empty 
feeling which was greater than any fear 



1M 



Space Episode 

could have been. She could not square 
them, as they were now, with the men she 
had known before — through innumerable 
Terrestrial dangers on land, sea, and in the 
clouds. The three had had a planet-wide 
reputation as reckless and danger-despising. 
And now. . . . 

"Erik!" she cried suddenly. "Damn it, 
this is not a tea party! We have to do 
something now. Toss coins or draw lots. 
Either one of us goes out there now, or we 
all crack up." 

Michael glanced at her dully as she spoke, 
his tongue moving over dry lips. Erik 
closed his eyes, brushing his hair with a 
limp gesture. Lida's hands tightened on the 
back seat; what was wrong with them? She 
bent forward slightly, her heart beating like 
a dull and distant drum. The dials on the 
control board frightened her; she whispered 
now. "You see what little time we have 
left? Nothing's going to happen unless we 
make it happen. We're falling, falling 
fast" 

Michael slumped in his seat, dropped h 
head to his knees groaning. Erik looked at 
her vaguely for a long second, then turned 
his eyes to the teleplate. Cold perspiration 
stood on his forehead. This was the dashing Erik Vane, onetime secret dream hero, 
close companion since that day, years back, 
when he and Mike had fished her out of 
the wreck of her plane somewhere in the 
Pacific. Suddenly, it all seemed amusing to 
her; the question of sacrifice lay between 
Michael and Erik — this was strictly men's 
work. But they were finding life a sweet 
thing — a sudden burst of laughter overcame 
her. There was such an amusing impotency 
to Erik's strength and the dash of his 
clothes; the knuckles stood white on his 
hands, cold damp fear glittering on his forehead. 

AND what of Michael, the gallant? He 
slumped in his seat, holding his face 
in shaking hands. Could this be the same 
man who had saved them all by scaling 
what was virtually a sheer cliff by night 
and obtaining help from neighboring aborigines? All the dangers they had faced together-and overcome together now crowded 
in her memory, one piling upon another. 
Scores of times one of them had unhesitatingly faced unpleasant death for the sake 
of all; she had been no exception. 

And there was another picture that made 
her laugh, too, but it wasn't a gay laugh. 
(Continued On Page 103) 




T S 

s'Trlall VC IKHUBi " ~ ICAffJ 

I We make FALSETEETU forj/mi by MAIL I'D*" 



'' C. S. Dental Co. Dept. C-A40 Chicago, in. 




1333333 

Ainu." your friends . . . IDENTIFY regular ENMARKKD 
Tinying; Cards from their backs. 
Oat Smraplt Ci- Hi. one each, taken Irani 
Tan dlirarenl popular clreici — Bm. BlOTls. etc., tluiwiftc cirrtet irmind Key 
Mark), with corn plat* f nitructioni. ||.00THE TEtHHtUB CO. 
r. 0. Boc G7B-OA. WjlUot, Idaho 



ASTHMA 

W. K. STERLING. 870 Ohio Ave., Sidn, 



Tmntmant mallad 
on FREC rnnL If 

satisfied. Bond 11; if 
Pras. Wrlta 



GET ACQUAINTED CLUB 

II you want a "wife." "husband," r "sweetheart," tall 
ui your age, description of your "ideal," and by return mail you will receive sealed particulars of on* 
of the oldest, most modern Clubi. in America, representing many wealthy educatad members. 
R. E. SIMPSON Box 1251 Denver, Colo, 

D. S. A. 



SOCIAl 

Correspondence Club 

EXPERIENCE the thrill of romance thru tail ■elect club! 
Introduction»-by-letter. This club it conducted on 4 high 
plane to help lonely, refiimd, nurriagaable ma 
find compatible friends. Ducreyi, confidents 

' Est 1922. ..Sealed pai 



* 938, Jacks* 



vilie. 



rid* 



WHAT CAUSES EPILEPSY? 

. booklet containing the opinions of famous doctors 
n thin inte:eatl>i|,- subject aril] be sant I'TtEE. while 
hey last, to anv reader writ in,; tu Lhp Krlm uti*.n.il 
KvlMlon, Dept. DB-13, 533 Filth Ave,. New York, 



107 



FALSE TEETH 




90 PAYS' TRIAL 

TEST THEM 
EXAMINE THEM 

Wf make FALSE TEETH for j™ to Ball 
from jour can Im pies* ions. Yoo ban natltrittlinof MONEY BACK GUARANTEE. CuHaun la Cnrted SUM* 
*nd Canada re Ctrl 8 ATI SF ACTION Out jmi he join on IIZDGK. 

SEND NO MONEY B8E»*"?S &£S 
CLEVELAND DENTAL SUPPLY CO. 

Drpt. 28RI, St. Louia, Dliiuib 



CASH FOR UNUSED STAMPS 

V. S. unused postage wanted at SO% (ace vaJue for 

denominations liio to 19c, ti% face -ralu« tor denominations :0c lo 5«c. Small lets IS% face »a)ue. MAI1 
8T AM 1*51 KFX;iPTFRED. Money sent by return mall 

OAKBER SERVICE, Tl Stb Ave., Dept. D-U, N.Y.c. 



£ASY WAY..,. 



UifcH 



BLJLCK 

This mnarkoblr CAKE dmviry, 
TIHTZJM Black Shampoo, washes cot 
dirt, loue dandrufl. (ium. *rinu and 
aaiUr |h« avr • real amoot h HTT (LACK 
fin that fairlj irloni with Bfaatid kntia 
Ood'I «M i« "hi. fad*d duU burnt, off «Jw W 
• miw kr^.r. T1NTZ M DJatk Gak* 
fredsal . . . *aeb atnnrp** kavo iw fcai 
■wakr ■ rmnatr. N«dj*d look. Win'lh 
Mefltcrtl). TISTZ ttmm m }« Bl«a, KfH mi Aara 

Browfi, Titian, and Bleed*. OrttctUd**) EUUakadt NaM 

SEND NO MONEY ZZZ^.-jz; 

Wdu tWeFsr 
-Wraa today M 

TINTZ CO.. Dea*. M4, Wl Ife. MlcMtan, CUeaia 
Canadian Office: Dipt, «a*. tt Celicce SI.. Tarsal* 






DID YOU KNOW 



that the SCARAB was carried by Brazilian India us to 
protect them from evil? 
That all Scarabs are males 
and so have been carried 
as a Love Charm? That 
Egyptians built sacred temples in its honor? That 
it was thought to fcring POWER and SUCCESS 
to the wearer? 
Did you know that you can get a genuine, real 
SCARAB imported direct from Brazil, preserved 
by Nature, herself, in a way to retain all its iridescent beauty and that they may be bad in rich 
ring or pendant settings of 14-Karat gold plate 
for only $1.00? 
Order one today so that you may wear one at all 
times. Send no money . . . simply pay postman 
$1.00 plus postage on delivery. Note ! When 
money is sent with order we prepay postage and 
Include Mystic Power Talisman FREE! 

Brazilian Scarab Import Co. 

35 W. 32iid St., Dept. DA-12, New York, N. T. 
108 



Future Fiction 

(Continued From Page 107) 

The picluie cf Michael opening the outer 
door cf the rocket on the night they left, 
bowing gallantly, speaking extravagantly 
dear words of welcome to her on their first 
space flight. Lida clung to a chair, eyes 
blurring, as she gazed at the control panel, 
now a welter of glittering metal, polished 
and useless. 

Michael's head shot up suddenly. "Stop 
laughing! Step it!" He covered his face 
with his hands and Lida felt sick; he was 
crying. 

She paused, her eyes filled with bitterness 
and contempt. Then she smiled wearily, 
feeling strangely akin to the vacuum outside them. There was only a sudden decision and she made it. This was her exit 
and to hell with heroes! 

She bowed to them scornfully, waving 
aside their fears with a flippant sweep of 
her hand. Only one regret remained now. 
They could have chosen fairly, made a pretense of flipping a coin. She looked cocky 
and defiant now, gathering tools for her 
job. A grin twisted her mouth into a quivering scarlet line. Would she make a television headline? Would they name a ramp 
after her, or, perhaps, some day, a rocket 
division ? There were several photos of her 
in newspaper files; she hoped they would 
pick a good one when they ran the story. 
Oh, hers would be a heroic end. 

She put aside the word "end" mentally 
and turned her attention to what had to be 
done. Her decision made, she would have 
to act swiftly or the sacrifice would be useless. The cabin's interior was becoming unreal and horrible with apathy. She ignored 
the others; they were like figures in a nightmare. 

The outer door had been destroyed, no 
doubt about that. Erik was almost blown 
from the cabin when he opened the inner 
door. She would need magnetic clamps 
from the outset; the neutralizing effect of 
the airlock between the two doors was 
gone; that spelled doom for the one who 
ventured beyond the cabin. Once out, there 
was no returning. The force of escaping 
air would not permit it. 

On the black, glistening floor of the cabin lay Erik's glittering, iridium- woven spacesuit. He had ventured that much at least, 
pulled it from a locker and tossed it to the 
floor. Fortunately the gyroscopes were 
working. She stepped into the suit, smiling 
grimly. It was much too long and wide all 



Space Episode 

over. Her fingers were swift and sure, adjusting the steel clamps. 

Michael was still in a semi-coma. Erik 
was watching her reflection. He knew what 
she was doing. His shoulders were rigid 
now, but he made no move to stop her. 
And now memory played the final ironic 
trick. She recalled Michael saying, with his 
arm around her shoulders, "When we get 
to Mars, you'll be the glamor girl of the 
planet. It'll be wonderful, Lida— just the 
two of us." His eyes had hinted at things 
he did not put into words and even though 
she knew that nothing of the kind would 
happen so long as there were three of them, 
she had been glad for him then. 

She jerked up the front zipper, trying to 
close her memories with the same motion. 
There weren't many seconds to spare now. 
She fastened the tools to her belt, checked 
them and with them her signal sending button with the receiving set on the instrument 
board. Then, with shaking hands she could 
not help, she picked up the helmet. 

Michael looked up suddenly, incredulity 
filling his eyes. Erik wheeled around from 
the teleplate. 

"Lida!" he said, his voice hoarse. 

Gone was the bitterness and contempt 
now. "So long, Erik," she replied softly. 
"I'll do the best I can. Watch for the signal on the control board. I'll send it 
through when the rocket nozzles are clear — 
that is, if I'm not blown from the ship.' 

He swayed for an instant, lurched over 
to where she stood. "I can't let you do it. 
Give me the suit, Lida. I'll go." She 
looked at him, cynical and proud, her eyes 
glittering like steel and her small chin 
thrust forward determinedly. These words 
he had said — what were they but words he 
flung from him, reaching out to pull together the tatters of his self-respect? She 
pitied him. 

"There's no time for that now," she replied crisply. "Good luck." 

On a sudden impulse she darted over to 
Michael and struck him sharply across the 
face. He looked up suddenly, his eyes 
widening in amazement. "Aren't you going to say — goodbye?" 

"Lida," he muttered, "don't go. Don't 
leave us qow; it won't do any good, Lida. 
Take off the suit and we'll all go together." 

SHE shook her head defiantly. "No! 
There's still time. Goodbye, Michael." 
She fastened on the helmet, her hands cold. 
(Continued On Page 111) 



GOOD NEWS FOR 

PILES SUFFERERS 

The McCleary Clinic. 1225 Elms Blvd., Excelsior Springs, Mo., i3 putting out an up-to-theminute 122-page book on Piles (Hemorrhoid;*), 
Fistula. PeHfctad ailments and colon disorders. You 
can hava a copy of this book by asking for it 
on a postcard sent to the above address. No 
oharge. It may save you much suffering and 
money. Writa today for a FREE copy. 



Learn this 
Profitable 
Profession 




in 90 Days at Home 



Tlicl 



tr.es iH-'.n makt 



i Sllui 



Doctor! and p:lia(e pattenta •* 

lit for eitilill»lifng your own oftice. 
Wtoreiilni aioncy-nmlil ne p™r<-ssion In your turn tuna* 
Flu jiil'" nur tiu'iie iliiily c.h:i ,c. Saras iimli inl.j.i 
NATIONALLY KNOWN railileni icbooL A diploma 
co millet I Mi) ot the courie. Course cm Ito 
plated In 3 to 4 mnntbi. High School Iriln-— Many tiro bit money wu.il* 



Anatomy Charts & Booklet FREE 



Include uniform ■ 



Tbonpy aupplloi 



tuition lea. 

Sent* coupon now (or Anatomy Charts »nj beeklat 
containing photograph* ind letters from oucaettfut 
traduatts. Tii-*? will all b* tont paatpais) — FREE. 

THE College ot Swedish Massagre 
ISueeessor t» Niliunal Collate of Massage) 
Dept. 803—30 E. Adams St.. Chicane. 

REE and Ooalpafd. Anatomy Chard, booklet cOflaod let cert from graduate!, and complete detail* 



lining ptiotograc 



Kan* 



MEN 



Buy wholes Ale evod a all racer 
blades, tooth paste. aha viae 
cream, personal needs, etc. Sani 
for free complete catalogue. 

Kc> -Imir ICtiiihcr Co., I>ni>t. D-l .; 
72 Mb Ave.. New York Oir.* 




FALSE 
YEETH 

AS LOW AS $7.95 

Par Plat*. Dental rjlntaa an 
made m oar owe btborntoiy 
o y«ir p eruana! lmini.iNTUtfor PUB HSSia 
oar 80-D.j Trial Offer. 



•UAWAt 



PRICK KKH
DON'T PUT IT OFF - WriU da Si™ ~ ^"-W?!! 

BRIGHTON-THOMAS DENTAL LABORATORY 

OEPT. Baj 6217 S. HALSTEO STREET. CHICAGO. ILL. 



10» 



TKEE1 



THIS VALUABLE NEW! 
BOOK, "Mathematics Made 
Easy" — gives you simplified 
instruction in every phase of 
figuring ALL types of work. 
PLUS a FREE Deluxe Professional SLIDE RULE. Save time, simplifies all calculating, fractions, 
estimating percentages, decimals, costs, ratio, etc. Complete 
instructions for using Slide Rule. BOTH FREE 
if you accept this amazing offer 
at onc«/ 



MAKE MORE MONEY! 
WIN A BETTER JOB! 



24 EASY,^ 
EASY, HOME 1 
jf STUDY MANUALSl 



ER UO .1 
ITRATISKS dl 

i f rou *« * 

sag" 

WILD**- ,. 

ScaWg* • 



1^ 

EASILY, 
QUICKLY. With This 
Amazing A. B. C. METHOD 

'at home— in spare time 

H«t it It at UK! A new. «ily, aharteut way I* Inrn 
Blu.tr>! Ki.a.ni Created by leading American eiptrtt ««diHlvtly far AurllB Tech. II deein't matter whether yeti're 
• ntcefiaalt. atfia* wertier, student, plumber, carpenter, steam 
Utter. ' truth 'i'^rf— ne Matter what yeur • ecu a at lea. thi> 
■*nutl«fl*l new •turn )■ aaattly what ytu Heed. Here li In* 
iw*h. «<iltfce*l way '* * better Job and bigger m* And 
li shingly law you'll be amazed. 



>f« Mu.» «« w 



These Noted EiDtfti Created 
Thle Amailng Course 
V. WALSH — B. A. Professor, Coble. Utile., N, T. C. well-known 
kit and lecturer, listed in "Who'f 
Who In America." 

F. «. RAPPOLT— B.A., C.E. M.S., 
and P.E. Professor, School of Technology, College of the City of N. T. 
Wi.Mj-liTMiwn cItII engineer. 
F. J. BURNS— B.S., M.E., Professor 
t Newark College ot Engineering, N. J. 



How Shadowgraph M.H«# 

IF YOU CAN READ ENGLISH 
YOU CAN LEARN TO READ BLUEPRINTS 



Wlm this ahotuut SIUDOWGHAPH course, 
you do not need any previous technical ot 
other sfeilal education — all you bate to 
hnow is how (o lead. Ton learn Blueprint 
Heading altnotl "at a (lance," by «e«ln( 
watching a 



OWCBAPH sjhosfcut finrw eoverw, 
tht> requirement* for bier i*uy 1»<j*< 
In every rtefenle *ti.l mechanical 

i mi tit try. If pat* everything; roil 

need to know ii t * blueprint* right 

at I'uur nrgfertlp*t 



Thij nvw and amazingly simple .SBADOWGBAPH method eliminates all complicated 
detail!. Here, In 24 easy, selt-Lnstiurtlvn 
mam i all, la ■ complete professional course 
In Blueprint Beading I Written in everyikj language that simplifies all technical 
norde and phrases. No need to spend months 
al an expensive trade ot technical school. 

THOUSANDS OF MEN WANTED AT ONCE! 

Thanaanda of trained men are ).m m ihnul — raott Thlaj StfAlH 
wanted at ©nee In all defense Induntrlcav— men who can road Blueprlnta. "Musi be able to work 
rrum Blueprint*" — that's file way 
the "want ado" read the»e day*. 
No matter what kind of work yon 
do, Blueprint Reading will help 

SEND NO MONEY — PAY NOTHING TO POSTMAN 

Mull coup-a now. Youil receive the- complete U manual SHADOW/ 
GRAPH ceurae for 8 day*' lit KT. KXAMfNATlON without obligation, 
II you feel It will help set you a better Job. |>ay for It on the eaay term, 
i-tven In the coupon. Otherwise return everything;, and you'll owe ua nothing. . 



Tlttt 5 -DAY EXAMINATION 



AUSTIN TECHNICAL INSTITUTE, Dir. O.A.I. *S9 Bread Btu Newgfk. N. J. 
Send the template 24- Manual Blueprint Reading Course iasluding the FREE beak 
" Mathematita Made Eaty" and th* FREE Slide Rule .» 1 «')'' FREE APPflOVAL. II I decide ta keep the csarie I will (emit tl-9S wllhlo 9 4 ay*, tad 
13 eaentbly tar ] aienlbi until the FULL PRICE al (7.95 It paid. Otlwrwllo I 
trill ralwa gverytbiai te yau. 

a A at I 

Aoaaiaa >•% 

env si at ( ( 

RCFiatMCC .» 

AObMESS 



no 



Space Ephtnte 

(Continued From Page 109) 
Steeling herself against the sudden chill of 
terror that was seeping through her, she 
forced herself to the inner door. She 
pressed the electric release, her hands, heavily swathed, clinging to the steel ring. The 
panel slid open slowly; a buzzing sound 
would be filling the cabin now, but she 
could not hear it. She could feel their eyes 
on her. With a magnetic clamp in readiness, she waited for the moment when the 
aperture would be wide enough. Then suddenly, pressing the button in reverse, she 
plunged through and was hurtled against 
the wall of the air lock. The magnetic 
clamp held ! 

Breathing a deep sigh of relief, Lida 
glanced around her. The inner door was 
shut already; this, then, was her final goodbye. There could be no returning to the 
cabin. She was conscious of a dull, throbbing pain in her arm. It was numb from 
the impact. Frantically, trying to save time, 
she worked it up and down until gradually 
life returned to it. Then she made her 
way to the ragged-edged gash in the hull. 
Nothing remained of the outer door. Clinging to a large metal splinter, she made a 
hurried survey. 

The path of the meteor and the damage it 
had done was clearly visible. It had 
ploughed a deep welt-like furrow in the 
side of the ship and piled melted metal and 
large chunks from the side over the nozzle 
ends. There were probably meteor fragments as well. But her job would be easy 
even so. Judicious blasting with the torch 
would take care of everything. Placing a 
heavily padded foot in the still glowing 
furrow, she detached a mignetic clamp from 
her belt. 

Space lay around her and, as she worked, 
she felt a nameless dread seep into her being. The face of the planet was directly 
above. Desperately, she tried not to look at 
it. Despite her efforts, she could not' help 
but glance upward at its looming immensity, 
cringing as she did so. It was so horribly 
large— falling on her. It seemed to be 
drawing her up, the way an electromagnet 
catches a piece of scrap-iron. And around 
her was space, space filled with pinpoints, 
billiard balls, and footballs of light. She 
knew she must not stop to look at them. 
They would charm away her senses and 
burn out her eyes. She knew this without 
ever having been told. There was a horror 
in space, not anything alive, but a dread 
that chilled and stole away one's life. 
(Continued On Page 112) 


(Continued From Page 111) 

Slowly, carefully, she made her way tip 
the side of (he ship, using her torch, when 
necessary, to clear obstructions. Finally she 
reached the nose, rested against the boldly 
painted nameplate Ares. A sense of the 
horrible irony of the situation struck her. 
If they had immediately fired the forward 
rockets when the meteor struck, the tremendous blast furnace would have melted the 
obstruction, for. she saw now, it was very 
slight. Given a chance to harden, however, it was a different story; to blast now, 
with it there, would blow out the tubes. 

She understood, now, why men who had 
faced all manner of Terrestrial dangers had 
become weak and helpless here. They had 
been fools, all of them, to come on this 
flight without conditioning — space was no 
place for humans unless they had been conditioned to it gradually. And they had 
thought themselves so clever in the way they 
bad evaded the requirements for a license. 

She pressed the signal button at her waist 
as the last trace of the obstruction was eaten 
away. An instant later, there was an answering flash in the small metal tube next 
to it; they bad been watching the control 
button. A single tear ran down her nose 
as she thought: "I hope they go to hell, 
damn them." 

Pulling her hand from the magnetic 
clamp, she straightened up stiffly, and, with 
a hard, quick push jumped clear of *the ship. 
It swerved suddenly and with dizzying violence knocked her clear of their rockets. 
She bad not considered the imminence of 
them before. The thought of being 
charred .... 

Earth loomed above her. She had not 
the acceleration of the ship. Soon it would 
leave her behind. She would float out here 
in an orbit of her own, a second moon. 
Perhaps a meteor would strike her some 
day; perhaps in the future space-voyagers 
would find her and bring her home. Soon, 
within an hour at the most, there would be 
no more air. But why wait hours? With a 
sudden movement, she threw open the helmet of her suit. 

The ship was gone now. Michael and 
Erik were safe. And something tenuous 
had clamped itself over her nose and mouth 
so that she could no longer breathe. For an 
instant she struggled, lungs bursting, as in 
the throes of a nightmare. Her thoughts 
cried out, "Michael! Michael!" 

The darkness gathered her in. 

