TYRANN By ISAAC ASIMOV 

TEDOR RIZZETT turned as 
Biron entered the pilot room 
again. His hair was gray, but 
his body was still vigorous and his 
face was broad, red, and smiling. 

He covered the distance between 
himself and Biron in a stride and 
seized the young man's hand heart.

"By the stars," he said, "I'd need 
no word from you to tell me that 
you are your father's son. It is the 
old Rancher alive again." 

"I wish it were," said Biron, 
somberly. 

Rizzett's smile faltered. "So do 
we all. Every one of us. I'm Tedor 
Rizzett, by the way. I'm a colonel in 
the regular Linganian forces, but 
we don't use titles in our own little 
game. We even say merely 'sir' to 
the Autarch. That reminds me." He 
looked grave. "We don't have 
Lords and Ladies or even Ranchers 
on Lingane. I hope I won't offend 
if I forget to throw in the proper 
title sometimes." 

Biron shrugged. "As you said, 
no titles in our little game. But 
what about the trailer? I'm to make 
arrangements with you, I take it." 

For a flickering moment, he 
looked across the room. Gillbret 
was seated, quietly listening. Artenisia had her back to him. Her slim, 
pale fingers wove an abstracted 
pattern on the photo-contacts of the 

TYRANN 



computer. Rizzett's voice brought 
him back. 

The Linganian had cast an allinclusive glance about the room. 
"First time I've ever seen a Tyrannian vessel from the inside. Don't 
care much for it. Now you've got 
the emergency airlock due astern, 
haven't you? It seems to me the 
power- thrusters girdle the mid-section." 

"That's right." 

"Good. Then there won't be any 
trouble. Some of the old model 
ships have power- thrusters due 
astern, so that trailers had to be set 
off at an angle. This makes the 
gravity adjustment difficult and the 
maneuverability in atmospheres just 
about nil." 

"How long will it take, Rizzett?" 

"Not long. How big would you 
want it?" 

"How big could you get it?" 

"Super-de-luxe? Sure. If the Autarch says so, there's no higher priority. We can get one that's 
practically a spaceship in itself. It 
would even have its own auxiliary 
motors." 

"It would have living quarters, 
I suppose." 

"For Miss Hinriad? It would be 
considerably better than you have 
here." 

At the mention of her name, Artemisia had drifted past coldly and 
slowly, moving out of the pilot 
room. Biron's eyes followed her. 

Rizzett said, "I guess I shouldn't 
have said Miss Hinriad." 

101 



"It's nothing. Pay no attention. 
You were saying?" 

"Oh, about the rooms. At least 
two sizable ones, with a communicating shower. It's got the usual 
closet room and plumbing arrangements of the big liners. She would 
be comfortable." 

"Good. We'll need food and water." 

"Sure. Water tank will hold a 
two months' supply; a little less if 
you want to arrange for a swimming pool aboard ship. And you 
would have frozen whole meats. 
You're eating Tyranni concentrate 
now, aren't you?" 

Biron nodded and Rizzett grimaced. "It tastes like chopped sawdust, doesn't it ? Want anything 
else?" 

"A supply of clothes for the 
lady," said -Biron. 

Rizzett wrinkled his forehead. 
"Yes, of course. Well, that will be 
her job." 

"It won't. We'll supply you with 
all necessary measurements, and you 
can supply us with whatever we ask 
for in whatever the current styles 
happen to be." 

Rizzett laughed shortly and shook 
his head. "Rancher, she won't like 
that. She wouldn't be satisfied with 
any clothes she didn't pick. Not 
even if they were the identical items 
she would have picked if she had 
been given- the chance. This isn't 
a guess, now. I've had experience 
with the creatures." 

Biron said, "I'm sure you're 



right, Rizzett, but that's the way it 
will have to be." 

"Well, don't say I didn't warn 
you. It will be your argument. 
What else?" 

"Little things. A supply of detergents. Oh, yes, and cosmetics, 
perfume, the things women need. 
We'll make the arrangements in 
time. Let's get the trailer started." 

And now Gillbret was leaving 
without speaking. Biron's eyes followed him, too, and he felt his jawmuscles tighten. Hinriads! Gillbret 
was one and she was another. 

He said, "And, of course, there'll 
be clothes for Mr. Hinriad and 
myself. They're not important." 

"Right! Mind if I use your 
radio? I'd" better stay on this ship 
till the adjustments are made." 

BIRON waited, while the orders went out. Then Rizzett 
turned on the seat and said, "I 
can't get used to seeing you here, 
moving, talking, alive. You're so 
like him. The Rancher used to 
speak about you every once in a 
while. You went to school on 
Earth, didn't you?" 

"I did. I would have graduated 
a little over a week ago, if things 
hadn't been interrupted." 

Rizzett looked uncomfortable. 
"Look, about your being sent to 
Rhodia the way you were. You 
mustn't hold it against us. We 
didn't like it. I mean, this is strictly between us, but some of the 
boys didn't like it at all. The Au


102 




 



tarch didn't consult us, of course. 
You couldn't expect him to. Frankly, it was a risk on his part. Some 
of us — I'm not mentioning names 
— even wondered if we shouldn't 
stop the liner you were on and 
take you off. Naturally, that would 
have been the worst thing we could 
possibly do. Still, we might have 
done it, excejjt that in the last 
analysis we knew the Autarch must 
know what he was doing." 

<<TT'S nice to be able to inspire 

X that kind of confidence." 

"We know him. There's no 
denying it, he's got it here." He 
slowly tapped his forehead. "Nobody knows exactly what makes 
him take a certain course sometimes, yet it always seems the right 
one. At least he's outsmarted the 
Tyranni so far and others don't." 

"Like my father, for instance." 

"I wasn't thinking of him, exactly, but, in a sense, you're right. 
Even the Rancher was caught. 
Well, he was a different kind of 
man. His way of thinking was 
straight. He would never allow for 
crookedness. He would always underestimate the worthlessness of 
the next man. But then again, that 
was what we liked best, somehow. 
He was the same to everyone. 

"I'm a commoner, for all I'm a 
colonel. My father was a metalworker, you see. It didn't make any 
difference to the Rancher. And it 
wasn't that I was a colonel, either. 
If he met the engineer's apprentice 



walking down the corridor, he'd 
step aside, and say a pleasant word 
or two, and, for the rest of the 
day, the apprentice would feel like 
a Master Engineman. It was the 
way the Rancher had. 

"Not that he was soft. If you 
needed disciplining, you got it, but 
no more than your share. What 
you got, you deserved, and you 
knew it. When he was through, he 
was through. He didn't keep throwing it at you at odd moments for 
a week or so. That was the 
Rancher. 

"Now the Autarch, he's different. He's pure brains. You can't 
get next to him, no matter who 
you are. For instance, he doesn't 
really have a sense of humor. I 
can't speak to him the way I'm 
speaking to you. Right now I'm 
just talking. I'm relaxed. It's almost free association. With him, 
you say exactly what's on your 
mind with no spare words. And 
you use formal phraseology, or 
he'll tell you you're slovenly. But 
then, the Autarch's the Autarch, 
and that's that." 

Biron said, "I'll have to agree 
with you as far as the Autarch's 
brains are concerned. Did you 
know that he had deduced my presence aboard this ship, before he 
ever got on?" 

"He did? We didn't know that. 
Now, there, that's what I mean. 
He was going to go aboard the 
Tyrannian cruiser alone. To us, it 
seemed suicide. We didn't like it. 



TYIANN 



103 



But we assumed he knew what he 
was doing, and he did. He could 
have told us you were probably 
aboard ship. He must have known 
it would be great news that the 
Rancher's son had escaped. But it's 
typical. He wouldn't." 

ARTEMISIA sat on one of the 
lower bunks in the cabin. She 
had to bend into an uncomfortable 
position to avoid having the frame 
of the second bunk pry into her 
first thoracic vertebra, but that was 
a small annoyance to her at the 
moment. 

Almost automatically, she kept 
passing the palms of her hand 
down the side of her dress. She 
felt frayed and dirty, and very 
tired. She was tired of dabbing at 
her hands and face with damp 
cloths. She was tired of wearing the 
same clothes for a week. She was 
tired of hair which felt dank and 
stringy by now. 

And then she was almost on her 
feet again, ready^ to turn about 
sharply. She wasn't going to see 
him. She wouldn't look at him. 

But it was only Gillbret. She 
sank down again. "Hello, Uncle 
Gil." 

Gillbret sat down opposite her. 
For a moment, his thin face 
seemed anxious and then it started 
wrinkling into a smile. "I think a 
week of this ship is very unamusing, too. I was hoping you could 
cheer me up." 

But she said, "Now, Uncle Gil, 



don't start using psychology on me. 
If you think you're going to cajole 
me into feeling a responsibility for 
you, you're wrong. I'm much more 
likely to hit you." 

"If it will make you feel 
better — " 

"I warn you again. If you hold 
out your face for me to hit, I'll do 
it, and if you say 'Does that make 
you feel better?' tu do it again." 

"In any case, it's obvious you've 
quarreled with Biron. What 
about?" 

"I don't see why there's any 
necessity for discussion. Just leave 
me alone. " Then, after a pause, 
"He thinks father did what the 
Autarch said he did. I hate him 
for that." 

"Your father?" 

"No! That stupid, childish, sanctimonious fool!" 

"Presumably Biron. Good. You 
hate him. You couldn't put a knifeedge between what you say is hate 
and what would seem to my 
bachelor mind to be a rather ridiculous excess of love." 

"Uncle Gil," she said, "could he 
really have done it?" 

"Biron? Done what?" 

"No! Father. Could father have 
informed against the Rancher?" 

Gillbret looked thoughtful and 
very sober. "I don't know." He 
looked at her out of the corner of 
his eyes. "He did give up Biron to 
the Tyranni." 

"Because he knew it was a 
trap," she said, vehemently. "And 



104 




 



it was. That horrible Autarch meant 
it as such. He said so. The Tyranni 
knew who Biron was and sent him 
to father on purpose. Father did 
the only thing he could do. That 
should be obvious to anybody." 

"Even if we accept that, he did 
try to argue you into a rather unamusing kind of marriage." 

She interrupted, "He had no 
way out there, either." 

"My dear, if you're going to excuse all that, how can you be sure 
he didn't betray the Rancher?" 

"Because I'm sure, that's why. 
You don't know father the way I 
do. He hates the Tyranni. He does. 
I admit that he's afraid of them 
and doesn't dare oppose them openly, but if he could avoid it somehow, he would never help them." 

"How do you know he could 
avoid it?" 

But she shook her head violently, so that her hair tumbled about 
and hid her eyes. It hid the tears 
a bit, too. 

Gillbret watched a moment, then 
spread his hands helplessly and 
left. 

THE trailer was joined to the 
Remorseless by a wasp-waist 
corridor attached to the emergency 
airlock in the rear of the ship. It 
was several dozen times larger than 
the Tyrannian vessel, almost humorously outsized. 

The Autarch joined Biron in a 
last inspection. He said, "Do you 
find anything lacking?" 



Biron said, "No. I think we'll 
be quite comfortable." 

"Good. And, by the way, Rizzett tells me the lady Artemisia is 
not well; or at least that she looks 
unwell. If she requires medical attention, it might be wise to send 
her to my ship." 

"She is quite well," said Biron, 
curtly. 

"If you say so. Would you be 
ready to leave in twelve hours?" 

"In two hours, if you wish." 

Biron passed through the connecting corridor — he had to stoop 
a little — into the Remorseless 
proper. 

He said with a careful lack of 
tone, "You've got a private suite 
back there, Artemisia. I won't 
bother you. I'll stay here most of 
the time." 

She replied coldly, "You don't 
bother me, Rancher. It doesn't matter to me where you are." 

And then the ships blasted off 
and after a single Jump found 
themselves at the edge of the Nebula. They waited for a few hours 
while the final calculations were 
made on Jonti's ship. Inside the 
Nebula, it would be almost blind 
navigation. 

Biron stared glumly at the visiplate. There was nothing there ! 
One entire half of the celestial 
sphere was taken up with blackness, unrelieved by a spark of light. 
For the first time, Biron realized 
how warm and friendly the stars 
were, how they filled space. 



TYRANN 



105 



"It's like dropping through a 
hole in space," he muttered to Gillbret. 

And then they Jumped again, 
this time into the Nebula. 

Almost simultaneously, Simok 
Aratap, Commissioner of the Great 
Khan, at the head of ten armed 
cruisers, listened to his navigator 
and said, "That doesn't matter. 
Follow them anyway." 

And not one light year from the 
point at which the Remorseless entered the Nebula, ten Tyranni 
vessels did likewise. 

CHAPTER XVI 

Hounds! 

SIMOK ARATAP was a little 
uncomfortable in his uniform. 
Tyranni uniforms are made of moderately coarse materials and fit only 
indifferently well. It is not soldierlike to complain of such inconveniences. In fact, it is part of the 
Tyranni military tradition that a 
little discomfort on the part of the 
soldier is good for discipline. 

But still Aratap could bring himself to rebel against that tradition 
to the extent of saying, ruefully, 
"The tight collar irritates my 
neck." 

Major Andros, whose collar was 
as tight and who had been seen in 
no other than military dress in the 
memory of living man, said, 
"When alone, it would be quite 
within regulations to open it. Be


fore any of the officers or men, 
any deviation from regulation dress 
would be a disturbing influence." 

Aratap sniffed. It wis the second 
change induced by the quasi-military nature of the expedition. In 
addition to being forced into uniform, he had to listen to an increasingly self-assertive military aide. 
That had begun even before they 
left Rhodia. 

Andros had put it to him baldly. 
He had said, "Commissioner, we 
will need ten ships." 

Aratap had looked up, definitely 
annoyed. At the moment, he was 
deciding to follow the young 
Widemos in a single vessel. He 
laid aside the capsules in which he 
was preparing his report for the 
Khan's Colonial Bureau, to be forwarded in the unhappy case that 
he did not return from the expedition. 

"Ten ships, Major?" 

"Yes, sir. Less will not do." 

"Why not?" 

"I intend to maintain a reasonable security. The young man is 
going somewhere. You say there 
is a well-developed conspiracy in 
existence. Presumably, the two fit 
together." 

"And therefore?" 

"We must be prepared for a * 
possibly well-developed conspiracy. 
One that might be able to overcome a single ship." 

"Or ten. Or a hundred. Where 
docs security cease?" 

"One must make a decision. In 



106 




 



cases of military action, it is my 
responsibility. I suggest ten." 

Aratap's contact lenses gleamed 
unnaturally in the wall-light as he 
raised his eyebrows. The military 
carried weight. Theoretically, in 
times of peace, the civilian made 
the decisions, but, here again, military tradition was a difficult tiling 
to set aside. 

HE SAID, cautiously, "I will 
consider the matter." 
"Thank you. If you do not 
choose to accept my recommendations, and my suggestions have only 
been advanced as such, I assure you, 
that would be your privilege. You 
would leave me, however, no choice 
but to resign my commission." 

It was up to Aratap to retrieve 
what he could from that position. 
He said, "It is not my intention to 
hamper you in any decision you 
may make on a purely military 
question. Major. I wonder if you 
might be as amenable to my decisions in matters of purely political importance." 

"What matters are these?" 
"There is the problem of Hinrik. You objected yesterday to my 
suggestion that he accompany us." 

The Major said, dryly, "I consider it unnecessary. With our 
forces in action, the presence of 
outlanders would be bad for morale." 

Aratap sighed softly, just below 
the limits of hearing. Yet Andros 
was a competent man in his way. 



There would be no use in displaying impatience. 

He said, "Again, I agree with 
you. I merely ask you to consider 
the political aspects of the situation. 
As you know, the execution of the 
old Rancher of Widemos was politically uncomfortable. It stirred 
up the Kingdoms unnecessarily. 
However necessary the execution 
was, it makes it desirable to refrain 
from having the death of the son 
attributed to us. As far as the people of Rhodia know, the young 
Widemos has kidnaped the daughter of the Director— the girl, by 
the way, being a popular and much 
publicized member of the Hinriads. It would be quite fitting, 
quite understandable, to have the 
Director head the punitive expedition. 

"It would be a dramatic move, 
very gratifying to Rhodian patriotism. Naturally, he would ask for 
Tyranni assistance, and receive it, 
but that can be played down. It 
would be easy, and necessary, to 
fix this expedition in the popular 
mind as a Rhodian one. If the 
inner workings of the conspiracy 
are uncovered, it will have been a 
Rhodian discovery. If the young 
Widemos is executed, it would be 
a Rhodian execution, as far as the 
other Kingdoms are concerned." 

The Major said, "It would still 
be a bad precedent to allow Rhodian vessels to accompany a Tyranni military expedition. They 
would hamper us in a fight. In 



TYRANN 



107 



that way, the question becomes a 
military one." 

"I did .lot say, my dear Major, 
that Hinrik would command a 
ship. Surely, you know him better 
than to think him capable of commanding or even anxious to try. He 
will stay with us. There will be no 
other Rhodian aboard ship." 

"In that case, I waive my objection, Commissioner," said the 
Major. 

THE Tyranni fleet had maintained their position two light 
years off Lingane for the better part 
of a week and the situation was 
becoming increasingly unstable. 

Major Andros advocated an immediate landing on Lingane. "The 
Autarch of Lingane," he said, "has 
gone to considerable lengths to 
have us think him a friend of the 
Khan, but I do not trust these men 
who travel abroad. They gain unsettling notions. It is strange that 
just as he returns, the young Widemos travels to meet him." 

"He has not tried to hide cither 
his travels or his return, Major. 
And we do not know that Widemos 
goes to meet him. He maintains an 
orbit about Lingane. Why does he 
not land?" 

"Why. docs he maintain an orbit? Let us question what he does 
and not what he does not do." 

"I can propose something which 
will fit the pattern." 

"I would be glad to hear it." 
Aratap placed a .finger inside his 




collar and tried futilely to stretch 
it. He said, "Since the young man 
is waiting, we can presume he is 
waiting for something or somebody. It would be ridiculous to 
think that, having gone to Lingane 
by so direct and rapid a route — a 
single Jump, in fact — that he is 
merely waiting out of indecision. I 
say, then, that he is waiting for a 
friend or friends to reach him. Thus 
reinforced, he will proceed elsewhere. The fact that he is not landing on Lingane directly would 
indicate that he does not consider 
such an action safe. That .would 
indicate that Lingane in general 




 



m 

WA 


f 


m 


! 





and the Autarch in particular are 
not concerned in the conspiracy, 
although individual Linganians may 
be." 

"I don't know if we can always 
trust the obvious solution to be the 
correct one." 

"My dear Major, this is not an 
obvious solution, merely. It is a 
logical one. It fits a pattern." 

"Maybe it does. But just the 
same, if there are no further developments in twenty-four hours, I 
will have no choice but to order 
an advance on Lingane." 

Aratap frowned at the door 
through which the Major had left. 

TYRANN 



It was disturbing to have to control at once the restless conquered 
and the short-sighted conquerors. 
Twenty-four hours. Something 
must happen; otherwise he might 
have to find some way of stopping 
Andros. 

The door signal sounded, and 
Aratap looked up with irritation. 
Surely it could not be Andros returning. It wasn't. The tall, stooped 
form of Hinrik of Rhodia was in 
the doorway, behind him a glimpse 
of the guard who accompanied him 
everywhere on the ship. Theoretically, Hinrik had complete freedom of movement. He himself 
probably thought he had. At least, 
lie never paid any attention to the 
guard at his elbow. 

Hinrik smiled mistily. "Am I 
disturbing you, Commissioner?" 

"Not at all. Take a seat, Director." Aratap remained standing. 
Hinrik seemed not to notice that. 

Hinrik said, "I have something 
of importance to discuss with you." 
He paused, and some of the intentness passed out of his eyes. He 
added in quite a different tone, 
"What a large, fine ship this is." 

"Thank you, Director." Aratap 
smiled tightly. The nine accompanying ships were typically minute 
in size, but the flagship on which 
they stood was an outsize model 
adapted from the designs of the 
defunct Rhodian navy. It was perhaps the first sign of the gradual 
softening of the Tyranni military 
spirit that more and more of such 

109 



ships were being added to the 
navy. The fighting unit was still 
the tiny two to three man cruiser, 
but, increasingly, the top brass 
found reasons for requiring large 
ships for their own headquarters. 

It did not bother Aratap. To 
some of the older soldiers this softness appeared to be degeneration; 
to himself it seemed increasing civilization. In the end, in centuries 
perhaps, it might even happen that 
the Tyranni would nielt away as a 
single people, fusing with the present conquered societies of the Nebular Kingdoms — and perhaps even 
that might be a good thing. 

Naturally, Aratap never expressed such an opinion aloud. 

"I came to tell you something," 
said Hinrik. He puzzled over it a 
while, then added, "I have sent a 
message home today to my people. 
I have told them I am well and 
that the criminal will be shortly 
seized and my daughter returned 
to safety." 

"Good," said Aratap. It was not 
news to him. He himself had written the message, though it was 
not impossible that Hinrik by now 
had persuaded himself that he was 
the writer, or even that he actually 
headed the expedition. Aratap felt 
a twinge of pity. The man was disintegrating visibly. 

Hinrik said, "My people, I am 
sure, are quite disturbed over this 
daring raid upon the Palace by these 
well -organized bandits. I think they 
will be proud of their Director now 



that I have taken such rapid action 
in response. Eh, Commissioner? 
They will see that there is still 
force among the Hinriads." He 
seemed filled with a feeble triumph. 

"I think they will," said Aratap. 

"Are we within range of the enemy yet?" 

"No, Director. The enemy remains where he is, just off Lingane." 

"Still? I remember what I came 
to tell you." He grew excited so 
that the words tumbled out. "It is 
very important, Commissioner. I 
have discovered it. We must take 
quick action. Treachery — " He was 
whispering. 

ARATAP felt impatient. It was 
necessary to humor the poor 
idiot, of cou rse, but thi s was a 
waste of time. At this rate, he 
would become so obviously mad 
that he would be useless even as 
a puppet, which would be a nuisance. 

He said, "No treachery, Director. 
Our men are staunch and true. 
Someone has been misleading you. 
You are tired." 

"No, no." Hinrik put aside Aratap's arm which, for a moment, had 
rested upon his shoulder. "Where 
are we?" 

"Why, here!" 

"The ship^I mean. I have watched the visiplate. We are near no 
star. We are in deep space. Did 
you know that?" 

"Why, certainly." 



no 




 



"Lingane is nowhere near. Did 
you know that?" 

"It is two light years off." 

"Ah ! Commissioner, no one is 
listening? Are you sure?" He 
leaned closely, while Aratap allowed his ear to be approached. 
"Then how do we know the enemy 
is near Lingane? He is too far to 
detect. We are being misinformed, 
and this signifies treachery." 

WELL, the man might be mad, 
but the point was a good one. 
Aratap said, "This is something 
for technical men, Director; and not 
for men of rank to concern themselves with." 

"But as head of the expedition I 
should know. I am head, am I 
not?" He looked about carefully. 
"Actually, I have a feeling that Major Andros does not always carry 
out my orders. Is he trustworthy? 
Of course, I rarely give him orders. 
It would seem strange to order a 
Tyrannian officer. But then, I must 
find my daughter. My daughter's 
name is Artemisia. She has been 
stolen from mc, and I am taking all 
this fleet to get her back. So you 
see, I must know. I mean, I must 
know how it is known the enemy 
is at Lingane. My daughter would 
be there, too. Do you know my 
daughter? Her name is Artemisia." 

His eyes looked up at the Tyrannian Commissioner in appeal. Then 
he covered them with his hand and 
mumbled something that sounded 
like, "I'm sorry." 



Aratap felt his jaw-muscles 
clench. It was difficult to remember 
that the man bef ore him was a 
bereaved father and that even the 
idiot Director of Rhodia might 
have a father's feelings. He could 
not let the man suffer. 

He said, gently, "I will try to 
explain. You know there is such a 
thing as a massometer which will 
detect ships in space." 

"Yes, yes." 

"It is sensitive to gravitational 
effects. You know what I mean ?" 

"Oh, yes. Everything has gravity." Hinrik was leaning toward 
Aratap, his hands gripping each 
other nervously. 

"That's good enough. Now naturally the massometer can only be 
used when the ship is close. Less 
than a million miles away or so. 
Also it has to be a reasonable distance from any planet, because if 
it isn't, all you can detect is the 
planet, which is much bigger." 

"And has much more gravity." 

"Exactly," said Aratap, and Hinrik looked pleased. "We Tyranni 
have another device. It is a transmitter which radiates through hypcrspace in all directions, and what 
it radiates is a particular type of 
distortion of the space fabric which 
is not electromagnetic in character. 
In other words, it isn't like light or 
radio or even sub-ctheric radio. Do 
you see?" 

Hinrik didn't answer. He looked 
confused. 

Aratap proceeded quickly. "Well, 



TYRANN 



111 



it's different; it doesn't matter how. 
We can detect that something is 
radiated so that we can always know 
where any Tyrannian ship is, even 
if it's halfway across the Galaxy, or 
on the other side of a star." 

Hinrik nodded solemnly, looking 
vaguely impressed. 

"Now," said Aratap, "if the 
young Widemos had escaped in an 
ordinary ship, it would have been 
very difficult to locate him. As it is, 
since he took a Tyrannian cruiser, 
we know where he is at all times, 
although he doesn't realize that. 
That is how we know he is near 
Lingane, you see. And what's more, 
he can't get away, so that we will 
certainly rescue your daughter." 

HINRIK smiled. "Why, that is 
wonderful, Commissioner. A 
very clever ruse." 

Aratap did not delude himself. 
Hinrik understood very little of 
what he had said, but that did not 
matter. It had ended with the assurance of his daughter's rescue, 
and somewhere in Hinrik's dim understanding there must be the realization that this, somehow, was made 
possible by Tyranni science. 

He told himself that he had not 
gone to this trouble entirely because 
the Rhodian appealed to his sense 
of the pathetic. He had to keep the 
man from breaking down altogether 
for obvious political reasons. Perhaps the return of his daughter 
would improve matters. He hoped 
so. 



There was a sharp door signal 
again and this time it was Major 
Andros who entered. Hinrik's arm 
stiffened on the arm-rest of his chair 
and his face assumed a hunted expression. He lifted himself and began, "Major Andros — " 

But Andros was already speaking 
quickly, disregarding the Rhodian. 
"Commissioner, the. Remorse/ess has 
changed position." 

"Surely he has not landed on 
Lingane," said Aratap, sharply. 

"No," said the Major. "He has 
Jumped away from Lingane." 

"Good. He has been joined by 
another ship, perhaps?" 

"By many ships, perhaps. We can 
detect only his, as you are quite 
aware.'.' 

"In any case, we follow again." 

"The order has already been 
given. I would merely like to point 
out that his Jump has taken him 
to the edge of the Horsehead Nebula." 

"What?" 

"No major planetary system 
exists in the ind icated di rection . 
There is only one logical conclusion." 

Aratap moistened his lips and 
left hurriedly for the pilot room, 
the Major with him. 

Hinrik remained standing in the 
middle of the suddenly empty room, 
looking at the door for a minute or 
so. Then, with a little shrug of the 
shoulders, he sat down again. His 
expression was blank. For a long 
while, he simply sat. 



112 




 



THE navigator said, "The space 
coordinates of the Remorseless 
have been checked, sir. They are 
definitely inside the Nebula." 

"That doesn't matter," said Aratap. 1 ' Fol low them an yway. ' ' He 
turned to Major Andros. "So you 
see the virtues of waiting. There is 
a good deal that is obvious now. 
Where else could the conspirator's 
headquarters be but in the Nebula 
itself? Where else could we have 
failed to locate them? A very pretty 
pattern." 

And so the squadron entered the 
Nebula. 

For the twentieth time, Aratap 
glanced automatically at the visiplate. Actually, the glances were 
useless since the visiplatc remained 
quite black. There was no star in 
sight. 

Andros said, "That's their third 
stop without landing. I don't understand it. What is their purpose? 
What are they after? Each stop of 
theirs is several days long. Yet they 
do not land." 

"It may take them so long," said 
Aratap, "to calculate their next 
Jump. Visibility is non-existent." 

"You think so?" 

"No. Their Jumps are too good. 
Each time they land very near a 
star. They couldn't do as well by 
massometcr data alone, unless they 
actually knew the locations of the 
stars in advance." 

"Then why don't they land?" 

"I think," said Aratap, "they 
must be looking for habitable plan


ets. Maybe they, themselves, do not 
know the location of the center of 
conspiraq 1 . Or, at least, not entirely." He smiled. "We need only follow." 




IHE navigator clicked heels. 
"Sir!" 



"Yes?" Aratap looked up. 
"The enemy has landed on a 
planet." 

Aratap signaled for Major Andros. 

"Andros," said Aratap, as the 
Major entered, "have you been 
told?" 

"Yes. I've ordered a descent and 
pursuit." 

"Wait. You may be again premature, as when you wanted a 
lunge toward Lingane. I think only 
this ship ought to go." 

"Your reasoning?" 

"If we need reinforcements, you 
will be there, in command of the 
cruisers. If it is indeed a powerful 
rebel center, they may think only 
one ship has stumbled upon them. 
I will get word to you somehow 
and you can retire to Tyrann." 

"Retire !" 

"And return with a full fleet." 

Andros considered. "Very well. 
This is our least useful ship in any 
case. Too large." 

The planet filled the visiplate as 
they spiraled down. 

"The surface seems quite barren, 
sir," said the navigator. 

"Have you determined the exact 
location of the Remorseless?" 



TYRANN 



113 



"Yes, sir." 

"Then land as closely as you can 
without being sighted." 

They were entering the atmosphere now. The sky, as they flashed 
along the day-half of the planet, 
was tinged with a brightening purple. Aratap watched the nearing 
surface. The long chase was almost 
over I 

CHAPTER XVII 
And Hares! 

TO THOSE who have not actually been in space, the investigation of a stellar system and the 
search for habitable planets may 
seem rather exciting; at the least, 
interesting. To the spaceman, it is 
the most boring of jobs. 

The location of a star, which is 
a huge glowing mass of hydrogen 
fusing into helium, is almost unavoidable. It advertises itself. Even 
in the blackness of the Nebula, it 
is only a question of distance. Approach within five billion miles and 
it will still advertise itself. 

But a planet, a relatively small 
mass of rock, shining only by reflected light, is another matter. One 
could pass through a stellar system 
a hundred thousand times at all 
sorts of odd angles without" ever 
coming close enough to a planet to 
see it for what it is, barring the 
oddest of coincidences. 

Hence, one adopts a system. A 
position is taken up in space, at a 



distance from the star being investigated, of some ten thousand times 
the star's diameter. From Galactic 
statistics it is known that not one 
time in fifty thousand is a planet 
located farther from its primary 
than that. Furthermore, practically 
never is a habitable planet removed 
from its primary more than one 
thousand times its sun's diameter. 

This means that from the position in space assumed by the ship, 
any habitable planet must be located within six degrees of the 
star. This, represents an area only 
1/ 3600th of the entire sky. That 
area can be handled in detail with 
relatively few observations. 

The movement of the tele-camera 
can be so adjusted as to counteract 
the motion of the ship in its orbit. 
Under those conditions, a time exposure will pinpoint the constellations in the star's neighborhood; 
provided, of course, that the blaze 
of the sun itself is blocked out, 
which is easily done. Planets, however, will have perceptible proper 
motions and therefore show up as 
tiny streaks on the film. 

When no streaks appear, there is 
always the possibility that the 
planets are behind their primary. 
The maneuver is therefore repeated 
from another position in space and, 
usually, at a point closer to the star. 

It is a very dull procedure indeed, and when it has been repeated three times for three different stars, each time with completely negative results, a certain 



114 




 



depression of morale is bound to 
occur. 

GILLBRET'S morale, for instance, had been suffering for 
quite a while. Longer and longer 
intervals took place between the 
moments when he found something "amusing." 

They were readying for the 
Jump to the fourth star on the 
Autarch's list, and Biron said, "We 
hit a star each time, anyway. At 
least, Jonti's figures arc correct." 

Gillbret said, "Statistics show 
that one out of three stars have 
planetary systems." 

Biron nodded. It was a wellworn statistic. Every child was 
taught that in elementary Galactography. 

Gillbret went on, "That means 
that the chances of finding three 
stars at random without a single 
planet — without one single planet 
— is two-thirds cubed, which is 
eight twenty-sevenths, or less than 
one in three." 

"So?" 

"And we haven't found any. 
There must be a mistake." 

"You saw the plates yourself. 
And besides, what price statistics? 
For all we know, conditions are 
different inside a Nebula. Maybe 
the particle-fog prevents planets 
from forming, or maybe the fog is 
the result of planets that didn't 
coalesce." 

"You mean that?" said Gillbret, 
stricken. 



"You're right. I'm just talking 
to hear myself. I don't know anything about cosmogony. Why the 
hell are planets formed anyway? 
Never heard of one that wasn't 
filled with trouble." Biron looked 
haggard himself. He w r as still printing and pasting up little stickers on 
the control panels. 

He said, "Anyway, we've got the 
blasters all worked out; range-finders, power-control, all that." 

It was very difficult not to look 
at the visiplate. They'd be Jumping 
again soon, through that ink. 

Biron said, absently, "You know 
why they call it the Horsehead Nebula, Gil?" 

"The first man to enter it was 
Horace Hedd. Are you going to 
tell me that's wrong?" 

"It may be. They have a different explanation on Earth." 

"Oh?" 

"They claim it's called that because it looks like a horse's head." 

"What's a horse?" 

"It's an extinct animal on 
Earth." 

"It's an amusing thought, but 
the Nebula doesn't look like any 
animal to me, Biron." 

"It depends on the angle you 
look at it. Now from Nephelos, it 
looks like a man's arm with three 
fingers, but I looked at it once from 
the observatory at the University 
of Earth. It does look a little like 
some creature's head. Maybe that is 
how the name started. Maybe there 
never was any Horace Hedd. Who 



TYRANN 



115 



knows?*" Biron felt bored with the 
matter, already. He was still talking simply to hear himself talk. 

THERE was a pause; that lasted 
too long, because it gave Gillbret a chance to bring up a subject 
which Biron did not wish to discuss and could not force himself 
to stop thinking about. 

Gillbret said f "Where's Arta?" 
Biron looked at him quickly, and 
said, "Somewhere in the trailer. I 
don't follow her about." 

"The Autarch does. He might as 
well be living here." 
"Lucky for her." 
Gillbret's wrinkles became more 
pronounced and his small features 
seemed to screw together. "Oh, 
don't be a fool, Biron. Arfemisia 
is a Hinriad. She can't take what 
you've been giving her." 
Biron said, "Drop it." 
"I won't. I've been spoiling to 
say this. Why are you doing this 
to her? Because Hinrik might have 
been responsible for your father's 
death ? Hinrik is my cousin ! You 
haven't changed toward me." 

"All right," Biron said, "I 
haven't changed toward you. I speak 
to you as I always have. I speak to 
Artemisia as well." 
"As you always have?" 
Biron was silent. 
Gillbret said, "You're throwing 
her at the Autarch." 
"It's her choice." 
"It isn't. It's your choice. Listen, 
Biron." Gillbret put a hand on 



Biron's knee. "This isn't a thing I 
like to interfere with, you understand. It's just that she's the only 
good thing in the Hinriad family 
just now. Would you be amused if 
I said I loved her? I have no children of my own." 

"I don't question your love." 

"Then I advise you for her good. 
Stop the Autarch, Biron." 

"I thought you trusted him." 

"As the Autarch, yes. As an antiTyranni leader, yes. But as a man 
for a woman, as a man for Artemisia, no." 

"Tell her that." 

"She wouldn't listen." 

"Do you think she would if I 
told her?" 

"If you told her properly," 

For a moment, Biron seemed to 
hesitate, his tongue dabbing slightly at dry lips. Then he turned 
away, saying harshly, "I don't want 
to talk about it." 

Gillbret said, sadly, "You'll regret this." 

Biron said nothing. Why didn't 
Gillbret leave him alone? It had 
occurred to him many times that 
he might regret all this. But what 
could he do? There was no easy 
way of backing out. 

BIRON had set the controls in 
accordance with the instructions from the Autarch's pilot, and 
left the manuals to Gillbret. He 
was going to sleep through this 
Jump. And then Gillbret was shaking his shoulder. 




 



"Biron! Biron!" 

Biron rolled over in his bunk, 
and out, landing in a crouch, fists 
balled. "What is it?" 

Gillbret stepped back hastily. 
"Now, take it easy. We've got an 
F-2 this time." 

It sank in. Biron drew a deep 
breath, and relaxed. "Don't ever 
wake me that way, Gillbret. An 
F-2, you say? I suppose you're referring to the new star." 

"I surely am. It looks most 
amusing, I think." 

In a way, it did. Approximately 
95% of habitable planets in the 
Galaxy circled stars of spectral 
types F or G; diameter from 750 to 
1500 thousand miles, surface temperature from rive to ten thousand 
centigrade. Earth's sun was G-0, 
Rhodia's F-8, Lingane's G-2, as was 
that of Nephelos. F-2 was a little 
warm, but not too warm. 

The first three stars they had 
stopped at were of spectral type K, 
rather small and ruddy. Planets 
would probably not have been noteworthy even if they had had any. 

A good star is a good star ! In 
the first day of photography, five 
planets were located, the nearest 
being one hundred fifty millions 
of miles from the primary. 

Tedor Rizzett brought the news 
personally. He visited the Remorseless as frequently as the Autarch, 
lighting the ship with his heartiness. He was whoofing and panting 
this time from the hand-over-hand 
exercise along the metal line. 



He said, "I don't know how the 
Autarch does it. He never seems 
to mind. Comes from being younger, I guess." He added, abruptly, 
"Five planets!" 

Gillbret said, "For this star ? 
You're sure?" 

"It's definite. Four of them are 
J-type, though." 

"And the fifth?"' 

"The fifth may be all right. Oxygen in the atmosphere, anyway." 

GILLBRET set up a thin yell of 
triumph, but Biron said, "Four 
are J-type. Oh, well, we only need 
one." 

He realized it was a reasonable 
distribution. The large majority of 
sizable planets in the Galaxy possessed hydrogenated atmospheres. 
After all, stars are mostly hydrogen and they are the source material of planetary building blocks. 
J-type planets had atmospheres of 
methane or ammonia with molecular hydrogen in addition sometimes, 
also considerable helium. Such atmospheres were usually deep and 
extremely dense. The planets themselves were almost invariably thirty 
thousand miles in diameter and up, 
with a mean temperature of rarely 
more than fifty below zero, centigrade. They were cjuite uninhabitable. 

Back on Earth, they used to tell 
him that these planets were called 
J-type because the J stood for Jupiter, the planet in Earth's solar system which was the best example of 



TYRANN 



117 



the type. Maybe they were right. 
Certainly, the other planet-classification was the E-type, and E did 
stand for Earth. E- types were usually small, comparatively, and their 
weaker gravity could not retain 
hydrogen or the hydrogen-containing gases, particularly since they 
were usually closer to the sun and 
warmer. Their atmospheres were 
thin and contained oxygen and 
nitrogen usually, with, occasionally, 
an admixture of chlorine. 

"How well have they gone over 
the atmosphere?" asked Biron. 

Rizzett shrugged, "We can only 
judge the upper reaches from out 
in space. If there were any chlorine, it would concentrate toward 
ground-level. We'll see." 

He clapped a hand on Biron's 
large shoulder. "How about inviting me to a small drink in your 
room, boy?" 

Gillbret looked after them uneasily. With the Autarch courting 
Artemisia, and his right-hand man 
becoming a drinking companion of 
Biron's, the Remorseless was becoming more Linganian than not. He 
wondered if Biron knew what he 
was doing, then thought of the 
new planet and let the rest go. 

ARTEMISIA was in the pilot 
room when they penetrated 
the atmosphere. There was a little 
smile on her face and she seemed 
quite contented. Biron looked in 
her direction occasionally. He had 
said, "Good day, Artemisia," when 



she came in — she hardly ever did 
come in; he had been caught by 
surprise — but she hadn't answered. 

She had merely said, "Uncle 
Gil," very brightly; then, "Is it 
true we're landing?" 

Gil had rubbed his hands. "It 
seems so, my dear. We may be getting out of the ship in a few hours, 
walking on solid surface. How's 
that for an amusing thought?" 

"I hope it's the right planet. If 
it isn't, it won't be so amusing." 

"There's still another star," said 
Gil, but his brow furrowed. 

And then Artemisia turned to 
Biron and said, frigidly, "Did you 
speak, Mr. Farrill?" 

Biron, caught by surprise again, 
started and said, "No, not really." 

"I beg your pardon, then. I 
thought you had." 

She passed by him so closely that 
the plastic flair of her dress brushed 
his knee and her perfume, momentarily, surrounded him. 

Rizzett was still with them; one 
of the advantages of the trailer was 
that they could put a guest up overnight. He said, "They're getting 
details on the atmosphere now. 
Lots of oxygen, almost 30^, and 
nitrogen and inert gases. It's quite 
normal. No chlorine." Then he 
stopped and went "Hmm." 

Gillbret said, "What's the matter?" 

"No carbon dioxide. That's not 
so good." 

"Why not?" demanded Artemisia from her vantage-point near 




 



the visiplate, where she watched 
the distant surface of the planet 
blur past at two thousand miles an 
hour. 

Biron said, curtly, "No carbon 
dioxide, no plant life." 

"Oh?" She looked at him, and 
smiled warmly. 

Biron, against his will, smiled 
back, and somehow, with scarcely 
a visible change in her countenance, 
she was smiling through him, past 
him, obviously unaware of his existence; and he was left there, 
caught in a foolish smile. He let it 
fade. 

It was just as well he avoided 
her. Certainly, when he was with 
her, he couldn't keep it up. When 
he could actually see her, the anesthetic of his will didn't work. It 
began hurting. 

GILLBRET was doleful. They 
were coasting now. In the 
thick lower reaches of the atmosphere, the Remorseless with its 
aerodynamically undesirable addition of a trailer was difficult to 
handle. 

Biron fought the bucking controls stubbornly. 

He said, "Cheer up, Gil!" 

He felt not exactly jubilant himself. Radio signals had brought no 
response as yet, and if this were not 
the "rebellion world," there would 
be no point in waiting longer. His 
line of action was set. 

Gillbret said, "It's rocky and 
dead, and not much water, either."' 



He turned. "Did they try for carbon dioxide again, Rizzett?" 

Rizzett's ruddy face was long. 
"Yes. Just a trace. About a thousandth of a per cent or so." 

Biron said, "You can't tell. They 
might pick a world like this, just 
because it would look so hopeless." 

"But I saw farms," said Gillbret. 

"How much do you suppose we 
can see of a planet this size by 
circling it a few times? You know 
damn well, Gil, that whoever they 
are, they can't have enough people 
to fill a whole planet. They may 
have picked themselves a valley 
somewhere where the carbon dioxide of the air has been built up, 
say, by volcanic action and where 
there's plenty of nearby water. We 
could whizz within twenty miles of 
them, and never know it. Naturally, they wouldn't be ready to 
answer radio calls without considerable investigation." 

"You can't build up a concentration of carbon dioxide that easily," 
muttered Gillbret. But he watched 
the visiplate intently. 

Biron suddenly hoped that it 
was the wrong world. He decided 
that he could wait no longer. It 
would have to be settled, now! 

IT WAS a queer feeling. 
The artificial lights had been 
turned off and sunlight was coming 
in unhindered at the ports. Actually, it was the less efficient method 
of lighting the ship, but there was 
a sudden desirable novelty to it. 



TYRANN 



119 



The ports were open, in fact, and 
the native atmosphere could be 
breathed. 

Rizzett advised against it on the 
grounds that lack of carbon dioxide would upset the respiratory 
regulation of the body, but Biron 
thought it might be bearable for a 
short time. 

GiUbret had come upon them, 
heads together. They looked up, 
and leaned away from one another. 

Gillbret laughed. Then he looked 
out of the open port, sighed, and 
said, "Rocks!" 

Biron said, mildly, "We're going to set up a radio transmitter at 
the top of the high ground. We'll 
get more range that way. We ought 
to be able to contact all of this 
hemisphere at any rate. And if it's 
negative, we can try the other side 
of the planet." 

"Is that what you and Rizzett 
were discussing?" 

"Exactly. The Autarch and I 
will do the job. It's his suggestion, 
which is fortunate, since otherwise 
I would have had to make the same 
suggestion myself." He looked 
fleetingly at Rizzett as he spoke. 
Rizzett was expressionless. 

Biron stood up. "J think it would 
be best if I unzipped my spacesuit lining and wore that." 

Rizzett was in agreement. It was 
sunny on this planet; little water vapor in the air, no clouds; but it 
was briskly cold. 

The Autarch was at the main 
lock of the Remorseless,. His over


coat was of thin foamite that 
weighed a fraction of an ounce, yet 
did a near-perfect job of insulation. 
A small carbon dioxide cylinder 
was strapped to his chest, adjusted 
to a slow leak that would maintain 
a perceptible. C0 2 vapor tension in 
his immediate vicinity. 

He said, "Would you care to 
search me, Farrill?" He raised his 
hands and waited, his lean face 
quietly amused. 

"No," said Biron. "Do you want 
to check me for weapons?" 

"I wouldn't think of it." 

The courtesies were as frigid as 
the weather. 

BIRON stepped out into the sunlight and tugged at his handle 
of the two-handled suitcase in 
which the radio equipment was 
stowed. The Autarch caught the 
other. 

"Not too heavy," said Biron. He 
turned, and Artemisia was standing 
just within the ship, silent. 

Her dress was a smooth, unfigured white which folded in a 
smooth drape that fled before the 
wind. The semi-transparent sleeves 
whipped back against her arms, 
turning them to silver. 

For a moment, Biron melted dangerously. He wanted to return 
quickly; to run, leap into the ship, 
grasp her so that his fingers would 
leave bruises on her shoulders; feel 
his lips meet hers — 

But he n od d ed bri efly i n s tea d ; 
her returning smile and the light 



120 




 



flutter of her fingers were for the 
Autarch. 

Five minutes later he turned and 
there was still that glimmer of 
white at the open door, and then 
the rise in the ground cut off the 
view of the ship. The horizon was 
free of anything but broken and 
bare rock now. 

Biron thought of what lay ahead, 
and wondered if he would ever see 
Artemisia again — and if she would 
care if he never returned. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

Out of the Jaws 

ARTEMISIA watched them as 
they became tiny figures trudging up the bare granite, then dipping below and out of sight. For 
8 moment, just before they disappeared, one of them had turned. 
She couldn't be sure which one, and, 
for a moment, her heart hardened. 

She said, peevishly, "Uncle Gil, 
why don't you close the ports? It's 
enough to freeze a person to death," 
The thermometer dial read plus 
seven Centigrade with the ship's 
heaters on high. 

"My dear Arta," said Gillbret, 
mildly, "if you will persist in your 
ridiculous habit of wearing nothing 
but a little fog here and there, you 
must expect to be cold." But he 
closed contacts, and, with little 
clicks, the airlock slid shut, the 
ports swung inward and molded 
themselves into the smooth, gleam


ing hull. As they did so, the thick 
glass polarized and became nontransparent. The lights of the ship 
went on and the shadows disappeared. 

Artemisia sat down in the heavily 
padded pilot's seat and fingered the 
arms aimlessly. His hands had often 
rested there and the slight warmth 
that flooded her as she thought that 
— she told herself — was only the 
result of the heaters making themselves felt decently, now that the 
outer winds were excluded. 

The long minutes passed, and it 
became impossible to sit quietly. 
She might have gone with him! She 
corrected the rebellious thought instantly to the plural "them." 

She said, "Why do they have to 
set up a radio transmitter anyway, 
Uncle Gil?" 

He looked up from the visiplate, 
the controls of which he was fingering delicately, and said, "Eh?" 

"We've been trying to contact 
them from out in space," she said, 
"and we haven't reached anyone. 
What special good would a transmitter on the planet's surface do?" 

Gillbret was troubled. "Why, we 
must keep trying, my dear. We 
must find the 'rebellion world'." 
And, between his teeth, he added to 
himself, "We must!" -A moment 
passed, and he said, "I can't find 
them." 

"Find whom?" 

"Biron and the Autarch. The 
ridge cuts me off no matter how I 
arrange the external mirrors. See?" 



TYRANN 



121 



She saw nothing but the sunny 
rock flashing past. 

Then Gillbret brought the little 
gears to rest and said, "Anyway, 
that's the Autarch's ship." 

Artemisia accorded it the briefest 
of glances. It lay deeper in the valley, perhaps a mile away. It glistened unbearably in the sun. It 
seemed to her, at the moment, to 
be the real enemy. // was, not the 
Tyranni. She wished suddenly, 
sharply, and very strongly that they 
had never gone to Lingane; that 
they had remained in space, the 
three of them only. Those had been 
funny days; so uncomfortable and 
yet so warm, somehow. And now 
she could only try to hurt him. 
Something made her hurt him, 
though she would have liked — 

Gillbret said, "Now what does he 
want?" 

ARTEMISIA looked up at him, 
seeing him through a watery 
mist, so that she had to blink rapidly to put him into normal focus. 
"Who?" 

"Rizzett. I think that's Rizzett. 
But he's certainly not coming this 
way." 

Artemisia was at the visiplate. 
"Make it larger," she ordered. 

"At this, short distance?" objected Gillbret. "You won't see anything. It will be impossible to keep 
it centered." 

"Larger, Uncle Gil." 

Muttering, he threw in the telescopic attachment and searched the 



bloated nubbles of rock that resulted. They jumped faster than the 
eye could follow at the lightest 
touch on the controls. For one moment Rizzett, a large, hazy figure, 
flashed past, and in that moment 
his identity was unmistakable. Gillbret backtracked wildly, caught him 
again, hung on for a moment, and 
Artemisia said, "He's armed. Did 
you see that?" 
"No." 

"He's got a long-range blasting 
rifle." 

She was up, tearing at the locker. 

"Arta! What are you doing?" 

She was unzipping the lining 
from another spacesuit. "I'm going 
out there. Rizzett's following them. 
Don't you understand ? The Autarch hasn't gone out to set up a 
radio. It's a trap for Biron." She 
was gasping as she forced herself 
into the thick, coarse lining. 

"Stop it ! You' re imagining 
things." 

But she was staring at Gillbret 
without seeing him, her face 
pinched and white. She should have 
realized it before; the way Rizzett 
had been coddling that fool. That 
emotional fool ! Rizzett had praised 
his father; told him what a great 
man the Rancher of Widemos had 
been and Biron had melted immediately. His every action was dictated by the thought of his father. 
How could a man let himself be 
rided by a monomania? 

She said, "I don't know what 
controls the airlock. Open it." 




 



"Arta, you're not leaving the 
ship. You don't know where they 
are." 

"I'll find them. Open the airlock." Gillbret shook his head. But 
the spacesuit she had stripped had 
borne a holster. She said, "Uncle 
Gil, I'll use this. I swear I will." 

Gillbret found himself staring at 
the wicked muzzle of a neuronic 
whip. He forced a smile. "Don"t 
now!" 

"Open the lock!" 

He did and she was out, running 
into the wind, slipping across the 
rocks and up the ridge. The blood 
pounded in her ears. She had been 
as bad as Biron, dangling the Autarch before him for no other purpose than her silly pride. The Autarch's personality sharpened in her 
mind; a man so studiedly cold as to 
be bloodless and tasteless. She 
quivered with repulsion. 

She had topped the ridge, and 
there was nothing ahead of her. 
Stolidly, she walked onward, holding the neuronic whip before her. 

BIRON and Autarch had not exchanged a word during their 
walk, and now they came to a halt 
where the ground leveled off. The 
rock was fissured by the action of 
sun and wind through the millenia. 
Ahead of them, there was an ancient fault, the farther lip of which 
had crurnbled downward, leaving a 
sheer precipice of a hundred feet. 

Biron approached cautiously and 
looked over it. It slanted outward 



past the drop, the ground riddled 
with craggy boulders which, with 
time and infrequent rains, had scattered out as far as he could see. 

"It looks," he said, "like a hopeless world, Jonti." 

The Autarch displayed none of 
Biron's curiosity in his surroundings. He did not approach the drop. 
He said, "This is the place we 
found before landing. It's ideal for 
our purposes." 

"It's ideal for your purposes, at 
least," thought Biron. He stepped 
away from the edge and sat down. 
He listened to the tiny hiss from 
his carbon dioxide cylinder, and 
waited a moment. Then he said, 
very quietly, "What will you tell 
them when you get back to your 
ship, Jonti? Or shall I guess?" 

The Autarch paused in the act 
of opening the two-handled suitcase they had carried. He straightened and said, "What are you talking about?" 

Biron felt the wind numb his 
face and rubbed his nose with his 
gloved hand. Yet he unbuttoned the 
foamile lining that wrapped him, 
so that it flapped wide as the gusts 
hit it. He said, "I'm talking about 
your purpose in coming here." 

"I would like to set up the radio 
rather than waste my time discussing the matter, Farrill." 

"You won't set up a radio. Why 
should you ? We tried reaching * 
them from space, without a response. There's no reason to expect 
more of a transmitter on the sur


TYRANN 



123 



face. It's not a question of ionized 
radio-opaque layers in the upper 
atmosphere, either, because we tried 
the sub-ether as well and drew a 
blank. Nor are we particularly the 
radio experts in our party. So why 
did you really come up here, 
Jonti?" 

The Autarch sat down opposite 
Biron. His hand patted the suitcase idly. "If you are troubled by 
these doubts, why did you come?" 

"To find out. Your man, Rizzett, 
told me you were planning this trip, 
and advised me to join you. I believe that your instructions to him 
were to tell me that, by joining you, 
I might make certain you received 
no messages that I remained unaware of. It was a reasonable point, 
except that I don't think you will 
receive any messages. But I allowed it to persuade me, and I've 
come with you." 

"To find my motive?" said Jonti, 
mockingly. 

"Exactly. 1 can guess already." 

"Tell me then. Let me learn my 
motive, too." 

"You came to kill me. I am here 
alone with you, and there is a cliff 
before us over which it would be 
certain death to fall. There would 
be no signs of deliberate violence. 
There would be no blasted limbs 
or any thought of weapon-play. It 
would make a nice, sad story to take 
back to your ship. I had slipped 
and fallen. You might even bring 
back a party to gather me up and 
give me a decent burial. It would 



all be very touching and I would 
be out of your way." 

"You believe this and yet you 
came." 

"1 expect it, so you won't catch 
me by surprise. We are unarmed 
and I doubt that you could force 
me over by muscle power alone." 

JONTI laughed. "Shall we concern ourselves with our radio 
transmitter then, since vour death is 
now impossible?" 

"Not yet. I want your admission 
that you were going to try to kill 
me." 

"Oh? Do you intend to beat a 
confession out of me? Now understand, Farrill, you are a young man 
and I am disposed to make allowances because of that and because 
of the convenience of your name 
and rank. However, I must admit 
you have until now been more 
trouble than help to me." 

"By keeping alive, despite you?" 

"If you refer to the risks you 
ran on Rhodia, I have explained 
it. I will not explain it again." 

Biron rose. "Your explanation 
was not accurate. It has a flaw in it 
which was obvious from the beginning." 

"Really?" 

"Really! Stand up and listen to 
me, or I'll drag you to your feet." 

The Autarch's eyes narrowed to 
slits as he rose. "I would not advise you to attempt violence, youngster." 

"Listen." Biron's voice was loud 



124 




 



and his cloak still bellied open in 
the breeze, disregarded. "You said 
that you sent me to a possible death 
on Rhodia only to implicate the Director in an anti-Tyranni plot." 

"That remains true." 

"That remains a lie. Your prime 
object was to have me killed. You 
informed the captain of the Rhodian ship of my identity at the very 
beginning. You had no real reason 
for believing that I would ever be 
allowed to reach Hinrik." 

"If I had wanted to kill you, Farrill, I might have planted a real 
radiation bomb in your room on 
Earth." 

"It would have been obviously 
more convenient to have the Tyranni maneuvered into doing the killing for you." 

"I might have killed you in space 
when I first boarded the Remorseless." 

"So you might. You came equipped with a blaster and you had it 
leveled at me at one point. You 
had expected me on board, but 
you hadn't told your crew that. 
When Rizzett called and saw me, 
it was no longer possible to blast 
me. You made a mistake then. You 
told me you had told your men I 
was probably on board, and a while 
later Rizzett told me you had not. 
Don't you brief your men concerning your exact lies as you tell them, 
Jonti?" 

Jonti's face had been white in 
the cold, but it seemed to whiten 
further. "I should kill you now for 



that, certainly. But what held back 
my trigger finger before Rizzett got 
on the visiplate and saw you?" 

"Politics, Jonti. Artemisia oth 
Hinriad was aboard, and for the 
moment she was a more important 
object than myself. I'll give you 
credit for a quick change of plans. 
To have killed me in her presence 
would have ruined a bigger game.'' 

<<T HAD fallen in love so rapid1 ly,then?"" 

"When the girl concerned is a 
Hinriad, why not? You lost no 
time. You tried first to have her 
transferred to your ship and when 
that failed, you told me that Hinrik had betrayed my father. So I 
lost her and left you the field undisputed. Now, I presume, she is 
no longer a factor. She is firmly on 
your side and you may proceed 
with your plan to kill me without 
losing the Hinriad succession." 

Jonti sighed and said, "Farrill, 
it is cold and getting colder. I believe the sun is heading downward. 
You are unutterably foolish and you 
weary me. Before we end this nonsense, will you tell me why I should 
be in the least interested in killing 
you? That is, if your obvious paranoia needs any reason." 

"There is the same reason that 
caused you to kill my father." 

"What?" 

"Did you think I believed you 
for an instant when you said Hinrik had been the traitor? He might 
have been, were it not for the fact 



TYRANN 



125 



that his reputation as a wretched 
weakling is so well established. Do 
you suppose that my father was a 
complete fool? Could he possibly 
have mistaken Hinrik for anything 
but what he was? If he had not 
known his reputation, would not 
live minutes in Hinrik's presence 
have revealed him as a hopeless 
puppet ? Would my father have 
babbled foolishly to Hinrik anything that might have been used to 
support a charge of treason against 
him? No, Jonti. The man who betrayed my father must have been 
one who was trusted by him." 

Jonti took a step backward and 
kicked the suitcase aside. He poised 
himself to withstand a charge and 
said, "I see your vile implication. 
My only explanation for it is that 
you are psychotic." 

Biron was trembling, and not 
with cold. "My father was popular 
with your men, Jonti. Too popular. 
An Autarch cannot allow a competitor in the business of ruling. 
You saw to it that he did not remain a competitor. And it was your 
next job to see to it that I did not 
remain alive either to replace or to 
avenge him." His voice raised to a 
shout, which whipped away on the 
cold air. "Isn't this true?" 

"No!" Jonti bent to the suitcase. 
"I can prove you are wrong!" He 
flung it open. "Radio equipment. 
Inspect it carefully. Take a good 
look at it." 

He tossed the items to the 
ground at Biron 's feet. Birbn stared 



at them. "How does that prove anything?" 

"It doesn't. But now take a good 
look at this." He had a blaster in 
his hand, and the coolness had left 
his voice. He said, "I am tired of 
you. But I won't have to be tired 
much longer." 

BIRON said, tonelessly, "You 
hid a blaster in the suitcase 
with (he equipment?" 

"You honestly came here expecting to be thrown off a cliff and you 
thought I would try to do it with 
my hands as though I were a stevedore or a coal-miner. I am Autarch 
of Lingane." 

His face worked and his left 
hand made a flat, cutting gesture 
before him. "I am tired of the fatuous idealism of the Ranchers of 
Widemos." He whispered, "Move 
on. Toward the cliff." He stepped 
forward. 

Biron", hands raised, eyes on the 
blaster, stepped back. "You killed 
my father, then." 

"I killed your father!" said the 
Autarch. "The same man who saw 
to it that your father was blasted 
to bits in a disintegration chamber 
will see to it that you follow him — 
and keep the Hinriad girl for himself thereafter, along with all that 
goes with her. I will give you an 
extra minute to think of that ! But 
keep your hands steady, or I will 
blast you and risk any questions my 
men may care to ask." It was as 
though his cold veneer, having 



125 




 



cracked, left nothing but a burning passion exposed. 

"You tried to kill me before 
this," Biron said stubbornly. 

"I did. Your guesses were in 
every way correct. Does that help 
you now? Back." 

"No," said Biron. He brought 
his- hands down. "If you're going 
to shoot, do so." 

The Autarch said, "You think I 
will not dare? You're calling my 
bluff?" 

"I've asked you to shoot." 

"And I will." The Autarch aimed 
deliberately at Biron's head at a 
distance of four feet. 

CHAPTER XIX 

Defeat! 

TEDOR RIZZETT circled the little piece of tableland warily. 
He was not yet ready to be seen, 
but to remain hidden was difficult 
in this world of bare rock. In the 
patch of tumbled boulders he felt 
safer. He threaded his way through 
them. Occasionally, he paused to 
pass the soft back of the spongy 
gloves he wore over his face. The 
dry cold was deceptive. 

He saw them now from between 
two granite monoliths that met in 
a V and rested his blaster in the 
crotch. The sun was on his back. 
He felt its feeble warmth soak 
through, and he was satisfied. If 
they happened to look in his direction, the sun would be in their eyes 



and he himself would be that much 
less visible. 

Their voices were sharp in his 
ear. Radio communication was in 
operation and he smiled at that. So 
far, according to plan. His own 
presence, of course, was not according to plan, but it would be better 
so. The plan was a rather overconfident one and the victim was not a 
complete fool, after all. Rizzett's 
own blaster might yet be needed lo 
decide the issue. 

He waited. Stolidly, he watched 
the Autarch lift his blaster as Biron 
stood there, unflinching. 

ARTEMISIA did not see the 
blaster lift. She did not see 
the two figures on the flat rock surface. Five minutes earlier, she had 
seen Rizzett silhouetted for a moment against the sky and since then 
she had followed him. 

He was moving too fast for her 
somehow. Things dimmed and wavered before her and twice she found 
herself stretched on the ground. 
She did not recall falling. The second time, she staggered to her feet 
with one wrist oozing blood where 
a sharp edge had scraped her. 

Rizzett had gained again and she 
had to reel after him. When he 
vanished in the glistening boulderforest, she sobbed in despair. She 
leaned against one of them, completely wear)-. Its beautiful fleshpink tint, the glassy smoothness of 
its surface, the fact that it stood as 
an ancient reminder of a primeval 



TYRANN 



127 



volcanic age were all lost upon her. 

She could only try to tight the 
sensation of choking that pervaded 
her. 

And then she saw him, dwarfed 
at the forked rock formation, his 
back to her. She held the neuronic 
whip before her as she ran unevenly 
over the hard ground. He was sighting along the barrel of his rifle, intent upon the process; taking aim; 
getting ready. 

She wouldn't make it in time. 

She would have to distract his 
attention. She called, "Rizzctt!" 
And again, "Rizzctt, don't shoot!" 
• She stumbled again. The sun was 



blotting out, but consciousness lingered. It lingered long enough for 
her to feel the ground jar thuddingly against her; long enough to 
press her finger upon the whip's 
contact; and long enough for her 
to know that she was well out of 
range, even if her aim w r as accurate. 

She felt arms about her, lifting. 
She tried to see, but her eyelids 
would not open. 

"Biron?" It was a weak whisper. 

The answer was a rough blur of 
words, but it was Rizzett's voice. 
She tried to speak further, then abruptly gave up. She had failed! 

Everything was blotted out. 



128 




 



THE AUTARCH remained motionless for the space it would 
take a man to count to ten slowly. 
Biron faced him as motionlessly, 
watching the barrel of the blaster 
that had just been fired point-blank 
at him. The barrel sank slowly as 
he watched. 

Biron said, "Your blaster seems 
not to be in firing order. Examine 
it." 

The Autarch's bloodless face 
turned alternately to Biron and to 
his weapon. He had fired at a distance of four feet. It should have 
been all over. The congealed astonishment that held him broke suddenly and he disjointed the blaster 
in a quick movement. 

The energy capsule was missing; 
where it should have been, there 
was a useless cavity. The Autarch 
with rage hurled the lump of dead 
metal aside. It turned over and 
over, a black blot against the sun, 
smashing into the rock with a ringing sound. 

Biron took a slow step forward. 
"There are many ways I could kill 
you, but most of them are too 
quick. I think the most satisfying 
would be to let you fight for your 
life — knowing you can't win. Being 
a stevedore would be more helpful 
right now than being Autarch of 
Lingane." 

His thigh muscles tensed, but the 
lunge they prepared was never completed. 

The cry that interrupted was thin 
and high, packed with panic. 

TYRANN 



"Rizzett !" it came. "Rizzett, 
don't shoot !" 

Biron whirled in time to see the 
motion behind the rocks a hundred 
yards away and the glint of sun 
off metal. And then the hurled 
weight of a human body was upon 
his back. He bent under it, dropping to his knees. 

The Autarch had landed fairly, 
his knees clasped hard about Biron 's 
waist, his fist thudding at the nape 
of the neck. Biron's breath 
whooshed out. He fought off the 
gathering blackness long enough to 
throw himself to one side. The Autarch jumped free, gaining clear 
footing while Biron sprawled on his 
back. 

He had just time to double his 
legs up against himself as the Autarch lunged down upon him again. 
The Autarch bounced off. They 
were up together this time, perspiration turning icy upon their 
cheeks. 

Slowly, they circled. Biron tossed 
his carbon dioxide cylinder to one 
side. The Autarch unstrapped his 
likewise, held it suspended a moment by its mesh-metal hose, then 
stepped in rapidly and swung it. 
Biron dropped, heard and felt it 
whistle above his head. 

He was up again, leaping before 
the Autarch could regain his balance. One large fist clamped down 
on a wrist, while the other exploded 
in the Autarch's face. He let the 
Autarch drop and stepped back. 

Biron said, "Stand up. I'll wait 

129 



for you with more of the same. 
There's no hurry." 

The Autarch touched his gloved 
hand to his face, then stared sickly 
at the blood that smeared off upon 
it. His mouth twisted and his hand 
snaked out for the metal cylinder 
he had dropped. Biron's foot came 
heavily down upon it, and the Autarch yelled in agony. 

Biron said, "You're too close to 
the edge of the cliff, Jonti. I'll 
throw you the other way now." 

But Rizzett's voice rang out, 
"Wait!" 

The Autarch screamed, "Shoot 
this man, Rizzett! His arms first, 
then his legs, and we'll leave him." 

Rizzett brought his weapon up 
slowly against his shoulder. 

Biron said, "Who saw lo it that 
your own blaster was unloaded, 
Jonti?" 

"What?" The Autarch stared 
blankly. 

"It was not I who had access to 
your blaster, Jonti. Who did have? 
Who is pointing a blaster at you 
right now? Not at me, Jonti, but 
at yon!" 

The Autarch turned to Rizzett 
and screamed, "Traitor!" 

Rizzett said, in a low voice, "Not 
I, sir. That man is the traitor who 
betrayed the loyal Rancher of Widemos to his death." 

"That is not I," cried the Autarch. "If he has told you I have, 
he lies." 

"It is you yourself who have told 
us. I not only emptied your wea


pon; I also shorted your communicator switch so that every word you 
said today was received by myself 
and by every member of the crew. 
We all know what you are." 

"I am your Autarch." 

"And also the foulest traitor 
alive." 

FDR a moment, the Autarch said 
nothing but looked from one 
to the other as they watched him 
with somber, angry faces. Then he 
wrenched to his feet, pulled together the parted seams of his selfcontrol and held them tightly by 
sheer nervous force. 

His voice was almost cool as he 
said, "And if it were all true, what 
would it matter? You have no 
choice but to let matters stand as 
they are. One last intra-nebular 
planet remains to be visited. It 
must be the 'Rebellion World' and 
only I know the co-ordinates." 

He retained dignity somehow. 
One hand hung uselessly from a 
broken wrist; his upper lip had 
swollen ludicrously and blood was 
caking his cheek, but he radiated 
the hauteur of one born to rule. 
"You'll tell us," said Biron. 
"Don't delude yourself that I 
will under any circumstances. And 
I have warned you already that 
there is an average of seventy cubic 
light years per star. If you work 
by trial and error, without me, the 
odds are 250 quadrillion to one 
against your coming within a billion 
miles of any star. Any star!" 



130 




 



Something went click in Biron's 
mind. He said, "Take him back to 
the Remorseless!'* 

Rizzett said in a low voice, "The 
Lady Artemisia — " 

And Biron interrupted. "Then 
it was she. Where is she?" 

"She's safe. She came out without a carbon dioxide cylinder. Naturally as the C0 2 washed out of her 
blood stream, the automatic breathing mechanism of the body slowed. 
She was trying to run, didn't realize 
she had to breath voluntarily, and 
fainted." 

Biron frowned. "Why was she 
trying to interfere with you, anyway? Making sure her boy-friend 
didn't get hurt?" 

Rizzett said, "She thought I was 
the Autarch's man and was going 
to shoot you. I'll take back this rat 
now, and, Biron — " 

"Yes?" 

"Get back as soon as you can. 
He's still the Autarch, and the crew 
may need talking to. It's hard to 
break a lifetime habit of obedience. 
She's behind that rock. Get to her 
before she freezes to death, will 
you? She won't leave." 

HER face was almost buried in 
the hood that covered her 
head, and her body was formless 
in the thick, enveloping folds of 
the spacesuit lining, but his steps 
quickened as he approached her. 
He said, "How are you?" 
She said, "Better, thank you. I 
am sorry if I caused any trouble." 



They stood looking at each other, 
and the conversation seemed to have 
burned itself out in two lines. 

Then Biron said, "I know we 
can't turn time backward, undo 
things that have been done, unsay 
things that have been said. But I 
do want you to understand." 

"Why this stress on understanding?" Her eyes flashed. "I have 
done nothing but understand for 
weeks now. Will you tell me again 
about my father?" 

"No. I knew your father was innocent. I suspected the Autarch almost from the start, but I had to 
find out definitely. I could only 
prove it, Arta, by forcing him to 
confess. I thought I could get him 
to confess by trapping him into attempting to kill me and there was 
only one way of doing that." 

He felt w-retched. He went on. 
"It was a rotten thing to do. As 
rotten, almost, as what he did to 
my father. I don't expect you to 
forgive me." 

She said, "I don't understand a 
word you're saying." 

"I knew he wanted you, Arta. 
Politically, you would be a perfect 
matrimonial object. The name of 
Hinriad would be more useful for 
his purposes than that of Widcmos. 
So once he had you, he would need 
me no longer. I deliberately forced 
you on him, Arta. I acted as I did. 
hoping you would turn to him. 
When you did, he thought he was 
ready to rid himself of me, and 
Rizzett and I laid our trap." 



TYRANN 



131 



"And you loved me all the 
time?" 

Biron said, "Can't you bring 
yourself to believe that, Arta?" 

"And, of course, you were ready 
to sacrifice your love to the memory 
of your father and the fconor of 
your family. How does the old doggerel go? You could not love me 
half so much, loved you not honor 
more!" 

Biron said, miserably, ' 'Please, 
Arta ! 1 am not proud of myself but 
I could think of no other way," 

"You might have told me your 
plan, made me your confederate 
rather than your tool." 

"It was not your fight. If I had 
failed — and I might have — you 
would have remained out of it. If 
the Autarch had killed me, and you 
were no longer on my side, you 
would be less hurt. You might have 
married him; even been happy." 

"Since you' have won, it might 
be that I would be hurt at bis loss." 

"But yoq aren't." 

"How do you know?" 

Biron said, desperately, "At 
least, try to see my motives. Granted 
that I was foolish, criminally foolish, can't you understand? Can't 
you try not to hate me?" 

She said, softly, "I have tried 
not to love you and, as you see, I 
have failed." 

"Then you forgive me," he said. 

"Why? Because I understand? 
No! If it were a matter of simply 
understanding, of seeing your motives, I would not forgive you your 



actions for anything I might have 
in life. If it were only that and 
nothing more! But I will forgive 
you, Biron, because I couldn't bear 
not to. How could I ask you to 
come back to me, unless I forgave 
you?" 

And she was in his arms, her 
weather-cold lips turning up to 
his. The two were held apart by a 
double layer of thick garments. His 
gloved hands could not feel the 
body they embraced, but it didn't 
seem to lessen his ardor. 

At last he said in concern, "The 
sun is going down. It's going to 
get colder." 

But she said, softly, "It's strange 
then that I seem to be getting 
warmer." 

Together they walked back to the 
ship. 

BIRON faced the crew with an 
appearance of easy confidence 
which he did not feel. The Linganian ship was large, and there were 
fifty in the crew. They sat facing 
him. Fifty faces! Fifty Linganian 
faces bred to unquestioning obedience to their Autarch. 

Some had been convinced by Kizzett; others had been convinced by 
the arranged eavesdropping on the 
Autarch's statements to Biron earlier that day. But how many others 
were still uncertain or even definitely hostile? 

So far Biron's talking had done 
little good. He leaned forward, let 
his voice grow confidential. "And 



132 




 



what are you fighting for, men? 
What are you risking your lives 
for? A free Galaxy, I think. A Galaxy in which each world can decide what is best in its own way, 
produce its own wealth for its own 
good, be slave to none and master 
of none. Am I right?" 

There was a low murmur of what 
might have been agreement, but it 
lacked enthusiasm. 

Biron went on, "And what is the 
Autarch righting for? For himself. 
He is the Autarch of Lingane. If he 
won, he would be Autarch of the 
Nebular Kingdoms. You would replace a Khan by an Autarch. Where 
would be the benefit of that? Is that 
worth dying for?" 

One in the audience cried out, 
"He would be one of us, not a 
filthy Tyrannian." 

Another shouted, "The Autarch 
was looking for the 'Rebellion 
World' to offer his sen-ices. Was 
that ambition?" 

"Ambition should be made of 
sterner stuff, eh ?" Biron shouted 
back, ironically. "But he would 
come to the 'Rebellion World' with 
an organization at his back. He 
could offer them all of Lingane; he 
could offer them, he thought, the 
prestige of an alliance with the 
Hinriads. In the end, he was pretty 
sure, the 'Rebellion World' would 
be his to do with what he pleased. 
Yes, that was ambition. 

"And when the safety of the 
movement ran counter to his own 
plans, did he hesitate to risk your 



lives for the sake of his ambition ? 
My father was a danger to him. 
My father was honest and a friend 
of liberty. But he was too popular, 
so he was betrayed. In that betrayal, 
the Autarch might have brought to 
ruins the entire cause and all of 
you with it. Which one of you is 
safe under a man who will deal 
with the Tyranni whenever it suits 
his purposes ? Who can be safe serving a cowardly traitor?" 

"Better," whispered Rizzctt. 
"Stick to that. Give it to them." 

AGAIN the voice called from 
the back rows, "The Autarch 
knows where the 'Rebellion World* 
is. Do you know?" 

"We will discuss that later. 
Meanwhile, consider instead that 
under the Autarch we were all 
headed for complete ruin; that thereis still time to save ourselves by 
turning from his guidance to a better and nobler way; that it is still 
possible from the jaws of defeat to 
snatch — " 

"Only defeat, my dear young 
man," came a soft, interrupting 
voice, and Biron turned in horror. 

The fifty crew-men came babbling to their feet and, for a moment, it seemed as though they 
might surge forward, but they had 
come to council unarmed; Rizzett 
had seen to that. And now a squad 
of Tyranni guardsmen were filing 
through the various doors, weapons 
ready. 

And Simok Aratap, himself, a 



TYRANN 



133 



blaster in each hand, stood behind 
Biron and Rizzett. 

CHAPTER XX 

Where? 

SIMOK ARATAP weighed carefully the personalities of each 
of the four who faced him and felt 
the stirring of a certain excitement 
within him. This would be the big 
gamble. The threads of the pattern 
were weaving toward a close. He 
was thankful that Major Andros 
was no longer with him; that the 
Tyranni cruisers had gone as well. 

He was left with his flagship, his 
crew and himself. They would be 
sufficient. He hated any kind of unwieldiness. 

He spoke mildly. "Let me bring 
you up to date, my Lady and gentlemen. The Autarch's ship has 
been boarded by a prize crew and 
is now being escorted back to Tyrann by Major Andros. The Autarch's men will be tried according 
to law and, if convicted, will receive the punishment for treason. 
They are routine conspirators and 
will be treated routinely. But what 
shall I do with you?" 

Hinrik of Rhodia sat beside him, 
his face crumpled in utter misery. 
He said, "Consider that my daughter is a young girl. She was led into 
this unwittingly. Artemisia, tell 
them that you were — " 

"Your daughter," interposed Aratap, "'will probably be released. 



She is, I believe, the matrimonial 
object of a highly placed Tyranni 
nobleman. Obviously, that will be 
kept in mind." 

Artemisia said, "I'll marry him, 
if you let the rest go." 

Biron half-rose, but Aratap 
waved him down. The Tyrannian 
Commissioner smiled and said, "My 
Lady, please! I can strike bargains, 
I admit. However, I am not the 
Khan, but merely one of his servants. Therefore, any bargain I do 
make will have to be justified thoroughly at home. So what is it exactly that you offer?" 

"My agreement to the marriage." 

"That is not yours to offer. Your 
father has already agreed and that 
is sufficient. Do you have anything 
else ?" 

Aratap was waiting for the slow 
erosion of their wills-to-resist. The 
fact that he did not enjoy his roledid not prevent him from rilling it 
efficiently. The girl, for instance, 
might at this moment burst into 
tears and that would have a salutary 
effect on the young man. They were 
obviously in love. He wondered if 
old Pohang would want her under 
the circumstances, and decided that 
he probably would. The bargain 
would still be all in the ancient's 
favor. For a moment, Aratap 
thought distantly that the girl was 
very attractive. 

And she was maintaining equilibrium. She was not breaking 
down. Very good, thought Aratap. 
She was strong-willed as well. Po


134 




 



hang would not have joy of his 
bargain after all. 

He said to Hinrik, "Do you wish 
to plead lor your cousin, too?' 1 

Hinrik's lips moved soundlessly. 

Gillbret cried, "No one pleads 
for me. 1 don't want anything of 
any Tyrannian. Go ahead, order me 
shot." 

"You are hysterical," said Aratap. "You know that I cannot order 
you shot without trial." 

"He is my cousin," whispered 
Hinrik. 

"That will be considered too. 
You noblemen will someday have 
to learn that you cannot presume 
too far on your usefulness to us. I 
wonder if your cousin has learned 
that lesson yet." 

HE WAS satisfied with Gillbret's 
reactions. That fellow, at least, 
sincerely wanted death. The frustration of life was too much for him. 
Keep him alive, then, and that 
alone would break him. 

He paused thoughtfully before 
Rizzett. This was one of the Autarch's men. The thought made him 
feel a faint embarrassment. At the 
start of the chase, he had dismissed 
the Autarch as a factor on the basis 
of what seemed iron logic. Well, 
it was healthy to miss occasionally. 
It kept self-confidence balanced at 
a point safely short of arrogance. 

He said, "You're the fool who 
served a traitor. You would have 
been better off with us." 
Rizzett flushed. 

TYRANN 



Aratap went on, "If you ever had 
any military reputation, I am afraid 
this would destroy it. You are not 
a nobleman and so considerations of 
state will play no part in your case. 
Your trial will be public and it will 
become known that you were a tool 
of a tool. Too bad." 

Rizzett said, "But you were about 
to suggest a bargain, I suppose?" 

"A bargain?" 

"Khan's evidence, for instance? 
You have only a shipload. Wouldn't you want to know the rest of 
the machinery of revolt?" 

Aratap shook his head slightly. 
"No. We have the Autarch. He 
will do as a source of information. 
Even without it, we need only make 
war on Lingane. There would be 
little left of revolt thereafter, I'm 
sure. There will be no bargain of 
that sort." 

And this brought him to the 
young man. Aratap had left him 
for last because he was the cleverest 
of the lot. But he was young, and 
young people were usually not dangerous. They lacked patience. 

Biron spoke first, saying, "How 
did you follow us? Was he working with you?" 

"The Autarch? Not in this case. 
The poor fellow was trying to play 
both sides of the game." 

Hinrik interrupted, with an incongruously childish eagerness. 
"The Tyranni have an invention 
that follows ships through hyperspace." 

Aratap turned sharply. "If your 
135 



Excellency will refrain from interrupting, I would be obliged." Hinrik cringed. 

It really didn't matter. None of" 
these four would be dangerous hereafter, but Aratap had no desire to 
decrease by even one any of the uncertainties in the young^ man's mind. 

Biron said, "Now, look, let's 
have facts or nothing. You don't 
have us here because you love us.. 
Why aren't we on the way back to 
Tyrann with the others? It's that 
you don't know how to go about 
killing us. Two of us are Hinriads. 
I am a Widemos. Rizzett is a wellknown officer of the Linganian fleet. 
And that fifth one you have, your 
own pet coward and traitor, is still 
Autarch of Lingane. You can't kill 
any of us without stinking up the 
Kingdoms from Tyrann to the edge 
of the Nebula itself. You've got 
to try to make some sort of bargain 
with us because there's nothing else 
you can do." 

Aratap said, "You are not altogether wrong. Let me weave a pattern for you. We followed you; how 
is not important. You may disregard, I think, the Director's overactive imagination. You paused near 
three stars without landing on any 
planet. You came to a fourth and 
found a planet to land on. There 
we landed with you, watched, waited. We thought there might be 
something to wait for and we were 
right. You quarreled with the Autarch and both of you broadcast 
without limitation. That had been 



arranged by you for your own purposes, I know, but it suited our 
purpose as well. We overheard. 

"The Autarch said that only one 
last intra-nebular planet remained 
to be visited and that it must be 
the 'Rebellion World." This is interesting, you see. A 'Rebellion 
World.' You know, my curiosity is 
aroused. Where would that fifth 
and last planet be located?" 

HE let the silence last. He took 
a seat and watched them dispassionately; first one, then another. 

Biron said, "There is no 'Rebellion World.' " 

"You were looking for nothing 
then?" 

"We were looking for nothing." 

"You are being ridiculous." 

Biron shrugged wearily. "You 
are yourself ridiculous if you expect 
more of an answer." 

Aratap said, "Observe that this 
'Rebellion World' must be the center of the octopus of conspiracy. 
To find it is my only purpose in 
keeping you alive. You each have 
something to gain. My Lady, I 
might free you of your marriage. 
My Lord Gillbret, we might establish a laboratory for you; let you 
work undisturbed. Yes, we know 
more of you than you think." Aratap turned away hastily. The man's 
face was working. He might weep 
and that would be unpleasant. 
"Colonel Rizzett, you will be saved 
the humiliation of court-martial and 
the loss of reputation that would 



136 




 



go with it. You, Biron Farrill, 
would be Rancher of Widemos 
again. In your case, we might even 
reverse the conviction of your father." 

"And bring him back tr life?" 

"And restore his honor." 

"His honor," said Biron, "rests 
in the very actions that led to his 
conviction and death. It is beyond 
your power to add to or detract 
from it." 

Aratap said, "One of you four 
will tell me where to find this world 
you seek. One of you will be sensible. He will gain, whichever one it 
is, what I have promised. The rest 
of you will be married, imprisoned, 
executed, whatever will be worst 
for you. I warn you, I can be sadistic if I must be." He waited a moment. "Which one will it be? If 
you don't speak, the one next to 
you will. You will have lost everything and I will still have the information I want." 

Biron said, "It's no use. You're 
setting this up so carefully, and 
yet it won't help you. There is no 
'Rebellion World.' " 

"The Autarch says there is." 

"Then ask the Autarch your question." 

Aratap frowned. The young man 
was carrying the bluff past the point 
of reason. 

He said, "My own inclination is 
to deal with one of you." 

"Yet you have dealt with the 
Autarch in the past. Do so again. 
There is nothing you can sell to us 



that we are willing to buy from 
you." Biron looked about him. 

"Right?" 

Artemisia crept closer to him and 
her hand went slowly about his elbow. Rizzctt nodded curtly and 
Gillbret muttered, "Right!" in a 
breathless manner. 

"You have decided," said Aratap, 
and put his finger on the correct 
knob. 

THE Autarch's right wrist was 
immobilized in a light metal 
sheath, which was held magnetically 
tight to the metal band about his 
abdomen. The left side of his face 
was swollen and blue with bruises 
except for a ragged, force-healed 
scar /hat seamed it redly. He stood 
before them without moving after 
that first wrench which had freed 
his good arm from the grip of the 
armed guard at his side. 

"What do you want?" the Autarch demanded. 

"I will tell you in a moment," 
said Aratap. "First, I want you to 
consider your audience. See whom 
we have here. There is the young 
man, for instance, whom you 
planned death for, yet who lived 
long enough to cripple you and 
destroy your plans, although you 
were an Autarch and he was an 
exile." 

It was difficult to tell whether 
a flush had entered the Autarch's 
mangled face. There was no single 
muscle-motion upon it. 

Aratap did not look for one. He 



TYRANN 



137 



went on, quietly, almost indifferently. "This is Gillbret oth Hmriad, who saved the young man's 
life and brought him to you. This is 
the lady Artemisia, whom, I ara 
told, you courted in your most 
charming manner and who betrayed you, nevertheless, for the 
love of the youngster. This is Colonel Rizzett, your most trusted military aide, who also ended by betraying you. What do you owe these 
people, Autarch ?", 

The Autarch said again, "What 
do you want?" 

"Information. Give it to me and 
you will be Autarch again. Your 
earlier dealings with us would be 
held in your favor at the Khan's 
court. Otherwise — " 

"Otherwise?" 

"I will get it from these, you 
see. They will be saved and you 
will be executed. That is why I ask 
whether you owe them anything, 
that you should give them the opportunity of saving their lives by 
yourself being mistakenly stubborn." 

The Autarch's face twisted painfully into a smile. "They cannot 
save their lives at my expense. They 
do not know the location of the 
world you seek. I do." 

"I have not said what the information I want is, Autarch." 

"There is only one thing you can 
want." His voice was hoarse, all 
but unrecognizable. "If my decision 
is to speak, then my Autarchy will 
be as before, you say." 

138 



"More closely guarded, of 
course," amended Aratap, politely. 

Rizzett cried out, "Believe him, 
and you'll but add treason to treason and be killed for it in the end." 

The ^uard stepped forward, but 
Biron anticipated him. He flung 





 



himself upon Rizzett, struggling 
backward with him. 

"Don't be a fool," he warned. 
"There's nothing you can do." 

The Autarch said, "I don't care 
about my Autarchy, or myself, Rizzett." He turned to Aratap. "Will 



these be killed? That, at least, you 
must promise." His horridly discolored face twisted savagely. "That 
one, above all." His finger stabbed 
toward Biron. 

"If that is your price, it is met." 

"If I could be his executioner, I 




TYRANN 



139 



would relieve you of all further obligation to me. If my finder could 
control the execution-blast, it would 
be partial repayment. But if not 
that, at least I will tell you what 
he would have you not know. I 
give you rho, theta, and phi in parsees and radians: 7352.43, 1.7836, 
5.2112. Those three points will determine the position of the world 
you seek. You have them now." 

"So I have," said Aratap, writing 
them down. 

And Rizzett broke away. "Traitor!" 

B;ron, caught off-balance, lost his 
grip on the Linganian and was 
thrown to one knee. "Rizzett," he 
yelled, futilely. 

Rizzett, face distorted, struggled 
briefly with the guard. Other guards 
were swarming in, but Rizzett had 
the blaster now. With hands and 
knees, he struggled against the Tyranni soldiers. Hurling himself 
through the huddle of bodies, Biron 
joined the fight. He caught Rizzett's 
throat, choking, pulling back. 

"Traitor," Rizzett gasped, struggling to maintain aim as the Autarch tried desperately to squirm 
aside. He fired. And then they disarmed him and threw him on his 
back. 

BUT the Autarch's right shoulder 
and half his chest had been 
blasted away. Grotesquely, the forearm dangled freely from its magnetized sheath. Fingers, wrist and 
elbow ended in black ruin. For a 



long moment, it seemed that the 
Autarch's eyes flickered as his body 
remained in crazy balance, and then 
they were gla2ed and he dropped 
and was a charred remnant upon 
the floor. 

Artemisia buried her face against 
Biron's chest. Biron forced himself 
to look once, iirmly and without 
flinching, at the body of his father's murderer, then turned his 
eyes away. Hinrik, from a distant 
corner of the room, mumbled and 
giggled to himself. 

Only Aratap was calm. He said, 
"Remove the body." 

They did so, flaring the floor 
with a soft heat-ray for a few moments to remove the blood. Only 
a few scattered char-marks were 
left. 

The guards helped Rizzett to his 
feet. He brushed at himself with 
both hands, then whirled fiercely 
toward Biron. '"What were you doing? I almost missed the bastard." 

Biron said, wearily, "You fell 
into Aratap's trap, Rizzett" 

"Trap? I killed the traitor, didn't 
I?" • 

"That was the trap. You did Aratap a favor." 

Rizzett made no answer, and Aratap did not interfere. He listened 
with a certain pleasure. The young 
fellow's mind worked smoothly. 

Biron said, "If Aratap overheard 
what he claimed to have overheard, 
he would have known that only 
Jonti had the information he 
wanted. Jonti said that, with em



 



phasis, when he faced us after the 
fight. It was obvious that Aratap 
was questioning us only to rattle 
us, to get us to act brainlessly at 
the proper time. I was ready for 
the irrational impulse he counted 
upon. You were not." 

"I had thought," interposed Aratap softly, "that you would have 
done the job." 

"I," said Biron, "would have 
aimed at you." He turned to Rizzett again. "Don't you see that he 
didn't want the Autarch alive? The 
Tyranni are snakes. He wanted the 
Autarch's information; he didn't 
want to pay for it; he couldn't risk 
killing him. You very obligingly did 
it for him." 

"Correct," said Aratap, "and I 
have my information." 

Somewhere there was the sudden 
clamor of bells. 

Rizzett began, "All right. If I 
did him a favor, I did myself one 
at the same time." 

"Not quite," said the Commissioner, "since our young friend has 
not carried the analysis far enough. 
You see, a new crime has been committed. Where the only crime is 
treason against Tyrann, your disposal would be a delicate matter 
politically. But now that you have 
murdered the Autarch of Lingane, 
you may be tried, convicted, and executed by Linganian law and Tyrann need play no part in it. This 
will be convenient for — " 

And then he frowned and interrupted himself. He heard the clang


ing, stepped to the door and kicked 
the release. 

"What is happening?" 

A soldier saluted. "General 
alarm, sir. Storage compartments." 

"Fire ?" 

"It is not yet known, sir." 

Aratap thought to himself, 
"Great Galaxy!" and stepped back 
into the room. "Where is Gillbret?" 

It was the first anyone knew of 
his absence. 

THEY found him in the engine 
room, cowering amid the giant 
structures, and half-dragged, halfcarried him back to the Commissioner's room. 

The Commissioner said, dryly. 
"There is no escape on a ship, my 
Lord. It did you no good to sound 
the general alarm. The time of 
confusion is bound to be limited." 

He went on, "I think it is 
enough. We have kept the cruiser 
you stole, Farrill, my own cruiser, 
on board ship. It will be used to 
explore the 'Rebellion World." We 
will make for the lamented Autarch's reference points as soon as 
the Jump can be calculated. This 
will be an adventure of a sort 
usually missing in this comfortable 
generation of ours." 

There was the sudden thought 
in his mind of his father in command of a squadron, conquering 
worlds. He was glad Andros was 
gone. This adventure would be his 
aione. 



TYRANN 



141 



THEY were separated after that. 
Artemisia was placed with her 
father, and Rizzett and Biron were 
marched off in opposite directions. 

Gillbret struggled and screamed. 
"I won't be left alone. I won't be 
in solitary." 

Aratap sighed. This man's grandfather had been a great ruler, the 
history books said. It was degrading 
to have to watch such a scene. He 
said, with distaste, "Put my Lord 
with one of the others." 

And so Gillbret was put with 
Biron. There was no speech between them till the coming of spaceship "night" when the lights turned 
a dim purple. It was bright enough 
to allow them to be watched 
through the televiewing system by 
the guards, shift and shift about, 
yet dim enough to allow sleep. 

But Gillbret did not sleep. "Biron," he whispered. "Biron." 

Biron, roused from a dull semidrowse, said, "What do you want?" 

"Biron, I have done it. It is all 
right, Biron." 

Biron said, "Try to sleep, Gil." 
But Gillbret insisted. "But I've 
done it, Biron. Aratap may be 
smart, but I'm smarter. Isn't that 
amusing? You don't have to worry, 
Biron. Biron, don't worry. I've fixed 
it." 

He was shaking Biron again, feverishly. 

Biron sat up. "What's the matter with you?" 

"Nothing. Absolutely nothing. 
It's all right. But I was the one 



who fixed it." Gillbret was smiling. 
It was a sly smile, the smile of a 
little boy who had done something 
clever. 

"What have you fixed?" Biron 
was on his feet. He seized the other 
by the shoulders and dragged him 
upright. "Answer me!" 

"They found me in the engine 
room." The words were jerked out. 
"They thought I was hiding. I 
wasn't. I sounded the general alarm 
for the storage room, because I had 
to be alone, but for just a few minutes. I shorted the hyperatomics." 

"You what?" 

"It was easy. It took a minute. 
And they won't know. I did it 
cleverly. They won't know until 
they try to Jump, and then all the 
fuel will be energy in one chain reaction and die ship and us and 
Aratap and all knowledge of the 
'Rebellion World' will be a thin 
expansion of iron vapor." 

Biron was backing away, eyes 
wide. "You did that?" 

"Yes." Gillbret buried his head 
in his hands and rocked to and fro. 
"Well be dead, Biron. I'm not 
afraid to die, but not alone. I had 
to be with someone. I'm glad I'm 
with you. I want to be with someone when I die. But it won't hurt; 
it will be so quick." 

Biron said, "You're mad. We 
might still have won out!" 

Gillbret didn't hear him. His ears 
were filled with his own moans. 

Biron could only dash to the 
door. "Guard," he yelled. "Guard!" 



142 




 



Were there hours or merely minutes left? 

CHAPTER XXI 

Here? 

THE soldier came clattering 
down the corridor. "Get back 
in there!" His voice was sharp. 

They stood facing one another. 
There were no doors to the small 
bottom-level rooms which doubled 
as prison cells, but a force-field 
stretched from side to side, top to 
bottom. Biron could feel it with 
his hand. There was a resilience to 
it, like rubber stretched nearly to 
its extreme, and then it stopped 
giving as though the first initial 
pressure turned it to steel. 

•It tingled Biron's hand, and he 
knew that though it would stop 
matter completely, it would be as 
transparent as space to the energy 
beam of a neuronic whip. And there 
was a whip in the guard's hand. 

Biron said, "I've got to see Commissioner Aratap." 

"Is that what you're making a 
noise about?" The guard was not 
in the best of humor; the night 
watch was unpopular and he was 
losing at cards. "I'll mention it after 
lights-on." 

"It won't wait." Biron felt desperate. "It's important." 

"It will have to wait. Will you 
get back, or do you want a bit of 
the whip?" 

"Look," said Biron, "the man 



with me is Gillbret oth Hinriad. He 
is sick. He may be dying. If a 
Hinriad dies on a Tyrannian ship 
because you will not let me speak 
to the man in authority, you will 
not have -i good time of it." 

"What's wrong with him?" 

"I don't know. Will you be 
quick or are you tired of life?" 

The guard mumbled something 
and went off. 

Biron watched him as far as he 
could see in the dim purple. He 
strained his ears in an attempt to 
catch the heightened throbbing of 
the engines as energy concentration 
climbed to a pre-Jump peak, but he 
heard nothing at all. 

He strode to Gillbret, seized the 
man's hair and pulled the head back 
gently. Eyes stared into his own out 
of a contorted face. There was no 
recognition in them; only fear. 

"Who are you?" 

"It's only me, Biron. How do 
you feel?" 

It took time for the words to 
penetrate. Gillbret said, blankly, 
"Biron?" Then, with a cjuivcr of 
life, "Biron! Are they Jumping? 
Death won't hurt, Biron." 

Biron let the head drop. No point 
in anger against Gillbret. But he 
was writhing in frustration. Why 
wouldn't they let him speak to Aratap? Why wouldn't they let him 
out? He found himself at a wall 
and beat upon it with his fists. If 
there were a door, he could break 
it down; if there were bars, he could 
pull them apart, or drag them out 



TYRANN 



143 



of their sockets, by the Galaxy. 

But there was a force-field which 
nothing could damage. He would 
yell again! 

There were footsteps once more 
He rushed to the open-yet-not-opci 
door. He could not look out to see 
who was coming down the corridor. 
He could only wait. 

IT WAS the guard again. "Get 
back from the field," he barked. 
"Step back with your hands in front 
of you." There was an officer with 
him. 

Biron retreated. The other's neuronic whip was on him, unwaveringly. Biron said, "The other man 
with you is not Aratap. I want to 
speak to the Commissioner." 

The officer said, "If Gillbrct oth 
Hinriad is ill, you don't want to 
see the Commissioner. You want to 
see a doctor." 

The force-field was down, with 
a dim blue spark showing as contact 
broke. The officer entered and Biron could see the Medical Group 
insignia on his uniform, 

Biron stepped in front of him. 
"All right, now listen to me. This 
ship mustn't Jump. The Commissioner is the only one who can see 
to that, and I must speak to him. 
Do you understand that? You're 
an officer. Have him awakened." 

The doctor put out an arm to 
brush Biron aside, and Biron batted 
it away. The doctor cried out sharply and called, "Guard, get this man 
out of here." 



THE guard stepped forward and 
Biron dived. They went thumping down together, and Biron 
swarmed up along the guard's body, 
seizing first the shoulder and then 
the wrist of the arm that was trying to bring its whip down upon 
him. 

For a moment, they remained 
frozen, straining against one another, and then Biron caught motion at the corner of his eye. The 
medical officer was rushing past 
them to sound the alarm. 

Biron's hand, the one not holding the other's whip-wrist, shot out 
and seized the officer's ankle. The 
guard writhed nearly free, and the 
officer kicked out wildly at him, 
but, with the veins standing out 
on his neck and temples, Biron 
pulled desperately with each hand. 

The officer went down, shouting 
hoarsely. The guard's whip clattered to the floor with a harsh 
sound. Biron fell upon it, rolled 
with it, and came up on his knees 
and one hand. In his other was the 
whip, 

"Not a sound," he gasped. "Not 
one sound. Drop anything else 
you've got." 

The guard, staggering to his 
feet, his tunic ripped, glared hatred 
and tossed a short, metal -weighted, 
plastic club away from himself. The 
doctor was unarmed. 

Biron gathered up the club. He 
said, "Sorry. I have nothing to tie 
and gag you with and no time anyway." 




 



The whip flashed dimly once, 
twice. .First the guard and then the 
doctor stiffened in agonized immobility and dropped solidly, in 
one piece, legs and arms bent 
grotesquely out from their bodies 
in the attitude they had last assumed before the whip struck. 

BIRON turned to Gillbret, who 
was watching with dull, soundless vacuity. 

"Sorry," said Biron, "but you, 
too, Gillbret," and the whip flashed 
a third time. 

The vacuous expression was 
frozen solid as Gillbret lay there 
on his side. 

The force-field was still down 
an d B i ron s tepped out into th e 
corridor. It was empty. Only the 
watch and the night-details would 
be up. There would be no time to 
try to locate Aratap. It would have 
to be straight for the engine room. 
He set off toward the bow. 
A man in engineer's workclothes hurried past him. 

"When's the next Jump?" called 
out Biron. 

"About half an hour," the engineer returned over his shoulder. 
"Engine room straight ahead?" 
"And up the ramp." The man 
turned suddenly. "Who are you?" 

Biron did not bother to answer. 
The whip flared a fourth time. He 
stepped over the body and went 
on. Half an hour left 

He heard the noise of men as he 
sped up the steep ramp. The light 

TYRANN 



.ahead was white, not purple. He 
hesitated. Then he put the whip 
into his pocket. They would be 
busy. There would be no reason for 
them to suspect him. 

He stepped in quickly. The men 
were pigmies scurrying about the 
huge matter-energy converters. The 
room glared with dials; a hundred 
thousand eyes staring their information out to all who would look. 
A ship this size, one almost in the 
class of a large passenger liner, 
was considerably different from the 
tiny Tyrannian cruiser he had been 
used to. There the engines had 
been all but automatic. Here they 
were large enough to power a city, 
and required considerable supervision. 

He was on a railed balcony that 
circled the engine room. In one 
corner there was a small room in 
which two men handled computers 
with flying fingers. He hurried in 
that direction, while engineers 
passed him without looking at him. 

He stepped through the door. 
The two at the computers looked 
at him. 

"What's up?" one, a lieutenant, 
said. "What are you doing here? 
Get back to your post." 

Biron said, "The hyperatomics 
have been shorted. They've got to 
be repaired." 

"Hold on," said the second. "I've 
seen this man. He's one of the 
prisoners. Hold him, Lancy." 

He jumped up and was making 
his way out the other door. Biron 

145 



hurdled the desk and the computer, 
seized the belt of the controlman's 
tunic and pulled him backward. 

"Correct," he said. "I'm one of 
the prisoners. I'm Biron of Widemos. But what I say is true. The 
hypcratomics are shorted. Have 
them inspected, if you don't believe me." 

The lieutenant found himself 
staring at a neuronic whip. He said, 
carefully, "It can't be done, sir, 
without orders from the Otticer of 
the Day. or from the Commissioner. 
It would mean changing the Jump 
calculations and delaying us for 
hours." 

"Get the authority then. Get the 
Commissioner." 

"May I use the communicator?" 
"Hurry." 

The lieutenant's arm reached out 
for the flaring mouthpiece of the 
communicator, and, halfway there, 
plummeted down hard upon the 
row of knobs at one end of his 
desk. Bells clamored in every corner of the ship. 

Biron's club was too late. It 
came down hard upon the lieutenant's wrist. The lieutenant snatched 
it away, moaning over it, but the 
warning signals were sounding. 

GUARDS were rocketing in 
upon the balcony through 
every entrance. Biron slammed out 
of the control room, looked in 
either direction, then hopped the 
railing. 

He plummeted down, landing 



with knees bent, and rolled. He 
rolled as rapidly as he could to prevent setting himself up as a target. 
He heard the soft hissing of a 
needle-gun near his ear, and then 
he was in the shadow of one of 
the engines. 

He stood up in a crouch, huddling beneath its curve. His right 
leg was a stabbing pain. Gravity 
was high near the ship's hull and 
the drop had been a long one; he 
had sprained his knee badly. It 
meant that there would be no more 
chase. If he won out, it was to be 
from where he stood. 

He shouted, "Hold your fire! I 
am unarmed." First the club and 
then the whip he had taken from 
the guard went spinning toward the 
center of the engine room. They 
lay there in hard impotence and 
plain view. "The hyper atomics are 
shorted. A Jump will mean the 
death of us all. I ask only that you 
check the motors. You will lose a 
few hours, perhaps, if I am wrong. 
You will save your lives if I am 
right." 

Someone called, "Go down there 
and get him." 

Biron yelled, "Will you sell your 
lives rather than listen?" 

He heard the cautious sound of 
many feet, and shrank back. Then 
there was a frictional sound above. 
A soldier was sliding down the 
engine toward him, hugging its 
faintly warm skin as though it were 
a b rid e. B i ron wa i ted . He coul d 
still use his arms. 




 



And then the voice came, from 
above, unnaturally loud, penetrating every corner of the huge room. 
It said, "Back to your places. Halt 
preparations for the Jump. Check 
the hyperatomics." 

It was Aratap, speaking through 
the public address system. The order then came, "Bring the young 
man to me." 

Biron allowed himself to be 
taken. There were two soldiers on 
each side, holding him as thosgh 
they expected him to explode. He 
tried to force himself to walk naturally, but he was limping in pain. 

ARATAP was only in semi-dress. 
His eyes seemed different; 
faded, peering, unfocused. It occurred to Biron that the man wore 
contact lenses. 

Aratap said, "You have created 
quite a stir, Farrill." 

"It was necessary to save our 
lives. Send these guards away. As 
long as the engines are being investigated, there's nothing more I 
intend doing." 

"They will stay just a while. At 
least, until I hear from my enginemen." 

They waited, silently, as the minutes dragged on, and then there 
was the flash of red upon the frosted-glass circle above the glowing 
lettering that read "Engine Room." 

Aratap opened contact. "Make 
your report!" 

The words that came were crisp 
and hurried. "Hyperatomics on the 



C Bank completely shorted. Repairs under way." 

Aratap said, "Have Jump recalculated for plus six hours." He 
turned to Biron coolly. "You were 
right." 

He gestured. The guards saluted, turned on their heels, and left 
one by one with a smooth precision. 

Aratap said, "The details, 
please." 

"Gillbret oth Hinriad, during his 
stay in the engine room, thought 
the shorting to be a good idea. The 
man is not responsible for his actions and must not be punished 
for it." 

Aratap nodded. "He has not been 
considered responsible for years. 
That portion of the events will remain between you and me only. 
However, my interest and curiosity 
are aroused by your reasons for 
preventing the destruction of the 
ship. You are surely not afraid to 
die in a good cause." 

"There is no cause," said Biron. 
"There is no 'Rebellion World.' I 
have told you so already and I repeat it. Lingane was the center of 
revolt and that has been checked. 
I was interested only in tracking 
down my father's ' murderer, the 
lady Artemisia only in escaping an 
utiwanted marriage. As for Gillbret, he is mad." 

"Yet the Autarch believed in the 
existence of this mysterious planet. 
Surely, he gave me the co-ordinates 
of something." 

"His belief is based on a mad


TVRANN 



147 



man's dream. Gillbrct dreamed 
something twenty years ago. Using 
that as a basis, the Autarch calculated five possible planets as the 
site of this dream-world. It is all 
nonsense." 

The Commissioner said, "And 
vet something disturbs me." 

"What?" 

"You are working so hard to persuade me. Surely, I will find all 
this out tor myself once I have 
made the Jump. It is not impossible 
that, in desperation, one of you 
might endanger the ship and the 
other save it as a complicated 
method for convincing me that I 
need look no farther for the 'Rebellion World.' I would say to myself: If there were really such a 
world, young Farrill would have let 
the ship vaporize, for he is a young 
man and romantically capable of 
dying what he would consider a 
hero's death. Since he has risked 
his life to prevent that happening 
Gillbret is mad, there is no 'Rebellion World' and I will return 
without further searching. Am I 
too complicated for you?" 

"No. I understand you." 

"And since you have saved our 
lives, you will receive appropriate 
consideration in the Khan's Court. 
You will have saved your life and 
your cause. No, young sir, I am 
not quite so ready to believe the 
obvious. We will still make the 
Jump." 

"I have no objections," said 
Biron. 



"You are cool," said Aratap. 
"It is a pity you were not born 
one of us." He meant it as ;i compliment. "We'll take you back to 
your cell now, and replace the 
force-field. A simple precaution." 

rpHE guard that Biron had 
J- knocked out was no longer 





 



there when they returned to the 
prison room, but the doctor was. 
He was bending over the still unconsci ous form of G i 1 1 bre t . 

Aratap said, "Is he still under?" 

At his voice, the doctor jumped 
up. "The effects of the whip have 
worn off, Commissioner, but the 
man is not young and has been 
under a strain. I don't know if he 
wHl recover." 

Biron felt horror fill him. He 
dropped to his knees, disregarding the wrenching pain, and 
reached out a hand to touch Gillbret*s shoulder gently. 

"Gil," he whispered. He 
watched the other's damp, white 
face anxiously. 



"Out of the way, man." The 
Medical Officer was scowling at 
him. He removed the black medical wallet from an inner pocket. 

"At least the hypodermics aren't 
broken," he grumbled. He leaned 
over Gillbrer, the hypodermic, 
filled with its colorless fluid, 
poised. It sank deep, and the 
plunger pressed inward automatically. The doctor tossed it aside 
and they waited. 

Gillbret's eyes flickered, then 
opened. For a while, they stared 
unseeingly. When he spoke 
finally, his voice was a whisper. 
"I can't see, Biron. I can't see." 

Biron leaned close again. "It's 
all right, Gil. Just rest." 

"I don't want to." He tried to 



TYRANN 



1-19 



struggle upright. "Biron, when are 
they Jumping?" 
"Soon, soon!" 

. "Stay with me, then. I don't 
want to die alone." His fingers 
clutched feebly, and then relaxed. 
His head lolled backward. 

The doctor stooped, then 
straightened, "We were too late." 

Tears stung at Biron's eyelids. 
"I'm sorry, Gil," he said. "You 
didn't know. You didn't understand." 

THEY were hard hours for 
Biron. Aratap had refused to 
allow him to attend the ceremonies 
involved in the burial of a body at 
space. Somewhere in the ship, he 
knew, Gillbret's body would be 
blasted in an atomic furnace and 
then exhausted into space, where 
its atoms might mingle forever 
with the thin wisps of interstellar 
matter. 

Artemisia and Hinrik would be 
there. Would they understand? 
Would she understand that he had 
done only what he had to do? 

The doctor had injected the 
cartilaginous extract that would 
hasten the healing of Biron's torn 
ligaments and already the pain in 
his knee were barely noticeable, 
but, then, that was only physical 
pain, anyway. Given a strong will, 
it could be ignored. 

He felt the inner disturbance 
that meant the ship had lumped 
and then the worst time came. 



Earlier he had thought his own 
analysis to be correct. It bad to be. 
But what if he were wrong? What 
if they were now at the very heart 
of rebellion? Trie information 
would go streaking back to Tyrann 
and the armada would gather. And 
he himself would die knowing that 
he might have saved the rebellion; 
but had risked death to ruin it. 

It was during that dark time that 
he thought of the document again. 
The document he had once failed 
to get. 

Strange the way the notion of 
the document came and went. It 
would be mentioned and then forgotten. There was a mad, intensive 
search for a "Rebellion World" and 
yet no search at all for the mysterious vanished document. 

Was the emphasis being misplaced ? 

It occurred to Biron then that 
Aratap was willing to come upon 
the "Rebellion World" with a 
single ship. What was that confidence he had? Could he dare a 
planet with a ship? 

The Autarch had said the document had vanished years before, 
but then who had it? The Tyranni? 
Did they have a document the 
secret of which would allow one 
ship to destroy a world? 

If that were true, it would no 
longer matter where the "Rebellion 
World" was, or if it existed at all. 

Time passed and finally Aratap 
entered. Biron got to his feet. 



150 




 



Aratap said, "We have reached 
the star in question. There is a star 
there. The co-ordinates given us by 
the Autarch were correct." 

"Well ?" 

"But there is no need to inspect 
it for planets. The star, I am told 
by my astrogators, was a nova less 
than a million years ago. If it had 
planets then, they were destroyed. 
It is a white dwarf now. It can 
have no planets." 

Biron stared. "Then — " 

Aratap said, "So you are right. 
There is no 'Rebellion World.' " 

CHAPTER XXII 

There! 

ALL of Aratap's philosophy 
could not completely wipe out 
the feeling of regret within him. 
For a while, he had not been himself, but his father over again. He, 
too, these last weeks had been 
leading a squadron of ships against 
the enemies of the Khan. 

But these were degenerate days 
and where there might have been a 
"Rebellion World," there was 
none. There were no enemies of 
the Khan after all; no worlds to 
gain. He remained only a Commissioner, a politician, still condemned 
to the soothing of little troubles. 
No more. 

Yet regret was a useless emotion. 
It accomplished nothing. 

He sat down and motioned Biron 



into a seat as well. "I want to talk 
to you."
The young man was staring 
solemnly at him, and Aratap found 
himself somewhat amazed that 
they had met first less than a month 
ago. The boy was older now, far 
more than a month older, and he 
had lost his fear. Aratap thought 
to himself, "I am growing completely decadent. How many of us 
are beginning to like individuals 
among our subjects? How many 
of us wish them well?" 

He said, "I am going to release 
the Director and his daughter. 
Naturally, it is the politically intelligent thing to do. In fact, it is 
politically inevitable. I think, 
though, that I will release them 
now and send them back, on the 
Remorseless. Would you care to 
pilot them?" 

Biron said, "Are you freeing 
me?" 

"Yes." 

"Why?" 

"You saved my ship; and my 
life as well." 

'T doubt that personal gratitude 
would influence your actions in 
matters of state." 

Aratap was within a hair of 
laughing outright. He did like the 
boy. "Then I'll give you another 
reason. As long as I was tracking 
a giant conspiracy against the 
Khan, you were dangerous. When 
that giant conspiracy failed to materialize; when all I had was a Lin


TYRANN 



ganian cabal of which the leader 
is dead; you were no longer dangerous. In fact, it would be dangerous to try either you or the 
Linganian captives. 

"The trials would be in Linganian courts and therefore not under 
our full control. They would inevitably involve discussion of the 
so-called 'Rebellion World.' And 
though there is none, half the subjects of Tyrann would have a concept to rally round, a reason for 
revolt, a hope for the future. The 
Tyranni realm would not be free 
of rebellion this side of a century." 

"rpHEN you free us all?" 

J- "It will not be exactly 
freedom since none of you are exactly loyal. We will deal with Lingane in our own way, and the next 
Autarch will find himself bound 
by closer ties to the Khan. It will 
be no longer an 'Associated 
Power' and trials involving Liaganians will not necessarily be 
tried in Linganian courts hereafter. Those involved in the conspiracy, including those in our 
hands now, will be exiled to 
worlds nearer Tyrann where they 
will be fairly harmless. You, for 
example, cannot return to Nephelos and need not expect to be restored to your Ranchy. You will 
stay on Rhodia, along with 
Colonel Riz2ett." 

"Good enough," said Biron, 
"but what of the lady Artemisia's 



marriage to that — nobleman ?" 

"You wish it stopped?" 

"You know that we would like 
to marry each other. You said 
once there might be some way of 
stopping the Tyranni affair." 

"At the time I said that I was 
trying to accomplish something. 
What is the old saying? 'The lies 
of lovers and diplomats shall be 
forgiven them.' " 

"But there is a way. Commissioner. It need only be pointed 
out to the Khan that when a powerf ul court ier would marry into 
an important subject family, it 
may be motives of ambition that 
lead him on. A revolt may be led 
by an ambitious Tyrannian as easily 
as by an ambitious Linganian." 

Aratap did laugh this time. 
"You reason like one of us. But 
it wouldn't work. Would you 
want my advice?" 

"What would it be?" 

"Marry her yourself, quickly. 
A thing once done would be 
difficult to undo under the circumstances. We would have to find 
another woman for Pohang." 

Biron hesitated. Then he put 
out a hand. "Thank you, sir." 

Aratap took it. "I don't like 
Pohang particularly, anyway. Still, 
there is one thing .further for you 
to remember. Don't let ambition 
mislead you. Though you marry 
the Director's daughter, you will 
never yourself be Director. You 
are not the type." 



152 




 



ARATAP watched the shrinking Remorseless in the visiplate and was glad the decision 
had been made. The young man 
was free; a message was already 
on its way to Tyrann through the 
sub-ether. Major Andros would 
undoubtedly swell into apoplexy, 
and there would undoubtedly be 
men at court to demand his recall 
as Commissioner. 

If necessary, he would travel to 
Tyrann. Somehow he would see the 
Khan and make him listen. Given 
all the facts, the King of Kings 
would see plainly that no other 
course of action was possible, and 
thereafter Aratap could defy any 
possible combination of enemies. 



The Remorseless was only a 
gleaming dot now, scarcely distinguishable from the stars that were 
beginning to surround it now that 
they were- emerging from the Nebula. 

Rizzett watched the shrinking 
Tyrannian flagship in the visiplate. 

He said, "So the man let us go! 
You know, if the Tyranni were all 
like him, damned if I wouldn't join 
their fleet. It upsets me in a way. I 
have definite notions of what Tyranni are like, and he doesn't fit. 
Do you suppose he can hear what 
we say?" 

Biron set the automatic controls 
and swiveled in the pilot's seat. "Of 
course not. He can follow us through hyper-space as he did before, but I don't think he can put a 
spy beam on us. You remember 
that when he first captured us, all 
he knew about us was what he 
overheard on the fourth planet. No 
more." 

Artemisia stepped into the pilot 
room, her finger on her lips. "Not 
too loudly," she said. "I think he's 
sleeping now. It won't be long before we reach Rhodia, will it, 
Biron?" 

"We can do it in one Jump, Arta. 
Aratap had it calculated for us." 

Rizzett said, "I've got to wash 
my hands." 

They watched him leave, and 
then she was in Biron's* arms. He 
kissed her on forehead and eyes, 
then found her lips as his arms 
tensed about her. The kiss came to 
a lingering and breathless end. She 
said, "I love you very much," and 
he said, "I love you more than I 
can say." The conversation that 
followed was both as unoriginal as 
that and as satisfying. 

Biron said after a while, "Will 
he marry us before we land?" 

Artemisia frowned a little. "I 
tried to explain that he's Director 
and captain of the ship and that 
there are no Tyranni here. I don't 
know, though; he's quite upset. 
After he's rested, I'll try again." 

Biron laughed softly. "Don't 
worry. He'll be persuaded." 

Rizzett's footsteps were noisy as 
he returned. He said, "I wish we 
still had the trailer." 



Biron said, "We'll be on Rhodia 
in a matter of hours. We'll be 
Jumping soon." 

"I know." Rizzett scowled. 
"And we'll stay on Rhodia till we 
die. Not that I'm complaining overloud; I'm glad I'm alive. But it's 
a silly end to it all." 

"rpHERE hasn't been any endX ing," said Biron, softly. 
Rizzett looked up. "You mean 
we can start all over? No, I don't 
think so. You can, perhaps, but 
not I. I'm too old and there's nothing left for me. Lingane will be 
dragged into line and I'll never see 
it again. That bothers me most of 
all, I think. I was born there and 
lived there all my life. I won't be 
but half a man anywhere else. 
You're young; you'll forget Nephelos." 

"There's more to life than a 
home planet, Tedor. It's been our 
great shortcoming in the past centuries that we've been unable to 
recognize that fact. All planets are 
our home planets." 

"Maybe. I don't know. If there 
bad been a 'Rebellion World,' why, 
then, it might have been so." 

"There is a 'Rebellion World,' 
Tedor." 

Rizzett said, sharply, "I'm in no 
mood for that, Biron." 

"It's the truth. There is such a 
world and I know its location. I 
might have known it weeks ago, 
and so might anyone in our party. 
The facts were all there. They were 



154 




 



knocking at my mind without being 
able to get in until that moment on 
the fourth planet when you and I 
had beaten down Jonti. Do you remember him standing there, saying 
that we would never find the fifth 
planet, without -his help? Do you 
remember his words?" 
"Exactly? No." 

"I think I do. He said, 'There is 
an average of seventy cubic light 
years per star. If you work by trial 
and error, without me, the odds are 
two hundred fifty quadrillion to 
one against your coming within a 
billion miles of any star. Any star!' 
It was at that moment, I think, that 
the facts got into my mind. I could 
feel the click." 

"Nothing clicks in my mind," 
objected Rizzett. "Suppose you explain a bit." 

Artemisia said, "I don't know 
what you mean, Biron.' 

"Don't you see that it is exactly 
those odds which Gillbret is supposed to have defeated ? You 
remember his story. The meteor 
hit, deflected his ship's course, and 
at the end of its Jumps, it was actually uithin a stellar system. That 
could have happened only by an 
incredible coincidence." 

THEN it uas a madman's story 
J- and there is no 'Rebellion 
World'.'" 

"Unless there is a condition under which the odds against landing 
within a stellar system are less incredible," said Biron, "and there is 
enough to trust the Director with 
any incriminating information. But 
the point is — and I knew it at the 
time — that this was just what my 
father did. GiUbret learned of 
Jonti's conspiratorial role through 
what he overheard in the discussions between my father and the 
Director. There is no other way in 
which he could have learned it 

"But a stick points both ways. 
Wc thought my father was working with Jonti and trying to enlist 
the support of the Director. Why is 
it not equally probable, or even 
more probable, that he was working with the Director— and that his 
role within Jonti's organization was 
as an agent of the 'Rebellion 
World,' attempting to prevent a 
premature explosion on Linganc 
that would ruin two decades of 
careful planning? 

"Why do you suppose it seemed 
so important to me to save Aratap's 
ship, when Gillbret shorted the motors? It wasn't for myself. I didn't, 
at the time, think Aratap would 
free me, no matter what. It wasn't 
even for you, Arta. It was to save 
the Director. He was the important 
man among us. Poor Gillbret 
didn't understand that." 

RIZZETT shook his head. "I'm 
sorry. I just can't make myself 
believe all that." 

It was a new voice that spoke. 
"You may as well. It is true." The 
Director was standing just outside 
the door, tall and somber-eyed. It 



was his voice and yet not quite his 
voice, for it was crisp and sure of 
itself. 

Artemisia ran to him. "Father! 
Biron says — " 

"I heard what Biron said." He 
was stroking her hair. "And it is 
true. I would even have let your 
marriage take place." 

She stepped back from him, almost in embarrassment. "You 
sound so different. You sound almost as if — " 

-"As if I weren't your father." 
He said it sadly. "It will not be 
for long, Arta. When we are back 
on Rhodia, I will be as you knew 
me and you must accept me so." 

Rizzett stared at him, his usually 
ruddy complexion as gray as his 
hair. Biron was holding his breath. 

Hinrik said, "Come here, Biron." 
He placed a hand on Biron's shoulder. "There was a time, young man, 
when I was ready to sacrifice your 
life. The time may come again in 
the future. Until a certain day, I 
can protect neither of you. I can 
be nothing but what I have always 
seemed. Do you understand that?" 

Each nodded. 

"Unfortunately," said Hinrik, 
"damage has been done. Twenty 
years ago, I was not as hardened 
to my role as I am today. I should 
have ordered Gillbret killed, but 
I could not. Because I did not, it is 
now known that there is a 'Rebellion World' and I am its leader." 

"Only wc know that," said 
Biron. 



153 




 



Hinrik smiled bitterly. "You 
think that because you are young. 
Do you think Aratap is less intelligent than yourself? The reasoning 
by which you determined the location and leadership of the 'Rebellion World' is based on facts known 
to him, and he can reason as well 
as you. It is merely that he is 
older, more cautious, that he has 
grave responsibilities. He must be 
certain. 

"Do you think he released you 
out of sentiment ? I believe that 
you have been freed now for the 
same reason you were freed once 
before; simply that you might lead 
him farther along the path that 
leads to me." 



I'll give him credit; he recognized 
its significance. But if he had consulted me, I would have told him 
it was no longer on Earth." 

"That's exactly it, sir. I am certain the Tyranni have it." 

"Certainly not. / have it. I've 
had it for twenty years. It was 
what started the 'Rebellion World,' 
for it was only when I had it that 
I knew we could hold our winnings 
once we had won." 

"It is a weapon, then." 

"It is the strongest weapon in 
the universe. It will destroy the 
Tyranni and us alike, but will save 
the Nebular Kingdoms. Without 
it, we could defeat the Tyranni perhaps, but we would only have exchanged one feudal despotism for 
another and, as the Tyranni are 
plotted against, we would be 
plotted against. We and they must 
both be delivered into the ashcan 
of outmoded political systems. The 
time for maturity has come as it 
once came on the planet Earth, and 
there will be a new kind of government, a kind that has never yet 
been tried in the Galaxy. There 
will be no Khans, nor Autarchs, 
Directors, nor Ranchers." 

"In the name of Space," roared 
Rizzett, "what will there be?" 

"People." 

"People? How can they govern? 
There must be some one person to 
make decisions." 

"There is a way. The blueprint 
I have dealt with a small section of 
one planet, but it can be adapted to 



BIRON was pale. "Then I must 
leave Rhodia?" 
"No. That would be fatal. There 
would seem no reason for you to 
leave, save the true one. Stay with 
me and they will remain uncertain. 
My plans are nearly completed. 
One more year, perhaps less." 

"But, Director, there are factors 
you may not be aware of. There is 
the matter of the document — " 
"For which your father was 
j searching?" 
ft "Yes." 

"Your father, my boy, did not 
jj know all there was to know. It is 
not safe to have anyone in possession of all the facts. The old 
Rancher discovered the existence of 
the document independently in the 
references to it in my old library. 



TYRANN 



159 



all the Galaxy." The Director 
smiled. "Come, children, I may as 
well marry you. It can do little 
more harm now." 

Biron's hand tightly enclosed 
Artemisia's and she was smiling at 
him. They felt the queer, inward 
twinge as the Remorseless made 
its single pre-calculated Jump. 

Biron said, "Before you start, 
sir, will you tell me something 
about the blueprint you mention, 
so that my curiosity will be satisfied and I can keep my mind on 
Arta?" 

Artemisia laughed and said, 
"You had better do it, father. I 
couldn't bear an abstracted groom." 

Hinrik smiled. "I know the 



document by heart. Listen to me." 

And with Rhodia's sun bright on 
the visiplate, Hinrik began with 
those words that were older, far 
older, than the civilization of any 
of the planets in the Galaxy save 
one: 

" 'We, the people of the United 
States' — but substitute the United 
Galaxy — 'in order to form a more 
perfect Union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, provide 
for the common defense, promote 
the general welfare, and secure the 
blessings of liberty to ourselves and 
our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the 
United States of America 