The Wind Between the Worlds by Lester del Rey


IT WAS hot in the dome of the 
Bennington matter transmitter 
building. The metal shielding 
walls seemed to catch the rays of 
the sun and bring them to a focus 
there. Even the fan that was 
plugged in nearby didn't help 
much. Vic Peters shook his head, 
flipping the mop of yellow hair out 
of his eyes. He twisted about, so 
the fan could reach fresh territory, 
and cursed under his breath. 

Heat he could take. As a roving 
troubleshooter for Teleport Interstellar, he'd worked from Rangoon 
to Nairobi — but always with men. 
Pat Trevor was the first of the few 
women superintendents he'd met. 
And while he had no illusions of 
masculine supremacy, he'd have felt 
a lot better working in shorts or 
nothing right now. 

Besides, a figure Jike Par's 
couldn't be forgotten, even though 



denim coveralls were hardly supposed to be flattering. Qoth 
stretched tight across shapely hips 
had never helped a man concentrate on his work. 

She looked down at him, grinning easily. Her arm came up to 
toss her hair back, leaving a 
smudge on her forehead to match 
one on her nose. She wasn't exactly 
pretty, but the smile seemed to 
illumine her gray eyes, and even 
the metal shavings in her brown 
hair couldn't hide the red highlights. 

"One more bolt, Vic," she told 
him. "Pheooh, I'm melting ... So 
what happened to your wife?" 

He shrugged. "Married her lawyer right after the divorce. Last I 
knew, they were doing fine. Why 
not? It wasn't her fault. Between 
hopping all over the world and 
spending my spare time trying to 


get on the moon rocket they were 
building, I wasn't much of a husband." 

Unconsciously, his lips twisted. 
He'd grown up before DuQuesne 
discovered the matter transmitter, 
when reaching the other planets of 
the Solar System had been the 
dream of most boys. Somehow, that 
no longer seemed important to people, now that the world was linked 
through Teleport Interstellar with 
races all across the Galaxy. 

MAN had always been a topsyturvy race. He'd discovered 
gunpowder before chemistry, and 
battled his way up to the atom bomb 
in a scant few thousand years of 
civilization, before he had a worldwide government. Other races, apparently, developed space travel 
long before the matter-transmitter, 
and long after they'd achieved a 
genuine science of sociology. 

DuQuesne had started it by investigating some obscure extensions 
of Dirac's esoteric mathematics. To 
check up on his work, he'd built a 
machine, only to find that it produced results beyond his expectations, matter in it simply seemed 
to disappear, releasing energy that 
was much less than it should have 
been, but still enough to destroy 
the machine. 

DuQuesne and his students had 
rechecked their math against the results and come up with an answer 
they didn't believe. This time they 
built two machines and experiment


ed with them until they worked 
together. When the machines were 
operating, anything within the 
small fields they generated simply 
changed places. At first it was just 
across a few yards, then miles — 
then half around the world. Matter 
was transmitted almost instantaneously from one machine to the other 
no matter how far apart they were. 

Such a secret couldn't be kept, of 
course. DuQuesne gave a demonstration to fellow scientists at which 
a few reporters were present. They 
garbled DuQuesne's explanation of 
electron waves covering the entire 
universe that were capable of 
identity shifts, but the accounts of 
the actual experiment were convincing enough. It meant incredibly fast 
shipping anywhere on the globe at 
an impossibly low cost. 

The second public demonstration 
played to a full house of newsmen 
and cold-headed businessmen. It 
worked properly — a hundred 
pounds of bricks on one machine 
changed place with a hundred 
pounds of coal on another. But 
then . . . 

Before their eyes, the coal disappeared and a round ball came 
into existence, suspended in midair. It turned around as if seeking 
something, an eyelike lens focused 
on the crowd. Then it darted down 
and knocked the power plug loose. 
Nothing could budge it, and no 
tricks to turn on power again 
worked. 

Even to the businessmen, it was 



6 




 



obvious that this object, whatever 
it was, had not been made on Earth. 
DuQuesne himself suggested that 
somewhere some other race must 
have matter transmittal, and that 
this was apparently some kind of 
observer. Man, unable to reach even 
his own moon yet, had apparently 
made contact with intelligence from 
some other world, perhaps some 
solar system, since there was no 
theoretical limit to the distance covered by matter transmittal. 

It was a week of wild attempts 
to crack open the "observer" and 
of futile attempts to learn something about it. Vic's mind had been 
filled with Martians, and he had 
tried to join the thousands who 
flocked to DuQuesne's laboratory 
to see the thing. But his father had 
been stubborn — no fare for such 
nonsense. And Vic had had to wait 
until the papers sprang the final 
surprise, a week later. 

THE ball had suddenly moved 
aside and made no effort to 
stop the machine from operating. 
When power was turned on, it had 
disappeared, and this time the Envoy had appeared. There was nothing outlandish about him — he 
seemed simply a "normal man, stepping out of the crude machine. 

In normal English, he had addressed the crowd with the casual 
statement that he was a robot, designed deliberately to serve as an 
ambassador to Earth from the 
Galactic Council. He was simply to 



be the observer and voice of the 
Council, which was made up of all 
worlds having the matter transmitter. They had detected the transmitter radiation, and, by Galactic 
Law, Earth had automatically 
earned provisional status. He was 
here to help set up transmitter 
arrangements. Engineers from Betz 
would build transports to six 
planets of culture similar to 
Earth's, to be owned by the Council, as a non-profit business, but 
manned by Earthmen as quickly as 
they could be trained. 

In return, nothing was demanded, and nothing more was offered. 
We were a primitive world by their 
standards, but we would have to 
work out our own advancement, 
since they would give no extra 
knowledge. 

He smiled pleasantly to the 
shocked crowd and moved off with 
DuQuesne to await results. There 
were enough, too, from a startled 
and doubting world. The months 
that followed were a chaos of news 
and half-news. The nations were 
suspicious. There was never something for nothing. The Envoy met 
the President and Cabinet; he met 
the United Nations. India walked 
out; India walked back quickly 
when plans went ahead blithely 
without her. Congress proposed 
tariffs and protested secret treaties. 
The Envoy met Congress, and 
somehow overcame enough opposition to get a bare majority. 

And the Betz II engineers came 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



7 



on schedule. Man was linked to the 
stars, though his own planets were 
still outside his reach. It was a paradox that soon grew stale, but what, 
actually, would be the point in flying to Mars or Venus when we 
were in instant touch with the 
farthest parts of the Galaxy? 

There were major wrenches to 
the economy as our heavy industries suddenly found that other 
planets could beat them at their 
work. Plathgol could deliver a perfect Earth automobile, semi-assembled and advanced enough to avoid 
our patent laws, for twenty pounds 
of sugar. The heavy industries 
folded, while we were still experimenting with the business of finding what we had to offer and what 
we could receive from other 
worlds. Banks had crashed, men 
had been out of work. The governments had cushioned the shock, 
and the new wonders helped to 
still the voices that suddenly rose 
up against traffic with alien worlds. 
But it had been a bitter period, 
with many lasting scars. 

Now a measure of stability had 
been reached, with a higher standard of living than ever. But the 
hatreds were pretty deep on the 
part of those who had been hurt, 
and others who simply hated newness and change. Vic had done 
well enough, somehow making his 
way into the first engineering class 
out of a hundred thousand applicants. And twelve years had gone 



Pat's voice suddenly cut into his 
thoughts. "All tightened up here, 
Vic. Wipe the scowl off and let's 
go down to check." 

She collected her tools, wrapped 
her legs around a smooth pole, and 
went sliding down. He yanked the 
fan and followed her. Below was 
the crew. Pat lifted an eyebrow at 
the grizzled, cadaverous head operator. "Okay, Amos. Plathgol standing by?" 

AMOS pulled his six-feet-two up 
from his slump and indicated 
the yellow stand-by light. Inside the 
twin poles of the huge transmitter 
that was tuned to one on Plathgol, 
a big, twelve-foot diameter plastic 
-cylinder held a single rabbit. Matter transmitting was always a twoway affair, requiring that the same 
volume be exchanged. And between 
the worlds, where different atmospheres and pressures were involved, 
all sending was done in the big 
capsules. One-way handling was 
possible, of course, but involved 
the danger of something materialize 
ing to occupy the same space a% 
something else — even air molecules. 
It wasn't done except as rigidly 
controlled experiments. 

Amos whistled into the transportwave interworld phone in the code 
that was universal between worlds, 
got an answering whistle, and 
pressed a lever. The rabbit was 
gone, and the new capsule was 
faintly pink, with something -resembling a giant worm inside. 




 



Amos clucked in satis/action. 
"Tsiuna. Good eating, only real 
good we ever got from these 
things. I got friends on Plathgol 
that like rabbit. Want some of this, 
Pat?" 

Vic felt his stomach jerk at the 
colors that crawled over the tsiuna. 
The hot antiseptic spray was running over the capsule, to be 
followed by supersonics and ultraviolets to complete sterilization. 
Amos waited a moment, then 
pulled out the creature. Pat 
hefted it. 

"Big one. Bring it over to my 
place and I'll fry it for you and 
Vic. How does the Dirac meter 
read, Vic?" 

"On the button." The seven per 
cent power loss was gone now, 
after a week of hard work in locating it. "Guess you were right— the 
reflector was off angle. Should have 
tried it first, but it never happened 
before. How'd you figure it out?" 

SHE indicated the interworld 
phone. "I started out in anthropology, Vic. Got interested in other 
races, and then found I couldn't 
talk to the teleport engineers without being one, so I got sidetracked 
to this job. But I still talk a lot on 
anything Galactic policy won't forbid. When everything else failed, 
I complained to the Ecthinbal operator that the Betz II boys installed 
us wrong. I got sympathy instead 
of indignation, so I figured it could 
happen. Simple, wasn't it?" 



He snorted, and waited while she 
gave orders to start business. Then, 
as the loading cars began to hum, 
she fell behind him, moving out 
toward the office. "I suppose you'll 
be leaving tonight, Vic. I'll miss 
you. You're the only troubleshooter 
I've met who did more than make 
passes." 

"When I make passes at your 
kind of girl, it will be legal. And 
in my business, it's no life for a 
wife." 

But he stopped to look at the 
building, admiring it for the last 
time. It was the standard Betz II 
design, but designed to handle the 
farm crops around, and bigger than 
any earlier models on Earth. The 
Betz II engineers made Earth 
engineering look childish, even if 
they did look like big slugs with 
tentacles and had no sense of sight. 

The transmitters were in the circular center, surrounded by a shield 
wall, a wide hall all around, another 
shield, a circular hall again, and „ 
finally the big outside shield. The 
two opposite entranceways spiraled 
through the three shields, each rotating thirty degrees clockwise 
from the entrance portal through 
the next shield. Those shields were 
of inert matter that could be damaged by nothing less violent than a 
hydrogen bomb directly on them — 
they refused to soften at less than 
ten million degrees Kelvin. How 
the Betzians managed to form them 
in the first place, nobody knew. 

Beyond the transmitter building, 



THE WIND- BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



9 



however, the usual offices and local 
transmitters across Earth had not 
yet been built. That would be 
strictly Earth construction, and 
would have to wait for an off season. They were using the nearest 
building, an abandoned store a 
quarter mile away, as -a temporary 
office. 

Pat threw the door open and 
then stopped suddenly. "Ptheela!" 

APLATHGOLIAN native sat 
on a chair, with a bundle of 
personal belongings around her, her 
three arms making little marks on 
something that looked like a used 
pancake. The Plathgolians had 
been meat-eating plants once. They 
still smelled high to Earth noses, 
and their constantly shedding skin 
resembled shaggy bark, while their 
heads were vaguely flowerlike. 

Ptheela wriggled her arms. "The 
hotel found regretfully that it had 
to decorate my room," she whistled 
in Galactic Code. "No other room 
and all other hotels say they're full. 
Plathgolians stink, I guess. So I'll 
go home when the transmitter is 
fixed." 

"With your trade studies half 
done?" Pat protested. "Don't be 
silly, Ptheela. I've got a room for 
you m my apartment. How arc the 
studies, anyhow ?" 

For answer, the plant woman 
passed over a newspaper, folded to 
one item. "Trade? Your House of 
Representatives just passed a tariff 
on all traffic through Teleport." 



Pat scanned the news, scowling. 
"Damn them. A tariff! They can't 
tax interstellar traffic. The Galactic 
Council won't stand for it; we're 
still accepted only on approval. The 
Senate will never okay it!" 

Ptheela whistled doubtfully, and 
Vic nodded. "They will. I've been 
expecting this. A lot of people are 
afraid of Teleport." 

"But we're geared to it now. The 
old factories are torn down, the 
new ones are useless for us. We 
can't get by without the catalysts 
from Ecthinbal, the cancer-preventative from Plathgol, all the rest. And 
who'll buy all our sugar ? We're 
producing fifty times what we need, 
just because most planets don't 
have plants that separate the levo 
from the dextro forms. All hell will 
pop!" 

Ptheela wiggled her arms again. 
"You came too early. Your culture 
is 'unbalanced. All physics, no sociology. All eat well, little think 
well." 

Ail emotion, little reason, Vic 
added to himself. It had been the 
same when the industrial revolution came along. Old crafts were 
uprooted and some people were 
hurt. There were more jobs now, 
but they weren't the familiar ones. 
And the motorists who gloated at 
first over cheap Plathgol cars complained when Plathgol wasn't permitted to supply the improved, 
ever-powered models they made for 
themselves. 

Hardest of all had been the idea 



10 




 



of accepting the existence ot* superior races. A feeling of inferiority 
had crept in, turned to resentment, 
and then through misunderstanding of other races to an outright 
hatred of them. Ptheela had been 
kicked out of her hotel room; but 
it was only a minor incident in a 
world full of growing bitterness 
against the aliens. 

Maybe we can get j obs on 
Plathgol," Vic suggested harshly. 

Ptheela whistled. "Pat could, if 
she had three husbands— engineers 
must meet minimum Standards. You 
could be a husband, maybe." 

Vic kept forgetting that Plathgol 
was backward enough to have taboos and odd customs, even though 
Galactically higher than Earth, having had nearly ten thousand years 
of history behind her to develop 
progress and amity. 

THE televisor connecting them 
with the transmitter building 
buzzed, and Amos' dour face came 
on. "Screwball delivery with top 
priority, Pat. Professor named 
Douglas wants to ship a capsule of 
Heaviside layer air for a capsule 
of Ecthinbal deep-space vacuum. 
Common sense says we don't make 
much shipping vacuums ■ by the 
pound !" 

"Public service, no charge," Vic 
suggested, and Pat nodded. Douglas was a top man at Caitech, and 
a plug from him might be useful 
sometime. "Leave it on, Amos — 1 
want to watch this. Douglas has 



some idea that space fluctuates, 
somehow, and he can figure out 
where Ecthinbal is from a sample. 
Then he can figure how fast an 
exchange force works, whether it's 
instantaneous or not. We've got the 
biggest Earth transmitters, so he 
uses us." 

As they watched, a massive capsule was put in place by loading 
machines,' and the light changed 
From yellow to red. A slightly 
greenish capsule replaced the other. 
Amos signaled the disinfection crew 
and hot spray hit it, to be followed 
by the ultrasonics. Something 
crackled suddenly, and Amos made 
a wild lunge across the screen. 

The capsule popped, crashing inward and scattering glass in a thousand directions. Pressure-glass; it 
should have carried a standard Code 
warning for cold sterilization and 
no supersonics. Vic leaped toward 
the transmitter building. 

Pat's cry brought him back. 
There were shrieks coming from 
the televisor. Men in the building 
were clinging frantically to anything they could hold, but men 
and bundles ready for loading were 
being picked up violently and 
sucked toward the transmitter. As 
Vic watched, a man hit the edge 
of the field and seemed to be sliced 
into nothingness, his scream cut off, 
half-formed. 

A big chunk of glass had hit the 
control, shorting two bus-bars, 
holding them together by its 
weight. The transmitter was locked 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



11 



into continuous transmit. And air, 
with a pressure of fifteen pounds 
per square inch, was running in and 
being shipped to Ecthinbal, where 
the pressure was barely an ounce 
per square inch! With that difference, pressure on a single square 
foot of surface could lift over a 
ton. The poor devils in the transmitter building didn't have a 
chance. 

He snapped off the televisor as 
Pat turned away, gagging. "When 
was the accumulator charged?*' 

"It wasn't an accumulator," she 
told him weakly. "The whole plant 
uses an electron-pulse atomotor, 
good for twenty years of continuous operation." 

Vic swore and made for the 
door, with Pat and Ptheela after 
him. The transmitter opening took 



up about two hundred square feet, 
which meant somewhere between 
fifty and five hundred thousand 
cubic feet of air a second were being lost. Maybe worse. 

Ptheela nodded as she kept pace 
with him. "I think the tariff won't 
matter much now," she stated. 

II 

VIC'S action in charging out had 
been pure instinct to get where 
the trouble lay. His legs churned 
over the ground, while a wind at 
his back made the going easier. 

Then his brain clicked over, and 
he dug his heels into the ground, 
trying to stop. Pat crashed into him, 
but Ptheela's arms lashed out, keeping him from falling. As he turned 
to face them, the wind struck at his 




\2 




 



face, whipping up grit and dust 
from the dry ground. Getting to 
the transmitter building would be 
easy — but with the wind already 
rising, they'd never be able to light 
their way back. 

It had already reached this far, 
losing its force with distance, but 
still carrying a wallop. It was beginning to form a pattern, marked 
by the clouds of dust and debris it 
was picking up. The arrangement 
of the shields and entrances in the 
building formed a perfect suction 
device to set the air circling around 
it counter-clockwise, twisting into a 
tornado that funnclcd down to the 
portals. Men and women near the 
building were struggling frantically 
away from the center of the fury. 
As he watched, a woman was 
picked up bodily, whirled around, 



and gulped down one of the yawning entrances. The wind strangled 
her cries. 

Vic motioned Pat and Ptheela 
and began moving back, fast. Killing himself would do no good. He 
found one of the little hauling tractors and pulled them onto it with 
him, heading back until they were 
out of the worst of the rising wind. 
Then he' swung to face Ptheela. 

"Galactic rules be damned, this 
is an emergency, and we need help! 
What now?" 

The shaggy Plathgolian made an 
awkward gesture with all three 
arms, and a slit opened in her chest. 
"Unprecedented." The word came 
out in English, surprisingly, and 
Pat's look mirrored his; Plathgolians weren't supposed to be able to 
talk. "You're right. If I speak, I 




THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



13 



shall be banished by the Council 
from Plathgol. Ask, nevertheless. I 
may know more — we've had the 
teleport longer — but remember that 
your strange race has a higher ingenuity quotient." 

"Thanks." Vic knew what the 
seven husbands back on her home 
planet meant to her, if she were 
exiled, but he'd worry about that 
after he could stop worrying about 
the world. "What happens next?" 

She dropped back to the faster 
Galactic Code for that. As he knew, 
the accidental turning on of the 
transmitter had keyed in the one on 
Ecthinbal automatically to receive, 
but not to transmit; the air was 
moving between Earth and Ecthinbal in one-way traffic. The receiving 
circuit, which would have keyed in 
the Ecthinbal transmit circuit had 
not been shorted. Continuous transmittal had never been used, to her 
knowledge; there was no certainty 
about what would happen. Once 
started, no outside force could stop 
a transmitter; the send and stop 
controls were synchronous, both 
tapped from a single crystal, and 
only that proper complex waveform could cut it off. It now existed as a space-strain, and the 
Plathgolians . believed that this 
would spread, since the outer edges 
transmitted before matter could 
reach the center, setting up an unbalanced resonance that would make 
the force field grow larger and 
larger. Eventually, it might spread 
far beyond the whole building. 



And, of course, since the metal 
used by the Betz II engineers could 
not be cut or damaged, there was 
no way of tunneling in. 

"What about Ecthinbal?" Pat 
asked. 

PTHEELA spread her arms. 
"The same, in reverse. The air 
rushes in, builds up pressure to 
break the capsule, and then rushes 
out — in a balanced stream, fortunately, so there"s no danger of crowding two units of matter in one 
unit of space." 

"Then I guess we'd better call 
the Galactic Envoy," Vic decided. 
"All he*s ever done is to sit in an 
office and look smug. Now — " 

"He won't come. He is simply 
an observer. Galactic Law says you 
must solve your own problem or 
die." 

"Yeah." Vic looked at the cloud 
of dust being whirled into the transmitter building. "And all I need 
is something that weighs a couple 
tons per square foot — with a good 
crane attached." 

Pat looked up suddenly. "How 
about one of the small atom-powered army tanks, the streamlined 
ones? Flavin could probably get 
you one." 

Vic stamped down "on the pedal, 
swinging the little tractor around 
sharply toward the office. The wind 
was stronger there, but still buckable. He clicked the televisor on, 
noticing that the dust seemed to 
disappear just beyond the normal 



14 




 



field of the transmitter. It must already be starting to .spread out. 

"How about it?" he asked 
Ptheela. " If it spreads, won't it 
start etching into the transmitter 
and the station ?" 

"No. Betz II construction. 
Everything they built in has some 
way of grounding out the effect. 
We don't know how it works, but 
the field won't touch anything put 
in by the Betzians." 

'"What about the hunk of glass 
that's causing the trouble?" 

For a moment she looked as if 
she were trying to appear hopeful. 
Then the flowerlike head seemed 
to wilt. "It's inside the casing, protected from the field." 

Pat had been working on the 
private wire to Chicago, used for 
emergencies. She was obviously 
having trouble getting put through 
lo Flavin. The man was a sore spot 
in Teleport Interstellar, one of the 
few political appointees. Nominally, he was a go-between for the 
President and the Teleport group, 
but actually he was simply a jobholder. Finally Pat had him on the 
screen. 

He was jovial enough, as usual, 
with a red spot on each cheek which 
indicated too many drinks for 
lunch. A bottle stood on the desk 
in front of him. But his voice was 
clear enough. "Hi, Pat. What's 
up?" 

Pat disregarded the frown Vic 
threw her, and began outlining the 
situation. The panic in her voice 



didn't require much feigning. 
Flavin blustered at first, then 
pressed the hold button for long 
minutes. Finally, his face reappeared. 

"Peters, you'll have full authority, of course. I'll get a couple 
tanks for you, somehow, but I 
have to work indirectly." Then he 
shrugged and looked rueful. "I always knew this sinecure would end. 
I've got some slips here that make 
it look as if you had a national 
disaster." 

His hand reached for the bottle, 
just as his eyes met Vic's accusing 
look. He shook his head, grinned 
sourly, put the bottle away in a 
drawer, untouched. "I'm not a fool 
entirely, Peters. I can do a little 
more than chase girls and drink. 
Probably be no use to you, but the 
only reason I drink is I'm bored, 
and I'm not bored now. I'll be out 
shortly." 

F.AVIN apparently had influence. The tanks arrived just 
before he did. They were heavy, 
squat affairs, super-armored to 
stand up under a fairly close 
atomic bomb hit, but small enough 
to plunge through the portals of 
the transmitter building. Flavin 
came up as Vic and Pat were studying them. His suit was designed 
to hide most of his waistline, but 
the fat of his jowls shook as he 
hurried up, and there was sweat on 
his forehead, trickling down from 
under his toupee. 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



15 



"Two, eh? Figured that's what 
I'd get if I asked for a dozen. 
Think you can get in — and what'Il 
you do then?" 

Vic shrugged. He'd been wondering the same thing. "If we 
could somehow ram the huge piece 
of glass and crack it where it was 
wedged into the wiring inside the 
shielding, it might release the 
shorted wires. That should effect 
an automatic cut-off. That's why I'm 
going with the driver. I can extemporize if we get in." 

"Right," Pat agreed cjuickly. She 
hitched up her coveralls and headed for the other tank. "And that's 
why I'm going with the other." 

"Pat!" Vic swung toward her. 
But it wasn't a time for stupid 
chivalry. The man or woman who 
could do the job should do it. He 
gave her a hand into the compact 
I i rtl e tank. ' 'Good 1 uck, then . 
We'll need it." 

He climbed into his own vehicle, 
crowding past the driver and 
wriggling into the tiny observer's 
seat. The driver glanced back, 
reached for the controls. The motor hummed quietly under them, 
making itself felt by the vibration 
of the metal around them. They 
began moving forward, advancing 
in low gear. The driver didn't like 
it as he stared through his telescreen, and Vic liked it even less 
from the direct view through the 
gun slit. Beside them, the other 
tank got into motion, roughly 
paralleling them. 



At first it wasn't too bad. They 
headed toward the north portal, 
going cautiously, and the tank 
seemed snug and secure. Beside 
him, Vic saw a tree suddenly come 
up by its roots and head toward 
the transmitter. It struck the front 
of the tank, but the machine 
pushed it brutally aside. 

Then the going got rough. The 
driver swore at the controls, finding the machine hard to handle. It 
wanted to drift, and he set up a 
fixed correction, only to revise it a 
moment later. The tank began to 
list and pitch. The force of the 
wind increased geometrically as 
they cut the distance. At fifty feet, 
the driver's wrists were white from 
fighting to overcome each tilt of 
the wind. t 

VIC swallowed, wondering at 
the nerve of the man driving, 
until he saw blood running from 
a bitten lip. His own stomach was 
pitching wildly. 

"Try another ten feet ?" the 
driver asked. 
"Have to." 

They crawled by inches now. 
Every tiny bump threatened to let 
the force of the wind pitch them 
over. They had to work by feel. 
Vic wiped his forehead and wiped 
it again before he noticed that the 
palm of his hand was as damp as 
his brow. 

He wondered about Pat and 
looked for her. There was no sight 
of the other machine. Thank God, 




 



shed turned back. But there was 
bitterness in his relief; he'd figured 
Pat was one human he could count 
on completely. Then he looked at 
the driver's wider screen, and sick 
shock hit him. 

The other tank had turned turtle 
and was rolling over and over, 
straight toward the portal! As he 
looked, a freak accident bounced 
it up and it landed on its treads. 
The driver must have been conscious; only consummate skill accounted for the juggling that kept 
it upright then. But its forward momentum was still too strong, and it 
lurched for the portal, 

Vic jerked against his driver's 
ear, pointing frantically. "Hit it!" 

The driver tensed, but nodded. 
Though the shriek of the insane 
wind was too strong for even the 
sound of the motor, the tank 
leaped forward, pushing Vic down 
in his webbed and padded seat. 
The chances they were taking now 
were pure gamble, but the driver 
moved more smoothly with a definite goal. The man Jet the wind 
help him pick up speed, jockeying 
sidewise toward the other tank. 
They almost rolled over as they 
swung, bucking and rocking frantically, but the treads hit the 
ground firmly again. They were 
drifting across the wind now, 
straight toward the nose of the 
other tank. 

Vic strained forward; the shock 
of hitting the tank knocked his 
head against the gun slit. He hard


ly felt it as he stared out. The two 
tanks struggled, forcing against 
each other, while the portal gaped 
almost straight ahead. 

"Hit the west edge and we have 
a chance," Vic yelled in the driver's ear. The man nodded weakly, 
and his foot pressed down harder 
on the throttle. Against each other, 
the two tanks showed little tendency to turn over, but they seemed 
to be lifted off the ground half the 
time. 

Inch by slow inch, they were 
making it. Pat's tank was well beyond the portal, but Vic's driver 
was sweating it out, barely on the 
edge. He bumped an inch forward, 
reversed with no care for gears, and 
hitched forward and back again. 
They seemed to make little progress, but finally Vic could see the 
edge move past, and they were out 
of the direct gale into the portal. 

ANEW screen had lighted beside the driver, and Pat's 
face was in it, along with the other 
driver. The scouring of the wind 
made speech impossible over the 
speakers, but the man motioned. 
Vic shook his head, indicated a 
spiral counter-clockwise and outward, to avoid bucking against the 
wind, with the two tanks supporting each other. 

They passed the south portal 
somehow, though there were moments when it seemed they must 
be swung in, and managed to gain 
ten feet outward on the turn. The 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



17 



next time around, they had doubled 
that. It began to be smoother going. The battered tanks lumbered 
up to their starting point and a 
little beyond. 

Vic crawled out of the seat, surprised to find his legs stiff and 
weak; the ground seemed to reel 
under him. It was some comfort 
to see that the driver was in no 
better shape. The man leaned 
against the tank, letting the raw 
wind dry the perspiration on his 
uniform. "Bro-ther! Miracles! 
You're nervy, guy, but I wouldn't 
go in there again with the angel 
Michael." 

Vic looked at the' wind maelstrom. Nobody else would go in 
there, either. Getting within ten 
feet of the portal was begging for 
death, even in the tank — and it 
would get worse. Then he spotted 
Pat opening the tank hatch and 
stumbled over to help her out. She 
was bruised and more shaky than 
he, but the webbing over the seat 
had saved her from broken bones. 
He lifted her out in his arms, surprised at how light she was. His 
mind flicked over the picture of 
her tank twisting over, and his 
arms tightened around her. She 
seemed to snuggle into them, seeking comfort. 

Her eyes came up, just as he 
looked down at her. There was no 
other way than kissing her to show 
his relief. "You scared hell out of 
me, Pat." 

"Me, too." She was regaining 



some color, and wriggled to be 
pur down. "Do you know how I 
feel about what you did in there?" 

Flavin cut off any answer Vic 
could have made, waddling up 
with his handkerchief out, mopping his face. He stared at them, 
gulped, shook his head. "Lazarus 
twins,*' he growled. "Better get in 
the car — there's a drink in the 
right door pocket." 

Vic looked at Pat and she 
nodded. They could use it. They 
found the car and chauffeur waiting farther back. Vic poured her a 
small jigger, and took one for himself before putting the bottle back. 
But the moment's relaxation over 
cigarets was better than the drink. 

WHILE Flavin was talking to 
the tank drivers, a small 
roll of bills changed hands, bringing grins to their faces. Political 
opportunist or not, he knew the 
right thing to do at the right time. 
Now he came back and climbed in 
beside them. 

"I've had the office moved back 
to Bennington. The intercity teleport manager offered us space." 
The locally owned world branches 
of intercity teleport were independent of Teleport Interstellar, but 
usually, granted courtesy exchanges 
with the latter. "They'll be evacuating the city next, if I know the 
Governor. Just got a cease and desist order — came while you were 
trying to commit suicide. We're to 
stop transmitting at once!" 




 



He grunted at Vic's grimace, and 
motioned the chauffeur on, just as 
a radiophone call reached them. 
Vic shook his head at the driver 
and looked out to see Pthcela 
ploughing along against the wind, 
calling to.them. The plant woman's 
skin was peeling worse than ever. 

Flavin followed Vic's eyes. "You 
going to let that ride with us? The 
way Plathies stink? Damned plants, 
you can't trust 'em. Probably mixed 
up in this trouble. I heard . . ." 

"Plathgol rates higher in civilization than we do," Pat stated 
flatly. 

"Yeah. Ten thousand years 
stealing culture we had to scratch 
up for ourselves in a thousand. So 
the Galactic Council tells us we've 
got to rub our noses to a superior 
race. Superior plants! Nuts!" 

Vic opened the door and reached 
for Pat's hand. Flavin frowned, 
fidgeted, then reached out to pull 
them back. "Okay, okay. I told you 
that you were in charge here. If 
you want to ride with stinking 
Plathies — well, you're running 
things. But don't blame me if 
people start throwing mud." He 
had the grace to redden faintly as 
Ptheela came up finally, and 
changed the subject hastily. "Why 
can't we just snap a big hunk of 
metal over the entrances and seal 
them up?" 

"Too late," Ptheela answered, 
sliding down beside Pat, her English drawing a surprised start from 
Flavin. "I was inspecting the tanks; 

THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



they're field-etched where they 
touched. That means the field is 
already outside the building, though 
it will spread more slowly without 
the metal to resonate it. Anyhow, 
you couldn't get metal plates up." 

"How long will the air last?" 
Pat asked. 

Vic shrugged. "A month at 
breathing level, maybe. Fortunately 
the field doesn't spread downward 
much, with the Betzian design, so 
it won't start working on the Earth 
itself. Flavin, how about getting 
the experts here? I need help." 

"Already sent for them," Flavin 
grunted. They were heading toward the main part of Bennington 
now, ten miles from the station. 
His face was gray and he no longer 
seemed to notice the somewhat 
pervasive odor of Ptheela. 

THEY drew up to a converted 
warehouse finally, and he gotout, starting up the steps just as 
the excited cries of a newsboy 
reached his ears. He flipped a coin 
and spread the extra before them. 

It was all over the front page, 
with alarming statements from the 
scientists first interviewed and 
soothing statements from later 
ones. No Teleport Interstellar man 
had spoken, hut an interview with 
one of the local teleport engineers 
had given the basic facts, along 
with some surprisingly keen guesses 
as to what would happen next. 

But above everything was the 
black headline: 

19 



BOMB TRANSMITTER, 
SAYS PAN- ASIA 

The ultimatum issued by PanAsia was filled with high-sounding 
phrases and noble justification, but 
its basic message was clear enough. 
Unless the loss of air — air that belonged to everyone — was stopped 
and all future transmitting of all 
types halted, together with all dealings with "alien anti-terrestrials," 
Pan-Asia would be forced to bomb 
the transmitters, together with all 
other resistance. 

"Maybe . . ." Flavin began 
doubtfully, but Vic cut him off. 
His faith in mankind's right to its 
accidental niche in the Galactic 
Council wasn't increasing much. 

"No dice. The field is a spacestrain that is permanent, ■ unless 
canceled by the right wave-form. 
The canceling crystal is in the 
transmitter. Destroy that and the 
field never can be stopped. It'll 
keep growing until the whole Earth 
is gone. Flavin, you'd better get 
those experts here fast!" 

Ill 

VIC sat in the car the next morning, watching the black cloud 
that swirled around the station, 
reaching well beyond the old office. 
His eyes were red, his face was 
gray with fatigue, and his lanky 
body was slumped onto the seat. 
Pat looked almost as tired, though 
she had gotten some sleep. Now 



she took the empty coffee cup and 
thermos from him. She ran a hand 
through his hair, straightening it, 
then pulled his head down to her 
shoulder and began rubbing the 
back of his neck gently. 

Pthecla purred approvingly from 
the other side, and Pat snorted. 
"Get your mind off romance, 
Ptheela! Vic's practically out on 
his feet. If he weren't so darned 
stubborn, this should make him go 
to sleep." 

"Romance!" Ptheela chewed the 
idea and spat it out. "All spring 
budding and no seed. A female 
should have pride from strong husbands and proven seeding." 

Vic let them argue. At the moment, Pat's attention was soothing, 
but only superficially. His head 
went on fighting for some usable 
angle and finding none. He'd 
swiped all the knowledge he could 
from Ptheela, without an answer. 
Plathgol was more advanced than 
Earth, but far below the Betz II 
engineers, who were mere servants 
of the Council. 

No wonder man had resented 
the traffic with other worlds. For 
centuries he had been the center of 
his universe. Now, like the Tasmanians, he found himself only an 
isolated valley of savages in a universe that was united in a culture 
far beyond his understanding. He'd 
never even conquered his own 
planets; all he'd done was to build 
better ways of killing himself. 

Now he was reacting typically 



20 




 



enough, in urgent need of some 
race even lower, to put him on 
middle ground, at least. He was 
substituting hatred for his lost confidence in himself. 

Why. learn more about matter 
transmitting when other races knew 
the answers and were too selfish to 
share them? Vic grumbled, remembering the experts. He'd wasted 
hours with them, to find that they 
were useless. The names that had 
been towers of strength had proved 
no more than men as baffled as he 
was. With even the limited knowledge he'd pried from Ptheela, he 
was far ahead of them — and still 
further behind the needs of the 
problem. 

THE gun Flavin had insisted he 
wear was uncomfortable, and 
he pulled himself up, staring at 
the crew of men who were working as close to the center of wind 
as they could get. He hadn't been 
able to convince them that tunneling was hopeless. All they needed 
was a one-millimeter hole through 
the flooring, up which blasting 
powder could be forced to knock 
aside the glass fragment. They refused to accept the fact that the 
Betz II shielding could resist the 
best diamond drills under full 
power for centuries. He shrugged. 
At least it helped the general 
morale to see something being 
done; he'd given in finally and let 
them have their way. 

"We might as well go back," he 



decided. He'd hoped that the morning air and sight of the station 
might dear his head, but the weight 
of responsibility had ruined that. 
It was ridiculous, but he was still 
in charge. 

Flavin reached back and cut on 
the little television set. With no 
real understanding, he was trying 
to learn tolerance of Ptheela, but 
he felt more comfortable in front, 
beside the chauffeur. 

Pat caught her breath, and Vic 
looked at the screen, where a newscast was showing a crowd in Denver tearing down one of the Earthdesigned intercity teleports. Men 
were striking back at the menace 
blindly. A man stood up from his 
seat in Congress to demand an end 
to alien intercourse; Vic remembered the fortune in interstellar 
trading of levo-rotary crystals that 
had bought the man's seat and the 
transmitter-brought drugs that had 
saved him from death by cancer. 

There were riots in California, 
the crackpot Knights of Terra were 
recruiting madly, and murder was 
on the increase. Rain had fallen in 
Nevada. There were severe weather 
disturbances throughout the country, caused by the unprecedented 
and disastrously severe low over 
Bennington. People were complaining of the air, already claiming they could feel it growing 
thinner, though that was sheer hysterical nonsense. Also, the Galactic 
Envoy was missing. 

The editorial of the Bennington 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



21 



Times came on last, pointing a finger at Vic for changing the circuits, but blaming it on the aliens 
who hoarded their knowledge so 
callously. There was just enough 
truth in the charge to be dangerous. Bennington was close enough 
to the transmitter to explain the 
undertones of lynch law that permeated the editorial. 

"Ill put a stop to that," Flavin 
told Vic angrily. "I've got enough 
pull to make them pull a complete 
retraction. But it won't undo all 
the harm." 

VIC felt the automatic, and it 
seemed less of a nuisance now. 
"I notice no news on Pan-Asia's 
ultimatum." 

"Yeah. I hear the story was 
killed by Presidential emergency 
powers, and Pan-Asia has agreed 
to a three-day stay — no more. My 
information isn't the best, but I 
gather we'll bomb it ourselves if 
it isn't cleared up by then." 

Vic climbed out at the local station office, with the others trailing. 
In the waiting room, a vaguely 
catlike male from Sardax waited, 
clutching a few broken ornaments 
and a thin sheaf of Galactic credits. One of his four arms was 
obviously broken and yellow blood 
oozed from a score of wounds. 

But he only shrugged at Vic's 
whistled questions, and his answer 
in Code was unperturbed. "No 
matter. In a few moments I ship 
to Chicago, then home. My attack


ers smclled strongly of hate, but I 
escaped." His whistle caught at a 
signal from the routing office, and 
he hurried off, with a linal sentence. "They will survive, I am 
told." 

Remembering die talons on the 
Sardaxan's hands, Vic grinned wryly. They were a peaceful race, but 
pragmatic enough to see no advantage in being killed. 

Vic threw open the door to his 
little office and the four went in. 
It wasn't until he started toward 
his desk that he noticed his visitor. 

The Galactic Envoy might have 
been the robot he claimed, but 
there was no sign of it. He was 
dressed casually in expensive 
tweeds, lounging gracefully in a 
chair, with a touch of a smile on 
his face. Now he got up, holding 
out a hand to Vic. 

"I heard you were running 
things. Haven't seen you since I 
helped pick you for the first year 
class, but I keep informed. Thought 
I'd drop by to tell you the Council 
has given official approval to your 
full authority over the Earth 
Branch of Teleport Interstellar, and 
I've filed the information with the 
U. N. and your President." 

Vic lifted his head. "Why me?" 

"You've learned all the theory 
Earth has, you've had more practical experience with more stations 
than anyone else, and you've undoubtedly picked Ptheela's brains 
dry by now. You're the obvious 
man." , 



22 




 



"I'd a lot rather see one of your 
high and mighty Galactic experts 
take over!" 

The Envoy shook his head gently. "We've found that the race 
causing the trouble usually is the 
race best fitted to solve it. The same 
ingenuity that maneuvered the sabotage — it was sabotage, by the way 
— will help you solve it, perhaps. 
The Council may not care much for 
your grab first rule in economics 
and politics, but it never doubted 
that you represent one of the most 
ingenious races we have met. You 
see, there really are no inferior 
races." 

"Sabotage?" Pat looked sick. 
"Who'd be that stupid and 
vicious?" 

THE Envoy smiled faintly. 
"Who'd give the Knights of 
Terra money for a recruiting drive? 
I can't play much part in things 
here — I've got limited abilities, a 
touch of telepathy, a little more 
knowledge than you, and a certain 
in-built skill at handling political 
situations. Your own government is 
busy examining the ramifications of 
the plot now. It had to be an inside job, as you call it." 

"Earth for Earth, and down with 
the transmitters," Vic summed it 

up- . 

The Envoy nodded. "They forget 
that the transmitters can't be removed without Council workers. 
And when the Council revokes approval, it destroys all equipment 



and most books, while seeing thai 
three generations are brought up 
without knowledge. You'd rever 
to semi-savagery and have to maku 
a fresh start up. Well, I'm lucky — 
your President J^ilkes is sympathetic, and your F. B. I. has been 
cooperative so far. If you sol\ . 
things, the sabotage shouldn\ 
prove too much of a problem. Goo I 
luck." 

Flavin had been eying him, anil 
his dislike flared up as the Envoy 
left. "A hell of a lot of nerve for 
guys who claim they don't interfere !" 

"It happened to us twice," 
Ptheela observed. "We were better 
for it eventually. The. Council's 
rules are from half a billion years 
of experience, with tremendous 
knowledge. We must submit." 
."Not without a fight!" 

"Without a fight," Vic said 
bluntly. "We're babes in arms to 
them. Anyhow, who cares? Congressional babble won't save us if 
we lose our atmosphere. But they 
can't see it." 

The old idea — something would 
turn up. Maybe they couldn't cut 
off the transmitter from outside, 
and had no way of getting past the 
wind to the inside. But something 
would turn up. 

He'd heard rumors of the Army 
taking over, and almost wished 
they would. As it stood, he had 
full responsibility and nothing 
more. Flavin and the Council had 
turned thiogs over to him, but the 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



23 



local cop on the beat had more 
power. It would be a relief to have 
someone around to shout even stupid orders, and get some of the 
weight off Vic's shoulders. 

SABOTAGE! It couldn't even be 
an accident;. the cockeyed race 
to which he belonged had to try to 
commit suicide and then expect 
him to save it. 

He shook his head, vaguely conscious of someone banging on the 
door, and reached for the knob. 
"Amos!" 

The sour face never changed expression as the corpselike figure of 
the man slouched in. Amos was 
dead — he'd been in the transmitter. They all realized it at once. 

But Amos shook off their remarks. "Nothing surprising, just 
common sense. When I saw the 
capsule start cracking, I jumped 
into a capsule headed for Plathgol, 
set the delay, and tripped the 
switch. Saw some glass shooting at 
me, but I was in Plathgol before 
it hit. Went out and got me a mess 
of Isiuna — they cook fair to middling, seeing they never tried it 
before they met us. Then I showed 
'em my pass, came through Chicago, 
here, and home. I figured the old 
woman would be worried. Nobody 
told me about the mess till I saw 
the papers. Common sense to report to you, so here I am." 

"How much did you see of the 
explosion?" Pat asked. 

"Not much. Just saw it was 



cracking — trick glass, no temperature tolerance. Looked like Earth 
capsule color." 

It didn't matter. It added to 
Vic's disgust to believe it was sabotage, but didn't change the picture 
otherwise. The Council wouldn't 
reverse its decision. They treated a 
race as a unit, making no exception 
for the behavior of a few individuals, whether good or bad. 

Another knock on the door cut 
off his vicious circle of hopelessness. "Old home week here, evidently. Come in!" 

The man who entered was the 
rare example of a fat man in the 
pink of physical condition, with no 
sign of softness. He shoved his bulk 
through the doorway as if he expected the two stars on his shoulders to light the way and awe all 
beholders. "Who is Victor Peters?" 

Vic wiggled a finger at himself, 
and the general came over. He 
drew out an envelope and dropped 
it on the desk, showing clearly that 
acting as a messenger was far beneath his dignity. "An official communication from the President of 
the United States," he said mechanically, and turned to make his exit 
back to the intercity transmitters. 

It was a plain envelope, without 
benefit of wax seals or ribbons. Vic 
ripped it open, looked at the signature and the simple letterhead, and 
checked the signature again. He 
read it aloud to the others. 

"To Mr. — damn it, officially I've 
got a doctor's degree — to Mr. Vic


24 




 



tor Peters, nominally — Hah ! — in 
charge of the Bennington Branch 
of Teleport Interstellar — I guess 
they didn't tell him it's nominally 
in charge of all Earth branches. 
Umm. You are hereby instructed to 
remove all personnel from a radius 
of five miles minimum of your 
Teleport Branch not later than 
noon, August 21, unless matters 
shall be satisfactorily culminated 
prior to that time. Signed, Homer 
Wilkes, President of the United 
States of America." 

"Bombs!" Pat shuddered, while 
Vic let the message fall to the 
floor, kicking it toward the wastebasket. "The fools! The damned 
fools! Couldn't they tell him what 
would happen? Couldn't they make 
him see that it'll only make turning 
off the transmitter impossible forever?" 

Flavin shrugged, dropping unaware onto the couch beside 
Ptheela. "Maybe he had no choice. 
Either he does it or some other 
power does it." t 

Then he came to his feet, staring at Vic. "My God, that's tomorrow noon!" 

IV 

VIC looked at the clock later, 
and was surprised to see that 
it was already well into the afternoon. The others had left him, 
Ptheela last when she found there 
was no more knowledge she could 
contribute. He had one of the elec


tronic calculators plugged in beside 
him, and a table of the so-called 
Dirac functions propped up on it; 
when the press had discovered that 
Dirac had predicted some of the 
characteristics that made telcportation possible, they'd named practically everything for him. 

The wastebasket was filled, the 
result of pure futility. He shoved 
the last sheet into it, and sat there, 
pondering. There had to be a solution!. 

Man's whole philosophy was 
built' on that idea. 

But it was a philosophy that included sabotage and suicide. What 
did it matter any — 

Vic jerked his head up, shaking 
it savagely, forcing the fatigue back 
by sheer will. There was a solution. 
All he had to do was find it — before the stupidity of war politics in 
a world connected to a Galaxy-wide 
union could prevent it. 

He pulled the calculator back, 
just as Flavin came into the room. 
The man was losing weight, or else 
fatigue was creating that illusion. 
He dropped into a chair as Vic 
looked up. 

"The men evacuated from 
around the station?" Vic asked. 

Flavin nodded. "Some of the 
bright boys finally convinced them 
that they were just wasting time, 
anyhow. Besides, the thing is still 
spreading, and getting too close to 
them. Vic, the news gets worse all 
the time. Can you take it?" 

"Now what? Don't tell me 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



25 



they've changed it to tomorrow 
morning." 

"Tomorrow, hell! In two hours 
they're sending over straight blockbusters, radar-controlled all the 
way. No atomics — yet — but they're 
jumping the gun, anyhow. Some 
nut convinced Wilkes that an ordinary eight-ton job might just 
shake things enough to fracture the 
glass that's holding the short. And 
Pan-Asia is going completely wild. 
I've been talking to Wilkes. The 
people are scared silly, and they're 
pressuring for quick war." 

Vic nodded reluctantly and 
reached for the benzedrine he'd 
hoped to save for the last possible 
moment, when it might carry him 
all the way through. What difference did it make? Even if he had 
an idea, he'd be unable to use it. 

"And yet . . ." He considered it 
more carefully, trying to figure percentages. There wasn't a chance in 
a million, but they had to take 
even that one chance. It was better 
than nothing. "It might just work 
- -if they hit the right spot. I know 
where the glass is, and the layout 
of the station. But I'll need authority to direct the bombs. Flavin, 
can you get me President Wilkes?" 

TTtl-AVIN shrugged, reached for 
JL the televisor. He managed to 
get quite a way up by some form 
of code, but then it began to be a 
game of nerves and brass. Along 
his own lines, he apparently knew 
his business. In less than fifteen 



minutes, Vic was talking to the 
President. For a further few minutes, the screen remained blank. 
Then another face came on, this 
time in military uniform, asking 
quick questions, while Vic pointed 
out the proper targets. 

Finally the officer nodded. "Good 
enough, Peters. We'll try it. If you 
care to watch, you can join the 
observers. Mr. Flavin already 
knows where they are. How are the 
chances?" 

"Not good. Worth trying." 

The screen darkened again, and 
Flavin got up. The thing was a 
wild gamble, but it was better to. 
jar the building than to melt its 
almost impregnable walls. Even 
Betz II metal couldn't take a series 
of hydrogen bombs, though nothing else could hurt it. And with 
that fury, the whole station would 
go
They picked up Pat, and moved 
out to Flavin's car. Vic knew better 
than to try to bring Ptheela along. 
As, an alien, she was definitely taboo around military affairs. The 
storm had reached the city now, 
and dense clouds were pouring 
down thick gouts of rain, leaving 
the day as black as night. The car 
slogged through it, until Flavin 
opened the door and motioned them 
out into a temporary metal shelter. 

Things were already started. Remote scanners were watching the 
guided missiles come down, and 
eyes were operating in the bombs, 
working on infra-red that cut 



26 




 



through the rain and darkness. It 
seemed to move slowly on the 
screen at first, but picked up apparent speed as it approached the 
transmitter buildings. The shielding 
grew dose, and Pat drew back 
with an involuntary jerk as it hit 
and the screen went black. Dead 
center. 

But the remote scanners showed 
no change. Hie abrupt break in the 
air-motion where the transmitter 
field began, outside the shielding, 
still showed. Another bomb came 
down, and others, each spaced so 
as to hit in time for others to be 
turned back, if it worked. Even 
through the impossible tornado of 
rotating fury, it was super-precision 
bombing. 

The field went on working just 
the same, far beyond the shielding, 
pulling an impossible number of 
cubic feet of air from Earth every 
second. They stopped watching the 
screen shown by the bomb-cyes at 
last, and even the Army gave up. 

"Funny," one observer commented. "No sound, no flash when 
the bombs hit. I've been watching 
the remote scanners every time instead of the eye, and nothing 
happens. The bombs just disappear." 

PAT shook herself. "They can't 
hit. They go right through the 
field, before they can hit. Vic, it 
won't matter if we do atom-bomb 
the station. It can't be reached." 
But he was already ahead of her. 



"The Ecthindar will love that. 
They've already been dosed with 
chemical bombs. Now guess what 
they'll do." 

"Simple." It was the observer 
who got that. "Start feeding atom 
bombs into their transmitters back 
to us." 

Then he shouted hoarsely, pointing through a window. From the 
direction of the station, a dazzle of 
light had lanced out sharply, and 
was now fading down. Vic snapped 
back to the remote scanner, and 
scowled. The field was still working; there was no sign of damage 
to the transmitter. If the Ecthindar had somehow snapped a bomb 
into the station, it must have been 
retransmitted before full damage. 

The Army men stared sickly at 
the station, but Vic was already 
moving toward the door. Pat 
grabbed his arm, and Flavin was 
with them by the time they reached 
the waiting car. 

"The Bennington office," Vic 
told the driver. "Fast! Somebody 
has to sec the Ecthindar in a hurry, 
if it'll do any good." 

"I'm going, too, Vic," Pat announced. He shook his head. "I'm 
going," she repeated stubbornly. 
"Nobody knows much about 
Ecthinbal or the Ecthindar. You 
call in Code messages, get routine 
Code back. We can't go there without fancy pressure suits, because we 
can't breathe their air. And they 
never leave. But I told you I was 
interested in races, and I have been 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



27 



trying to chit-chat with them. I 
know some things. You'll need 
me." 

He shook his head again. "It's 
enough for one of us to get killed. 
If I fail, Amos can try, or Flavin. 
If they both fail — well, suit yourself. It won't matter whether they 
kill me there or send through 
bombs to kill me here. But if one 
of us can get a chance to explain, 
it may make some difference. I 
don't know. But it may." 

Her eyes were hurt, but she gave 
in, going with him silently as he 
stepped into the local Bennington 
unit and stepped out in Chicago, 
heading toward the Chicago Interstellar branch. She waited patiently 
while the controlmen scouted out a 
pressure suit for him. Then she began helping him fasten it and 
checking his oxygen equipment. 
"Come back, Vic," she said 
finally. 

HE CHUCKED a fist under her 
chin and kissed her quickly, 
keeping it casual with a sureness 
he couldn't feel. "You're a good 
kid, Pat. I'll sure try." 

He pulled the helmet down and 
clicked it shut before stepping into 
the capsule and letting the seal 
snap shut. He could see her swing 
to the interstellar phone, her lips 
pursed in whistled code. The sound 
was muffled, but the lights changed 
abruptly, and her hand hit the 
switch. 

There was no apparent time in


volved. He was on Ecthinbal, looking at a faintly greenish atmosphere, noticeable only because of 
the sudden change, and fifty pounds 
seemed to have been added to his 
weight. The transmitter was the 
usual Betz II design, and everything else was familiar except for 
the creature standing beside the 
capsule. 

The Ecthindar might have been 
a creation out of green glass, coated 
with a soft fur, and blown by a 
bottlemaker who enjoyed novelty. 
There were two thin, long legs, 
multijointed, and something that 
faintly resembled the pelvis of a. 
skeleton. Above that, two other thin 
rods ran up, with a double bulb 
where lungs might have been, and 
shoulders like the collar pads of a 
football player, joined together and 
topped by four hard knobs, each 
with a single eye and orifice. Double arms ran from each shoulder, 
almost to the ground. 

He expected to hear a tinkle 
when the creature moved, and was 
surprised when he did hear it, until 
he realized the sound was carried 
through the metal floor, not 
through the thin air. 

The creature swung open the 
capsule door after some incomprehensible process that probably 
served to sterilize it. Its Galactic 
Code whistle came through Vic's 
shoes from the floor. "We greet 
you, Earthman. Our mansions are 
poor, but they are yours. Our lives 
are at your disposal." Then the 



28 




 



formal speecli ended in a sharp 
whistle. "Literally, it would seem. 
We die." 

It didn't fit with Vic's expectations, but he tried to take his cue 
from it. "That's why I'm here. Do 
you have some kind of ruler? Umm, 
good. How do I get to see this 
ruler?" He had few hopes of getting there, but it never did any 
harm to try. 

The Ecthindar seemed unsurprised. "I shall take you at once. 
For what other purpose is a ruler 
but to serve those who wish to see 
it? But — I trespass on your kindness in the delay. But may I question whether a strange light came 
forth from your defective transmitter?" 

VIC snapped a look at it, and 
nodded slowly. 
"It did." 

Now the ax would fall. He 
braced himself for it, but the creature ceremoniously elaborated on 
his nod. 

' ' I was on e who beli eved i t 
might. It is most comforting to 
know my science was true. When 
the bombs came through, we held 
them in a shield, but, in our error, 
we believed them radioactive. We 
tried a negative aspect of space to 
counteract them. Of course, it 
failed, since they were only chemical. But I had postulated that some 
might have escaped from receiver 
to transmitter, being negative. You 
are kind. And now, if vou will 



honor my shoulder with the touch 
of your hand, so that my portableunit will transport us both . . 

Vic reached out and the scene 
shifted at once. There was no apparent transmitter, and the trick 
beat anything he had heard from 
other planets. Perhaps it was -totally unrelated to the teleport machine. 

But he had no time to ask. 

A door in the little room opened, 
and another creature came in, this 
time single from pelvis to shoulders, but otherwise the same. "The 
ruler has been requested," it whistled. "That which the ruler is is 
yours, and that which the ruler has 
is nothing. May the ruler somehow 
serve?" 

It was either the most cockeyed 
bit of naivete or the fanciest runaround Vic had found, but totally 
unlike anything he'd been prepared 
for. He gulped, and began whistling out the general situation on 
Earth. 

The Ecthindar interrupted politely. "That we know. And the converse is true— we too are dying. We 
are a planet of a thin air, and that 
little is chlorine. Now from a matter transmitter comes a great rush 
of oxygen, which we consider 
poison. Our homes around are 
burned in it, our plant life is dying 
of it, and we are forced to remain 
inside and seal ourselves off. Like 
you, we can do nothing — the wind 
from your world is beyond our 
strength." 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



"But your science . . ." 

"Is beyond yours, true. But your 
race is adaptable, and we are too 
leisurely for that virtue." 

Vic shook his head, though perhaps it made good sense. "But the 
bombs ..." 

A series of graceful gestures 
took place between the two creatures, and the ruler turned back to 
Vic. 

"The ruler had not known, of 
course. It was not important. We 
lost a few thousand people whom 
we love. We understood, however. 
There is no anger, though it 
pleases us to sec that your courtesy 
extends across the spaces to us. 
May your dead pass well." 

That was at least one good break 
in the situation. Vic felt some of 
his worry slide aside to make room 
for the rest. "And I don't suppose 
you have any ideas on how we can 
take care of this . . ." 

There was a shocked moment, 
with abrupt movements from the 
two creatures. Then something 
came up in the ruler's hands, vibrating sharply. Vic jumped back 
— and froze in mid-stride, to fall 
awkwardly onto the floor. A chunk 
of ice seemed to form in his backbone and creep along his spine, 
until it touched his brain. Death 
dr paralysis? It was all the same; 
he had air for only an hour more. 
The two creatures were fluttering 
at each other and moving toward 
him when he abruptly and painlessly blacked out. 



V 

HIS first feeling was the familiar, deadening pull of fatigue 
as his senses began to come back. 
Then he saw that he was in a tiny 
room — and that Pat lay stretched 
out beside him ! 

He threw himself up to a sitting 
position, surprised to find that there 
were no after-effects to whatever 
the ruler had used. The damned 
little fool, coming through after 
him. And now they had her, too. 

Her eyes snapped open, and she 
sat up beside him. "Darn it, I almost fell asleep waiting for you to 
revive. It's a good thing I brought 
extra oxygen flasks. Your hour is 
about up. How'd you manage to 
insult them?" 

He puzzled over it while she 
changed his oxygen flask and he 
did the same for her. "I didn't. I 
just asked whether they didn't know 
of some way we could take care of 
this trouble." 

"Which meant to them that you 
suspected they weren't giving all 
the help they could, after their formal offer when you came over. I 
convinced them it was just that you 
were still learning Code, whatever 
you said. They're nice, Vic. I never 
really believed other races were 
better than we are, but I do now — 
and it doesn't bother me at all." 

,"It'd bother Flavin. He'd have 
to prove they were sissies or something. How do we get out?" 
She pushed the door open, and 



30 




 



they stepped back into the room of 
the ruler, who was waiting for 
them. It made no reference to the 
misunderstanding, but inspected 
Vic, whistled approval of his condition, and plunged straight to 
business. 

"We have found part of a solution, Earthman. We die, but it 
will be two weeks before our end. 
First, we shall set up a transmitter 
in permanent transmit, equipped 
with a precipitator to remove our 
chlorine, and key it to another of 
your ' transmitters. Whichever one 
you wish. Ecthinbal is heavy, but 
small, and a balance will be struck 
between the air going from you and 
the air returning. The winds between stations may disturb your 
weather, but not seriously, we hope. 
That which the ruler is is yours. A 
lovely passing." 

It touched their shoulders, and 
they were back briefly in the transmitter, to be almost instantly in the 
Chicago Branch. Vic was still shaking his head. 

"It won't work. The ruler didn't 
allow for the way our gravity falls 
off faster and our air thins out 
higher up. We'd end up with maybe four pounds pressure, which 
isn't enough. So both planets die — 
two worlds on my shoulders instead of one. Hell, we couldn't take 
that offer from them, anyhow. Pat, 
how'd you convince them to let me 
go?" 

She had shucked out of the pressure suit and stood combing her 



hair. "Common sense, as Amos 
says. I figured engineers consider 
each other engineers first, and 
aliens second, so I went to the head 
engineer instead of the ruler. He 
fixed it up somehow. I guess I must 
have sounded pretty desperate, at 
that, knowing your air would give 
out after an hour." 

They went through the, local intercity teleport to Bennington and 
on into Vic's office, where Flavin 
met them with open rehef and a 
load of questions. Vic let Pat answer, while he mulled over her 
words. Somewhere, there was an 
idea — let the rulers alone and go 
to the engineers. Some obvious solution that the administrators would 
try and be unable to use? He 
shoved it around in his floating 
memory, but it refused to trigger 
any chain of thought. 

PAT was finishing the account of 
the Ecthindar offer, but Flavin 
was not impressed. Ptheela came 
in, and it had to be repeated for 
her, with much more enthusiastic 
response. 

"So what?" Flavin asked. "They 
have to die, anyhow. Sure, it's a 
shame, but we have our own problems. Hey — wait ! Maybe there's 
something to it. It'd take some guts 
and a little risk, but it would 
work." 

Flavin considered it while Vic 
sat fidgeting, willing to listen to 
any scheme. The politician took a 
cigar out and lit it carefully, his 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



31 



first since the accident; he'd felt 
that smoking somehow used up 
•air. "Look, if they work their transmitter, we end up with a quarter 
of what we need. But suppose we 
had four sources. We connect with 
several oxygen -atmosphere worlds. 
Okay, we load our transmitters with 
atom bombs, and send one capsule 
to each jvorld. After that, they 
either open a transmitter to us with 
air, or we let them have it. They 
can live — a little poorer, maybe, 
but still live. And we're fixed for 
good. Congress and the President 
would jump at it." 
"That all?" Vic asked. 

F.AVIN nodded. Vic's fist 
caught him in the mouth, 
spilling him onto the floor. The 
politician lay there, feeling his jaw 
and staring up at Vic. Then the 
anger was gone, and Vic reached 
down to -help him up. 

"You're half a decent guy and 
half a fouse," Vic told him. "You 
had that coming, but I should have 
used it on some of the real lice 
around. Besides, maybe you have 
part of an idea." 

"All right, no teeth lost — just 
the first cigar I've enjoyed in 
days." Flavin rubbed his jaw, then 
grinned ruefully. "I should have 
known how you feel. I just happen 
to believe in Earth first. What's 
this big idea of yours?" 

"Getting our air through other 
planets. Our air. It's a routing job. 
If we can set up a chain so the air 



going out of one transmitter in a 
station is balanced by air coming 
from another in the same station, 
there'd be a terrific draft. But most 
of it would be confined in the station, and there wouldn't be the 
outside whirlwind to keep us from 
getting near. Instead of a mad rush 
of air in or out of the building, 
there'd be only eddy currents outside of the inner chamber. We'd 
keep our air, and maybe have time 
to figure out some way of getting 
at that hunk of glass." 

"Won't work," Flavin ' said 
gloomily. "Suppose Wilkes was 
asked to route through for another 
planet. He'd have to turn it down. 
Too much risk." 

"That's where Pat gave me the 
tip. Engineers get used to thinking 
of each other as engineers instead 
of competing races — they have to 
work together. They have the same 
problems and develop the same 
working habits. If I were running 
a station and the idea was put to 
me, I'd hate to turn it down, and 
I might not think of the political 
end. I've always wanted to see what 
happened in continuous transmittal; 
I'll be tickled pink to get at the 
instrument rolls in the station. And 
a lot of the other engineers will 
feel the same." 

"We're already keyed to Plathgol on a second transmitter," Pat 
added. "And the Ecthindar indicated they had full operation when 
it happened, so they're keyed to 
five other planets." 



32 




 



"Bomb-dropping starts in about 
four hours," Flavin commented. 
"After that, what?" 

"No chance. They'll go straight 
through, and the Ecthindar can 
neutralize them — but one is pretty 
* sure to start blasting here and carry 
through in full action. Then there'll 
be no other transmitter in their station, just a big field on permanent 
receive." 

THE two engineers at the Chicago Branch were busy shooting dice when the four came 
through the intercity transmitter. 
There was no one else in the place, 
and no sign of activity. Word of 
the proposed bombing had leaked 
out, and the engineers had figured 
that answering bombs would come 
blasting back through Earth tcleports. They knew what they'd have 
done, and didn't know of the 
Ecthindar philosophy. The engineers had passed the word to other 
employees, and only these two 
were left, finishing a feud of long 
standing in the time left. 

"Know anything about routing?" Vic asked. When they indicated no knowledge, he chased 
them out on his Teleport Interstellar authority and took over. He 
had no need of more engineers, 
and they were cynical enough about 
the eventual chances there to leave 
gladly. Vic had never had any use 
for Chicago's manager and the 
brash young crew he'd built up; 
word shouldn't have gone beyond 



the top level. If it leaked out to 
the general public, there'd be a 
panic for miles around. 

But Chicago's routing setup was 
the best in the country; he needed 
it. Now how did he go about getting a staff trained to use it? 

"Know how to find things 
here?" Flavin asked Pat. He accepted her nod, and looked surprised at Ptheela's equally quick 
assent. Then he grinned at Vic and 
began shucking off his coat. "Okay, 
you see before you one of the best 
traffic managers that ever helped 
pull a two-bit railroad out of the 
red, before I got better offers in 
politics. I'm good. You get me the 
dope, Vic can haggle on the transmitter phones, and I'll route it." 

He was good. Vic watched him 
take over with surprise, and a 
sudden growing liking for the man. 
Flavin had probably been a lot more 
of a man, before he'd been shoved 
into politics. Maybe he'd have done 
less of drinking and picking up 
prejudices if he'd been working 
where he knew he was Joing a 
good job. Certainly he had adapted 
well enough to the present situation, and he looked happier now 
as he took over. 

Flavin's mind seemed to soak up 
all routing data at once, from a 
single look at- the complicated 
blocks of transmitter groups and 
key-ins. He jumped from step to 
step without apparent thought, and 
he had to have information only 
once before engraving it on his 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



33 



mind. It was a tough nut, since the 
stations housed six transmitters 
each, keyed to six planets — but in 
highly varied combinations; every 
world had its own group of tie-ins 
with planets, also. Routing was the 
most complicated job in the wholeproblem. 

PLATHGOL was handled by 
Ptheela, who was still in good 
standing until the Council would 
learn of her breaking the law by 
talking to Vic. There was no trouble there. But trouble soon developed. Ecthinbal had been keyed to 
only two other planets, it turned 
out. Vromatchk was completely 
cold on the idea, and flatly refused. 
Ee, the other planet, seemed difficult. 

It surprised him, because it 
didn't fit with Pat's theories of 
engineers at all. He scowled at the 
phone, then whistled again. '-'Your 
zeal is commendable. Now put an 
engineer on !" 

The answering whistle carried a 
fumbling uncertainty of obvious 
surprise. "I — how did you know? I 
gave all the right answers." 

"Sure. Right off the Engineer 
Rule Sheet posted over the transmitter. No real engineer worries 
that much about them; he has more 
things to think of. Put the engineer on." 

The answer was still obstinate. 
"My father's asleep. He's tired. Call 
later." 

The connection went dead at 



once. Vic called Ecthinbal while 
clambering into the big pressure 
suit. He threw the delay switch and 
climbed into the right capsule. A 
moment later, an Ecthindar was 
moving the capsule on a delicatelooking machine to another transmitter. Something that looked like 
a small tyrannosaurus with about 
twenty tentacles instead of forelegs 
was staring in at him a second later, 
and he knew he was on Ee. 

"Take me to the engineer!" he 
ordered. "At once!" 

The great ridges of horn over 
the eyes came down in a surprisingly human scowl, but the stubbornness was less certain in person. The 
creature turned and led Vic out to 
a huge shack outside. In answer 
to a whooping cry, a head the size 
of a medium-sized freight car came 
out of the door, to be followed by 
a titanic body. The full-grown 
adult was covered with a thick coat 
of ropy hair. 

"Where from?" the Ee engineer 
whistled. "Wait — I saw a picture 
once. Earth.. Come in. I hear you 
have quite a problem there." 

Vic nodded. It came as a shock 
to him that the creature could probably handle the whole station by 
itself, as it obviously did, and quite 
efficiently, with that size and all 
those tentacles. He stated his problem quickly. 

The Looech, as it called itself, 
scratched its stomach with a row 
of tentacles and pondered. "I'd 
like to help you. Oh, the empress 



34 




 



would have Jits, but I could call it 
an accident. We engineers aren't 
really responsible to governments, 
after all, are we? But it's the busy 
season. I'm already behind, since 
my other engineer got in a duel. 
That's why the pup was tending 
while I slept. You say the field 
spreads out on continuous transmit?.'* 

"It does, but it wouldn't much 
more if there isn't too long a period." 

"Strange. I've thought of continuous transmittal, of course, but 
I didn't suspect that. Why, I wonder?" 

VIC started to give Ptheela's explanation of unbalanced resonance between the vacuum of the 
center and the edges in contact 
with matter, but dropped it quickly. "I'll probably know better when 
I can read the results from the instruments." 

The Looech grumbled to itself. 
"You suppose you could send me 
the readings? We're about on a 
Galactic level, so it wouldn't strain 
the law too much." 

Vic shook his head. "If I can't 
complete the chain, there won't be 
any readings. I imagine you could 
install remote cut-offs fairly easily." 

"No trouble, though nobody ever 
seemed to think they might be 
needed. I suppose it would be covered under our emergency powers, 
if we stretch them a little. Oh, 
blast you, now I won't sleep for 



worrying abou t why the field 
spreads. When will you begin?" 

Vic grinned tightly as they arranged the approximate time and 
let the Looech carry him back to 
the capsule. He flashed through 
Ecthinbal, and climbed out of the 
Chicago transmitter to find Pat 
looking worriedly at the capsule, 
summoned by the untended call 
announcer. 

"You're right, Pat," he told her. 
Engjn eers run pretty much to 
form. Tell Flavin we've got Ee." 

But there were a lot of steps to 
be taken still. He ran into a -Stumbling block at Norag, and had to 
wait for a change of shift, before 
a sympathetic engineer cut the red 
tape to clear him. And negative 
decisions here and there kept Flavin 
jumping to find new routes. 

They almost made it, to find a 
decision had just been reversed on 
Seloo by some authority who had 
gotten word of the deal. That meant 
that other authorities would probably be called in, with more reverses, in time. Once operating, the 
engineers could laugh at authority, 
since the remote cut-off could be 
easily hidden. But time was running out. There were only twentyseven minutes left before the bombs 
dropped, and it would take fifteen to countermand their being 
dropped. 

"Give me that," Flavin ordered, 
grabbing the phone. "There are 
times when it takes executives instead of engineers. We're broken at 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



35 



Scloo. Okay, we don't know where 
Scloo ships." His Galactic Code was 
halting, but fairly effective. The 
mechanical chirps from the Seloo 
operator leaped to sudden haste. A 
short pause was followed by an 
argument Vic was too tired to 
catch, until the final sentence. 
"Enad to Brjd to Teeni clear." 

"Never heard of Brjd," he commented. 

Flavin managed a ghost of a 
swagger. "Figured our lists were 
only partial, and wc could stfr up 
another link. Here's the list. I'll 
get Wilkes. Now that we've got it, 
he'll hold off until we see how it 
works." 

It was a maze, but the list was 
complete, from Earth to Ecthinbal, 
Ee, Petzby, Norag, Szpendrknopalavotschel, Seloo, Enad, Brjd, Teeni, 
and finally through Plathgol to 
Earth. Vic w histled the given signal, 
and the acknowledgments came 
through. It was in operation. 
Flavin's nod indicated Wilkes had 
confirmed it and held off the bombs. 

Nothing was certain, still; it 
might or might not do the trick. 
But the tension dropped somewhat. 
Flavin was completely exhausted. 
He hadn't had decent exercise for 
years, and running from communications to routing had been almost 
continual. He flopped over on a 
shipping table. Ptheela bent over 
him and began massaging him deftly. He grumbled, but gave in, then 
sighed gratefully. 

"Where'd you learn that?" 



She managed an Earthly giggle. 
"Instinct. My ancestors were plants 
that caught animals for food. We 
had all manner of ways to entice 
them— not just odor and looks. I 
can sense exactly how your body 
feels in the back of my head. Mm, 
delicious!" 

HE STRUGGLED at that, his 
face changing color. Her arms 
moved slowly, and he relaxed. 
Finally he reached for a cigar. "I'll 
have nightmares, I'll bet, but it's 
worth it. Oh, oh! Trouble!" 

The communicators were chirping busily. 

"Some of the rulers must be 
catching on and don't like it," 
Ptheela guessed. 

To Vic's surprise, though, several 
did like it, and were simply sending along hopes for success. Etchinbal's message was short, but it tingled along Vic's nerves: "It is good 
to have friends." 

Bennington was reporting by 
normal televisor contact, but while 
things seemed to be improving, they 
still couldn't get near enough to be 
sure. The field was apparently collapsing as the air was fed inside 
it, though very slowly. 

Ptheela needed no sleep, while 
Flavin was already snoring. Pat 
shook her head as Vic started to 
pull himself up on a table. She 
led him outside to the back of one 
of the sheds, where a blanket covered a cot, apparently used by one 
of the supervisors. She pushed him 



36 




 



toward it, As he started to struggle 
at the idea of using the only soft 
bed, she dropped onto it herself and 
pulled him down. 

"Don't be silly, Vic. It's big 
enough for both, and it's better 
than those tables." 

It felt like pure heaven, narrow 
though it was. Beside him, Pat 
stirred restlessly. He rolled over, 
pulling himself closer to her, off the 
hard edge of the cot, his arm over 
and around her. 

For a moment, he thought she 
was protesting, but she merely 
turned oyer to face him, settling his 
arm back. In the half-light, her 
eyes met his, wide and serious. Her 
lips trembled briefly under his, then 
clung firmly. His own responded, 
reaching for the comfort and end 
of tension hers could bring. 

"I'm glad it's you, Vic," she told 
him softly. Then her eyes closed as 
he started to answer, and his own 
words disappeared into a soft fog 
of sleep. 

The harsh rasp of a buzzer woke 
him, while a light blinked on and 
off near his head. He shook some 
of the sleep confusion out of his 
thoughts, and made out an intercom box. Flavin's voice came over 
It harshly and he flipped the switch. 

"Vic, where the hell are you? 
Never mind. Wilkes just woke me 
up with a call. Vic, it*s helped, but 
not enough. The field is about even 
with the building now. It's stopped 
shrinking, but we're still losing air. 
There's too much loss at Ecthinbal 



and at Ee — the engineer there 
didn't get the portals capped right, 
and Ecthinbal can't do anything. 
We're getting about one-third of 
our air back. And Wilkes can't hold 
the pressure for bombing much 
longer! Get over here." 

VI 

"TT7HERFS Ptheela?" Vic 
V V asked as he came into the 
transmitter room. She needed no 
sleep, and should have taken care 
of things. 

"Gone. Back to Plathgol, I 
guess, ' ' Flavin said bitterly, ' 'She 
was flicking out as 1 woke up. Rats 
deserting the sinking ship — though 
I was starting to figure her different. It just shows you can't trust a 
plant." 

Vic swept his attention to the 
communicator panel. The phones 
were still busy. They were still 
patient. Even the doubtful ones 
were now accepting things; but it 
couldn't last forever. Even without 
the risk, the transmitter banks were 
needed for regular use. Many did 
not have inexhaustible power 
sources, either. 

A new note cut in over the whistling now, and he turned to the 
Plathgol phone, wondering whether 
it was Ptheela and what she wanted. The words were English, but 
the voice was strange. 

"Plathgol calling. This is 
Thlegaa, Wife of Twelve Husbands, Supreme Plathgol Teleport 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



Engineer, Ruler of the Council of 
United Plathgol, and hereditary 
goddess, if you want the whole 
letterhead. Pthcela just gave me the 
bad news. Why didn't you call on 
us before — or isn't our air good 
enough for you?" 

"Hell, do you all. speak English?" Vic asked, too surprised to 
care whether he censored his 
thoughts. "Your air always smelled 
good to me. Are you serious?" 

The chuckle this time wasn't a 
mere imitation. Thlegaa had her 
intonation down exactly. "Sonny, 
up here we speak whatever our cultural neighbors do. You should 
hear my French nasals and Vro* 
matchkan rough-breathings. And 
I'm absolutely serious about the 
offer. We're pulling the stops off 
the transmitter housing. We run a 
trifle higher pressure than you, so 
we'll probably make up the whole 
loss. But I'm not an absolute ruler, 
so it might be a good idea to speed 
things up. You can thank me later. 
Oh — Pthcela's j ust been banned 
for giving you illegal data. She 
con f essed . When you get your 
Bennington plant working, she'll 
probably be your first load from us. 
She's packing up now." 

Flavin's face held too much relief. Vic hated to disillusion the 
politician as he babbled happily 
about always knowing the PlathgoIians were swell people. But Vic 
knew the job was a long way from 
solved. With Plathgol supplying 
air, the field would collapse back 



to the inside of the single transmitter housing, and there should be 
an even balance of ingoing and 
outcoming air, which would end 
the rush of air into the station, and 
make the circular halls passable, except for eddy currents. But getting 
into the inner chamber, where the 
air formed a gale between the two 
transmitters, was another matter. 

TTTLAVIN'S chauffeur was asleep 
A at the wheel of the car as they 
came out of the Bennington local 
office, yet instinct seemed to rouse 
him, and the car cut off wildly for 
the station. Vic had noticed that 
the cloud around it was gone, and 
a mass of people was grouped nearby. The wind that had been sucked 
in and around it to prevent even a 
tank getting through was gone now, 
though the atmosphere would 
probably show signs of it in freak 
weather reports for weeks after. 

Pat had obviously figured out the 
trouble remaining. And didn't look 
too surprised at the gloomy faces 
of the transmitter crew who were 
grouped near the north entrance. 
But she began swearing under her 
breath, as methodically and levelly 
as a man. Vic was ripping his shirt 
off as they drew up. 

"This time you stay out," he told 
her. "It's strictly a matter of muscle 
power against wind resistance, and 
a man has a woman beat there." 

"Why do you think I was curs-' 
ing?" she asked. "Take it easy, 
though." 



33 




 



The men opened a way for him. 
He stripped to his briefs, and let 
them smear him with oil to cut 
down air resistance a final fraction. 
Eddy currents caught at him before 
he went in, but not too strongly. 
Getting past the first shielding 
wasn't too bad. He found the second entrance . port through the 
middle shield, and snapped a chain 
around his waist. 

Then the full picture of what 
must have happened on Plathgol 
hit him. Chains wouldn't hav*e 
helped when they pulled off the 
coverings from the entrances, the 
su d d en rush of ai r must have 
crushed their lungs and broken 
their bones, no matter what was 
done. Imagine volunteering for sure 
death to help another world ! He 
had to make good on his part. 

He got to the inner portal, but 
the eddies there were too strong 
to go farther. Even sticking his 
eyes beyond the edge almost caught 
him into the blast between the two 
transmitters. Then he was clawing 
his way out again. 

Amos met him, shaking a 
gloomy head. "Never make it, 
Vic. Common sense. I've been 
there three times with no luck. And 
the way that draft blows, it'd knock 
even a tractor plumb out of the 
way before it could reach that hunk 
of glass." 

Vic nodded. The tanks would 
take too long to arrive, anyhow, 
though it would be a good idea to 
have them called. He yelled to 



Flavin, who came over on the run, 
while Vic was making sure that the 
little regular office building still 
stood. 

' 'Order the tanks, if we need 
them," he suggested. "Get me a 
rifle, some hard-nosed bullets, an 
all-angle vise big enough to clamp 
on a three-inch edge, and two of 
those midget telesets for use between house and field. Quick I" 

Amos stared at him, puzzled, but 
Flavin's car was already roaring toward Bennington, with a couple of 
cops leading the way with open 
sirens. Flavin was back with everything in twenty minutes, and Vic 
selected two of the strongest, leanest-looking men to come with him, 
while Pat went down to set the 
midget pickup in front of the stilloperating televisor between the 
transmitter chamber and the little 
office. Vic picked up the receiver 
and handed the rest of the equipment to the other two. 

IT WAS sheer torture fighting 
back to the inner entrance port, 
but they made it, and the other 
two helped to brace him with the 
chain while he clamped the vise to 
the edge of the portal, and locked 
the rifle into it, somehow fighting 
it into place. In the rather ill-defined picture on the tiny set's 
screen, he could see the huge fragment of glass, out of line from 
either entrance, between two covering uprights. He could just see 
the rifle barrel also. The picture 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



lost detail in being transmitted to 
the little office and picked up from 
the screen for rctransmittal bade 
to him, but it would have to do. 

The rifle was loaded to capacity 
with fourteen cartridges. He lined 
it up as best he could and tightened 
the vise, before pulling the trigger. 
The bullet ricocheted from the 
inner shield and headed toward the 
glass — but it missed by a good 
three feet. 

He was close on the fifth try, 
not over four inches off. But clinging to the edge while he pulled 
the trigger was getting harder, and 
the wind velocity inside was tossing the bullets off course. 

He left the setting, fired four 
more shots in succession before he 
had to stop to rest. They were all 
close, but scattered. That could 
keep up all day, seemingly. 

He pulled himself up again and 
squeezed the trigger. There was no 
sound over the roar of the wind — 



i 




 




and then there was suddenly a 
sound, as if the gale in there had 
stopped to cough. 

A blast of air struck, picking all 
three men up and tossing them 
against the wall. He'd forgotten the 
lag before the incoming air could 
be cut! It could be as fatal as the 
inrush alone. 

But the gale was dying as he hit 
the wall. His flesh was bruised 
from the shock, but it wasn't serious. Plathgol had managed to 
make their remote control cut out 
almost to the micro-second of the 
time when the flow to them had 
stopped, or the first pressure released — and transmitter waves were 
supposed to be instantaneous. 

He tasted the feeling of triumph 
as he crawled painfully back. With 
this transmitter off and the others 
remote controlled, the whole battle 
was over. Ecthinbal had keyed out 
automatically when Earth stopped 
sending. From now on, every transmitter would have a full set of remote controls, so the trouble could 
never happen again. 

He staggered out, unhooking the 
chain, while workmen went rushing in. Pat came through the 
crowd, with a towel and a pair of 
pants, and began wiping the oil 
off him while he tried to dress. 
Her grin was a bit shaky. He knew 
it must have looked bad when the 
final counterblast whipped out. 

Amos looked up glumly, and Vic 
grinned at him. "All over, Amos." 

The man nodded, staring at the 



THE WIND BETWEEN THE WORLDS 



41 



workmen who were dragging out 
the great pieces of glass from the 
building. His voice was strained, 
unnatural. "Yeah. Common sense 
solution, Vic." 

THEN his eyes swung aside and 
his face hardened. Vic saw the 
Envoy shoving through, with two 
wiry men behind him. The Envoy 
nodded at Vic, but his words were 
addressed to Amos. "And it shouldhave been common sense that 
you'd be caught, Amos. These men 
arc from your F. B. I. They have 
the men who paid you, and I suppose the glass will prove that it 
was a normal capsule, simply 
shocked with superhot spray and 
overdosed with supersonics. Didn't 
you realize that your easy escape to 
Plamgol was suspicious?" 

Pat had come up; her voice was 
unbelieving. "Amos!" 

Amos swung back then. "Yeah, 
Pat. I'd do it agai n , an d maybe 
even without the money. You think 
I like these God damned animals 
and plants acting so uppity? I liked 
it good enough before they came. 
Maybe I didn't get rid of them, but 
I sure came close." 

The two men were leading him 
away as he finished, and Pat stared 
after him, tears in her eyes. 

The Envoy broke in. "He'll get 
a regular trial in your country. It 
looks better for (he local governments to handle these things. But 
I'll see if he can't get a lighter sentence than the men who hired him. 



You did a good job, Vic — you 
and Pat and Flavin. You proved 
that Earth can cooperate with other 
worlds. That is the part that impresses the Council as no other solution could have. Your world and 
Plathgol have already been accepted 
officially as full members of the 
Council now, under Ecthinbal's 
tutelage. We're a little easier about 
passing information and knowledge 
to planets that have passed the test. 
But you'll hear all that in the announcement over the network tonight. I'll see you again. I'm sure 
of that." 

He was gone, barely in time to 
dear space for Ptheela, as she 
came trooping up with eight thin, 
wispy versions of herself in tow. 
She chuckled. "They promoted me 
before they banished me, Pat. Meet 
my eight strong husbands. Now I'll 
have the strongest seed on all 
Earth. Oh, I almost forgot. A present for you and Vic." 

Then she was gone, leading her 
husbands toward Flavin's car, while 
Vic stared down at a particularly 
ugly tsiuna in Pat's hands. He 
twisted his mouth resignedly. 

"All right, I'll learn to eat the 
stuff," he told her. "I suppose I'll 
have to get used to it. Pat, will you 
marry me?" 

She dropped the tsiuna as she 
came to him, her lips reaching up 
for his. It wasn't until a month 
later that he found tsiuna tasted 
better than chicken. 
