Good night Mr. James By CLIFFORD D. SIMAK 

HE CAME alive from nothing. He became aware from 
unawareness. He smelled the air of the night 
and heard the trees whispering on 
the embankment above him and 
the breeze that had set the trees to whispering came down- to him and 
felt him over with soft and tender 
fingers, for all the world as if it 
were examining him for broken 
bones or contusions and abrasions. 

He sat up and put both his 
palms down upon the ground beside him to help him sit erect and 
stared into the darkness. Memorycame slowly and when it came it 
was incomplete and an swered 
nothing. 

His name was Henderson James 
and he was a human being and he 
was sitting somewhere on a planet 
that was called the Earth. He was 
thirty-six years old and he was, in 
his own way, famous, and comfortably well-off. He lived in an old 
ancestral home on Summit avenue, 
which was a respectable address 
even if it had lost some of its 
smartness in the last twenty years 
or so. 

On the road above the slope of 
the embankment a car went past 
with its tires whining on the pavement and for a moment its headlights made the trectops glow. Far 
away, muted by the distance, a 
whistle cried out. And somewhere 
else a dog was barking with a flat 
viciousness. 

His name was Henderson James 
and if that were true, why was he 
here? Why should Henderson 
James be sitting on the slope of an 
embankment, listening to the wind 
in the trees and to a wailing 
whistle and a barking dog? Something had gone wrong, some incident that, if he could but remember 
tt, might answer all his questions. 

There was a job to do. 

He sat and stared into the night 
and found that he was shivering, 
although there was no reason why 
he should, for the night was not 



that cold. Beyond the embankment 
he heard the sounds of a city late 
at night, the distant whine of the 
speeding car and the far-off windbroken screaming of a siren. Once 
a man walked along a street close 
by and James sat listening to his 
footsteps until they faded out of 
hearing. 

Something had happened and 
there was a job to do, a job that 
he had been doing, a job that somehow had been strangely interrupted 
by the inexplicable incident which 
had left him lying here on this 
embankment. 

H e checked hi msel f . Clothing 
. . . shorts and shirt, strong shoes, 
his wristwatch and the gun in the 
holster at his side. 

A gun? 

The job involved a gun. 

He had been hunting in the city, 
hunting something that required a 
gun. Something that was prowling 
in the night and a thing that must 
be killed' 

THEN he knew the answer, but 
even as he knew it he sat for 
a moment wondering at the 
strange, methodical, step-by-step 
progression of reasoning that had 
brought him to the memory. First 
his name and the basic facts pertaining to himself, then the realization of where he was and the 
problem of why he happened to be 
there and finally the realization that 
he had a gun and that it was meant 
to be used. It was a logical way to 




 



think, a primer schoolbook way to 
work it out: 

I am a man named Henderson 
James. 

I live in a house on Summit avenue. 

Am I in the house on Summit 
avenue ? 

No, I am not in the house on 
Summit avenue. 

I am on an # embankment somewhere. 

Why am I on the embankment? 

But it wasn't the way a man 
thought, at least not the normal 
way a normal man would think. 
Man thought in shortcuts. He cut 
across the block and did not go all 
the way around. 

It was a frightening thing, he 
told himself, this clear-around- theblock thinking. It wasn't normal 
and it wasn't right and it made no 
sense at all . . . no more sense than 
did the fact that he should find 
himself in a place with no memory 
of getting there. 

HE ROSE to his feet and ran his 
hands up and down his 
body. His clothes were neat, not 
rumpled. He hadn't been beaten 
up and he hadn't been thrown from 
a speeding car. There were no sore 
places on his body and his face was 
unbloody and whole and he felt 
all right. 

He hooked his fingers in the 
holster belt and shucked it up so 
that it rode tightly on his hips. He 
pulled out the gun and checked it 



with expert and familiar fingers and 
the gun was ready. 

He walked up the embankment 
and reached the road, went across it 
with a swinging stride to reach the 
sidewalk that fronted the row of 
new bungalows. He heard a cat 
coming and stepped off the sidewalk to crouch in a clump of evergreens that landscaped one corner 
of a lawn. The move was instinctive and he crouched there, feeling 
just a little foolish at the thing 
he'd done. 

The car went past and no one 
saw him. They would not, he now 
realized, have noticed him even if 
he had remained out on the sidewalk. 

He was unsure of himself; that 
must be the reason for his fear. 
There was a blank spot in his life, 
some mysterious incident that he 
did not know and the unknowing 
of it had undermined the sure and 
solid foundation of his own existence, had wrecked the basis of his 
motive and had turned him, momentarily, into a furtive animal that 
darted and hid at the approach of 
his fellow men. 

That and something that had 
happened to him that made him 
think clear around the block. 

He remained crouching in the 
evergreens, watching the street and 
the stretch of sidewalk, conscious of 
the white-painted, ghostly bungalows squatting back in their landscaped lots. 

A word came into his mind. 



GOOD NIGHT. MR. JAMES 



67 



Puudly. An odd word, unearthly, 
jet it held terror. 

The puudly had escaped and that 
was why he was here, hiding on 
the front lawn of some unsuspecting and sleeping citizen, equipped 
with a gun and a determination to 
use it, ready to match his wits and 
the quickness of brain and muscle 
against the most bloodthirsty, hatefilled thing yet found in the Galaxy. 

The puudly was dangerous. It 
was not a thing to harbor. In fact, 
there was a law against harboring 
not only a puudly, but certain other 
alien beasties even less lethal than a 
puudly. There was good reason for 
such a law, reason which no one, 
much less himself, would ever think 
to question. 

And now the puudly was loose 
and somewhere in the city. 

JAMES grew cold at the thought 
of it, his brain forming images 
of the things that might come to 
pass if he did not hunt down the 
alien beast and put an end to it. 

Although beast was not quite 
the word to use. The puudly was 
more than a beast . . . just how 
much more than a beast he once 
had hoped to learn. He had not 
learned a lot, he now admitted to 
himself, not nearly all there was 
to learn, but he had learned 
enough. More than enough to 
frighten him. 

For one thing, he had learned 
what hate could be and how shallow an emotion human hate turned 



out when measured against the 
depth and intensity and the ravening horror of the puudly '$ hate. 
Not unreasoning hate, for unreasoning hate defeats itself, but a rational, calculating, driving hate 
that motivated a clever and deadly 
killing machine which directed its 
rapacity and its cunning against 
every living thing that was not a 
puudly. 

For the beast had a mind and a 
personality that operated upon the 
basic law of self-preservation 
against all comers, whoever they 
might be, extending that law to the 
interpretation that safety lay in 
one direction only ... the death of 
every other living being. No other 
reason was needed for a puud/y's 
killing. The fact that anything else 
lived and moved and was thus posing a threat, no matter how remote, 
against a puudly, was sufficient 
reason in itself. 

It was psychotic, of course, some 
murderous instinct planted far back 
in time and deep in the creature's 
racial consciousness, but no more 
psychotic, perhaps, than many human instincts. 

The puudly had been, and still 
was for that matter, a unique opportunity for a study in alien behaviorism. Given a permit, one 
could have studied them on their 
native planet. Refused a permit, 
one sometimes did a foolish thing, 
as James had. 

And foolish acts backfire, as tills 
one did. 



63 




 



James put down a hand and patted the gun at his side, as if by 
doing so he might derive some assurance that he was equal to the 
task. There was no question in his 
mind as to the thing that must be 
done. He must rind the puudiy and 
kill it and he must do that before 
the break of dawn. Anything less 
than that would be abject and horrifying failure. 

For the puudiy would bud. It 
was long past its time for the reproductive act and there were bare 
hours left to 'find it before it had 
loosed upon the Earth dozens of 
baby puudl'ies. They would not remain babies for long. A few hours 
after budding they would strike 
out on their own. To find one 
puudiy, lost in the vastness of a 
sleeping city, seemed bad enough; 
to track down some dozens of them 
would be impossible. 

So it was tonight or never. 

Tonight there would be no killing on the puudiy' s part. Tonight 
the beast would be intent on one 
thing only, to find a place where 
it could rest in quiet, where it 
could give itself over, wholeheartedly and with no interference, to 
the business of bringing other 
puudlies into being. 

It was clever. It would have 
known where it was going before 
it had escaped. There would be, 
on its part, no time wasted in seeking or in doubling back. It would 
have known where it was going 
and already it was there, already 



the buds would be rising on its 
body, bursting forth and growing. 

There was one place, and one 
place only, in the entire city where 
an alien beast would be safe from 
prying eyes. A man could figure 
that one out and so could a puudiy. 
The question was: Would the 
puudiy know that a man could 
figure it out? Would the puudiy 
underestimate a man ? Or, knowing 
that the man would know it, too, 
would it find another place of hiding? 

James rose from the evergreens 
and went down the sidewalk. The 
street marker at the corner, standing underneath a swinging street 
light, told him where he was and 
it was closer to the place where he 
was going than he might have 
hoped. 

II 

THE zoo was quiet for a while, 
and then something sent up a 
howl that raised James' hackles and 
made his blood stop in his veins. 

James, having scaled the fence, 
stood tensely at its foot, trying to 
identify the howling animal. He 
was unable to place it. More than 
likely, he told himself, it was a new 
one. A person simply couldn't keep 
track of all the zoo's occupants. 
New ones were coming in all the 
time, strange, unheard of creatures 
from the distant stars. 

Straight ahead lay the unoccupied moat cage that up until a day 



GOOD NIGHT. MR. JAMES 



69 



or two before had held an unbelievable monstrosity from the jungles of one of the Arctian worlds. 
James grimaced in the dark, remembering the thing. They had 
finally had to kill it. 

And now the puudly was there 
. . . well, maybe not there, but one 
place that it could be, the one place 
in the entire city where it might be 
seen and arouse no comment, for 
the 200 was filled with animals that 
were seldom seen and another 
strange one would arouse only momentary wonder. One animal more 
would go unnoticed unless some 
zoo attendant should think to check 
the records. 

There, in that unoccupied cage 
area, the puudly would be undisturbed, could quietly go about its 
business of budding out more 
pundlies. No one would bother it, 
for things like pundlies were the 
normal occupants of this place set 
aside for the strangers brought to 
Earth to be stared at and studied by 
that ferocious race, the humans. 

James stood quietly beside the 
fence. 

Henderson James. Thirty-six. Unmarried. Alien psychologist. An 
official of this i:oo. And an offender 



against the law for having secured 
and harbored an alien being that 
was barred from Earth. 

Why, he asked himself, did he 
think of himself in this way? Why, 
standing here, did he catalogue 
himself? It was instinctive to know 
one's self . . . there was no need, 
no sense of setting up a mental outline of one's self. 

It had been foolish to go ahead 
with this puudly business. He recalled how he had spent days fighting it out with himself, reviewing 
all the disastrous possibilities which 
might arise from it. If the old 
renegade spaceman had not come 
to him and had not said, over a 
bottle of most delicious Lupan 
wine, that he could deliver, for a 
certain, rather staggering sum, one 
live puudly, in good condition, it 
never would have happened. 

JAMES was sure that of himself 
he never would have thought 
of it. But the old space captain was 
a man he knew and admired from 
former dealings. He was a man who 
was not averse to turning either an 
honest or a dishonest dollar, and 
yet he was a man, for all of that, 
that you could depend upon. He 




 




would do what you paid him for 
and keep his lip buttoned tight 
once the deed was done. 

James had wanted a puudly, for 
it was a most engaging beast with 
certain little tricks that, once understood, might open up new avenues of speculation and approach, 
might write new chapters in the 
tortuous study of alien minds and 
manners. 

But for all of that, it had been a 
terrifying thing to do and now that 
the beast was loose, the terror was 
compounded. For it was not wholly 
.beyond speculation that the descendants of this one brood that the 
escaped puudly would spawn might 
wipe out the population of the 
Earth, or at the best, make the 
Earth untenable for its rightful 
dwellers. 

A place like the Earth, with its 
teeming millions, would provide a 
field day for the fangs of the 
puudlies, and the minds that drove 
the fangs. They would not hunt for 
hunger, nor for the sheer madness 
of the kill, but because of the compelling conviction that no puudly 



GOOD NIGHT. MR. JAMES 



would be safe until Earth was 
wiped clean of life. They would be 
killing for survival, as a cornered 
rat would kill . . . except that they 
would be cornered nowhere but in 
the murderous insecurity of their 
minds. 

If the posses scoured the Earth to 
hunt them down, they would be 
found in all directions, for they 
would be shrewd enough to scatter. 
They would know the ways of guns 
and traps and poisons and there 
would be more and more of them 
as time went on. Each of them 
would accelerating their budding to 
replace with a dozen or a hundred 
the ones that might be killed. 

James moved quietly forward to 
the edge of the moat and let himself down into the mud that covered the bottom. -When the monstrosity had been killed, the moat 
had been drained and should long 
since have been cleaned, but the 
press of work, James thought, must 
have prevented its getting done. 

Slowly he waded out into the 
mud, feeling his way, his feet making sucking noises as he pulled 
them through the slime. Finally he 
reached the rocky incline that led 
out of the moat to the island cage. 

He stood 'for a moment, his 
hands on the great, wet boulders, 
listening, trying to hold his breath 
so the sound of it would not interfere with hearing. The thing that 
howled had quieted and the night 
was deathly quiet. Or seemed, at 
first, to be. Then he heard the little 



insect noises that ran through the 
grass and bushes and the whisper 
of the leaves in the trees across the 
moat and the far-off sound that was 
the hoarse breathing of a sleeping 
city. 

NOW, for the first time, he felt 
fear. Felt it in the silence that 
was not a silence, in the mud beneath his feet, in the upthrust 
boulders that rose out of the moat. 

The puudly was a dangerous 
thing, not only because it was 
strong and quick, but because it was 
intelligent. Just how intelligent, he 
did not know. It reasoned and it 
planned and schemed. It could talk, 
though not as a human talks . . . 
probably better than a human ever 
could. For it not only could talk 
words, but it could talk emotions. 
It lured its victims to it by the 
thoughts it put into their minds; it 
held them entranced with dreams 
and illusion until it slit their 
throats. It could purr a man to 
sleep, could lull him to suicidal inaction. It could drive him crazy 
with a single flicking thought, 
hurling a perception so foul and 
alien that the mind ' recoiled deep 
inside itself and stayed there, 
coiled tight, like a watch that has 
been overwound and will not run. 

It should have budded long ago, 
but it had fought off its budding, 
holding back against the day when 
it might escape, planning, he realized now, its fight to stay on Earth, 
which meant its conquest of Earth. 



72 




 



It had planned, and planned well, 
against this very moment, and it 
would feel or show no mercy to 
anyone who interfered with it. 

His hand went down and 
touched the gun and he felt the 
muscles in his jaw involuntarily 
tightening and suddenly there was 
at once a lightness and a hardness 
in him that had not been there before. He pulled himself up the 
boulder face, seeking cautious handand toeholds, breathing shallowly, 
body pressed against the rock. 
Quickly, and surely, and no noise, 
for he must reach the top and be 
there before the piiudly knew there 
was anyone around. 

The pnudly would be relaxed 
and intent upon its. business, engrossed in the budding forth of that 
numerous family that in days to 
come would begin the grim and relentless crusade to make an alien 
planet safe for puudlies . . . and 
for puudlies alone. 

That is, if the pnudly were here 
and not somewhere else. James 
was only a human trying to think 
like a pnudly and that was not an 
easy or a pleasant job and he had 
no way of knowing if he succeeded. 
He could only hope that his reasoning was vicious and crafty enough. 

His clawing hand found grass 
and earth and he sank his fingers 
deep into the soil, hauling his body 
up the last few feet of the rock face 
above the pit. 

He lay flat upon the gently sloping ground, listening, tensed for 



any danger. He studied the ground 
in front of him, probing every 
foot. Distant street lamps lighting 
the zoo walks threw back the total 
blackness that had engulfed him as 
he climbed out of the moat, but 
there still were areas of shadow that 
he had to study closely. 

INCH by inch, he squirmed his 
way along, making sure of the 
terrain immediately ahead before 
he moved a muscle. He held the 
gun in a rock-hard fist, ready for 
instant action, watching for the 
faintest hint of motion, alert for 
any hump or irregularity that was 
not rock or bush or grass. 

Minutes magnified themselves 
into hours, his eyes ached with staring and the lightness that had been 
in him drained away, leaving only 
the hardness, which was as tense 
as a drawn bowstring. A sense of 
failure began to seep into his mind 
and with it came the full-fledged, 
until now unadmitted, realization 
of what failure meant, not only for 
the world, but for the dignity and 
the pride that was Henderson 
James. 

Now, faced with the possibility, 
he admitted to himself the action he 
must take if the puudly were not 
here, if he did not find it here and 
kill it. He would have to notify the 
authorities, would have to attempt 
to alert the police, must plead with 
newspapers and radio to warn the 
citizenry, must reveal himself as a 
man who, through pride and self


GOOD NIGHT. MR. JAMES 



73 



conceit, had exposed the people of 
the Earth to this threat against their 
hold upon their native planet. 

They would not believe him. 
They would laugh at him until the 
laughter died in their torn throats, 
choked off with their blood. He 
sweated, thinking of it, thinking of 
the price this city, and the world, 
would pay be f ore it learned th e 
truth. 

There was a whisper of sound, a 
movement of black against deeper 
black. 

The puudly rose in front of him, 
not more than six feet away, from 
its bed beside a bush. He jerked 
the pistol up and his finger tightened on the trigger. 

"Don't," the puudly sa/d inside 
his mind. "I'll go along with you." 

His finger strained with the careful slowness of the squeeze and the 
gun leaped in his hand, but even as 
it did he felt the whiplash of terror 
slash at his brain, caught for just a 
second the terrible import, the 
mind-shattering obscenity that 
glanced off his mind and riccocheted away. 

"Too late," he told the puudly, 
with his voice and his mind and his 
body shaking. "You should have 
tried that first. You wasted precious 
seconds. You would have got me if 
you had done it first." 

It had been easy, he assured himself, much easier than he had 
thought. The puudly was dead or 
dying and the Earth and its millions of unsuspecting citizens were 



safe and, best of all, Henderson 
James was safe . . . safe from indignity, safe from being stripped 
naked of the little defenses he had 
built up through the years to shield 
him against the public stare. He 
felt relief flood over him and it left 
him pulseless and breathless and 
feeling clean, but weak. 

"You fool," the dying puudly 
said, death clouding its words as 
they built up in his mind. "You 
fool, you half-thing, you duplicate . . ." 

It died then and he felt it die, 
felt the life go out of it and leave 
it empty. 

TTE ROSE softly to his feet and 
-I- J- he seemed stunned and at 
first he thought it was from knowing death, from having touched 
hands with death within the 
puudly $ mind. 

The puudly had tried to fool 
him. Faced with the pistol, it had 
tried to throw him off his balance 
to give it the second that it needed 
to hurl the mind-blasting thought 
that had caught at the edge of his 
brain. If he had hesitated for a 
moment, he knew, it would have 
been all over with him. If his finger 
had slackened for a moment, it 
would have been too late. 

The puudly must have known 
that he would think of the zoo as 
the first logical place to look and, 
even knowing that, it had held him 
in enough contempt to come here, 
had not even bothered to try to 



74 




 



watch for him, had not tried to 
stalk him, had waited until he was 
almost on top of it before it moved. 

And that was queer, for the 
puudly must have known, with its 
uncanny mental powers, every move 
that he had made. It must have 
maintained a casual contact with 
his mind every second of the time 
since it had escaped. He had known 
that and . . . wait a minute, he 
hadn't known it until this very moment, although, knowing it now, it 
seemed as if he had always known 
it. 

What is the matter with me, he 
thought. There's something wrong 
with me. I should have known I 
could not surprise the puudly, and 
yet I didn't know it. I must have 
surprised it, for otherwise it would 
have finished me off quite leisurely 
at any moment after I climbed out 
of the moat. 

You fool, the puudly hid said. 
You fool, you half-tliing. you duplicate . . . 

You duplicate! 

He felt the strength and the 
personality and the hard, unquestioned identity of himself as Henderson James, human being, drain 
out of him, as if someone had cut 
the puppet string and he, the puppet, had slumped supine upon the 
stage. 

So that was why he had been able 
to surprise the puudly! 

There were two Henderson 
Jameses. The puudly had been in 
contact with one of them, the orig


inal, the real Henderson James, 
had known every move he made, 
had known that it was safe so far 
as that Henderson James might be 
concerned. It had not known of 
the second Henderson Junes that 
had stalked it through the night. 

Henderson James, duplicate. 

Henderson James, temporary. 

Henderson James, here tonight, 
gone tomorrow. 

FOR they would not let him live. 
The original Henderson James 
would not allow him to continue 
living, and even if he did. the world 
would not allow it. Duplicates were 
made only for very temporary and 
very special reasons and it was always understood that once their 
purpose was accomplished they 
would be done away with. 

Done away with . . . those were 
the words exactly. Gotten out of 
the way. Swept out of sight and 
mind. Killed as unconcernedly and 
emotionlessly as one chops off a 
chicken's head. 

He walked forward and dropped 
on one knee beside the puudly, 
running his hand over its body in 
the darkness. Lumps stood out all 
over it, the swelling buds that now 
would never break to spew forth in 
a loathsome birth a brood of 
puudly pups. 

He rose to his feet. 
The job was done. The puudly 
had been killed — killed before it 
had given birth to a horde of 
horrors. 



GOOD NIGHT, MR. JAMES 



The job was done and he could 
go home. 
Home ? 

Of course, that was the thing 
that had been planted in his mind, 
the thing they wanted him to do. 
To go home, to go back to the 
house on Summit avenue, where his 
executioners would wait, to walk 
back deliberately and unsuspectingly to the death that waited. 

The job was done and his usefulness was over. He had been created to perform a certain task and 
the task was now performed and 
while an hour ago he had been a 
factor in the plans of men, he was 
no longer wanted. He was an embarrassment and superfluous. 

Now wait a minute, he told himself. You may not be a duplicate. 
You do not feel like one. 

That was true. He felt like Henderson James. He was Henderson 
James. He lived on Summit avenue 
and had illegally brought to Earth 
a beast known as a puudly in order 
that he might study it and talk to it 
and test its alien reactions, attempt 
to measure its intelligence and guess 
at the strength and depth and the 
direction of its non-humanity. He 
had been a fool, of course, to do it, 
and yet at the time it had seemed 
important to understand the deadly, alien mentality. 

I am human, he said, and that 
was right, but even so the fact 
meant nothing. Of course he was 
human. Henderson James was human and his duplicate would be ex
76 



actly as human as the original. For 
the duplicate, processed from the 
pattern that held every trait and 
characteristic of the man he was to 
become a copy of, would differ in 
not a single basic factor. 

In not a single basic factor, perhaps, but in certain other things. 
For no matter how much the duplicate might be like his pattern, no 
matter how full-limbed he might 
spring from his creation, he still 
would be a new man. He would 
have the capacity for knowledge 
and for thought and in a little time 
he would have and know and be 
all the things that his original 
was . . . 

BUT it would take some time, 
some short while to come to a 
full realization of all he knew and 
was, some time to coordinate and 
recognize all the knowledge and 
experience that lay within his mind. 
At first he'd grope and search until 
he came upon the things that he 
must know. Until he became acquainted with himself, with the sort 
of man he was, he could not reach 
out blindly in the dark and put his 
hand exactly and unerringly upon 
the thing he wished. 

That had been exactly what he'd 
done. He had groped and searched. 
He had been compelled to think, at 
first, in simple basic truths and 
facts. 

I am a man. 

I am on a planet called Earth. 
I am Henderson James. 


 



I live on Summit avenue. 

There is a job to do. 

It had been quite a while, lie remembered now, before he had been 
able to dig out of his mind the nature of the job. 

There is a puudly to hunt down 
and destroy. 

Even now he could not find in 
the hidden, still-veiled recesses of 
his mind the many valid reasons 
why a man should run so grave a 
risk to study a thing so vicious as 
a puudly. There were reasons, he 
knew there were, and in a little 
time he would know them quite 
specifically. 

The point was that if he were 
Henderson James, original, he 
would know them now, know them 
as a part of himself and his life, 
without laboriously searching for 
them. 

The puudly had known, of 
course. It had known, beyond any 
chance of error, that there were 
two Henderson Jameses. It had 
been keeping tab on one when another one showed up. A mentality 
far less astute than the puudly' s 
would have had no trouble in figuring that one out. 

If the puudly had not talked, he 
told himself, I never would have 
known. If it had died at once and 
not had a chance to taunt me, I 
would not have known. I would 
even now be walking to the house 
on Summit avenue. 

He stood lonely and naked of 
soul in the wind that swept across 



the moated island. There was a sour 
bitterness in his mouth. 

He moved a foot and touched 
the dead puudly, 

"I'm sorry," he told the stiffening body. "I'm sorry now I did it. 
If I had known, I never would have 
killed you." 

Stiffly erect, he moved away. 

Ill 

HE STOPPED at the street corner, keeping well in the 
shadow. Halfway down the block, 
and on the other side, was the 
house. A light burned in one of the 
rooms upstairs and another on the 
post beside the gate that opened 
into the yard, lighting the walk up 
to the door. 

Just as if, he told himself, the 
house were waiting for the master 
to come home. And that, of course, 
was exactly what it was doing. An 
old lady of a house, waiting, hands 
folded in its lap, rocking very gently in a squeaky chair . . . and with 
a gun beneath the folded shawl. 

His lip lifted in half a snarl as 
he stood there, looking at the house. 
What do they take me for, he 
thought, putting out a trap in plain 
sight and one that's not even baited? Then he remembered. They 
would not know, of course, that he 
knew he was a duplicate. They 
would think that he would think 
that he was Henderson James, the 
one and only. They would expect 
him to come walking home, quite 



GOOD NIGHT. MR. JAMES 



77 



naturally, believing he belonged 
there. So far as they would know, 
there would be no possibility of his 
finding out the truth. 

And now that he had? Now that 
he was here, across the street from 
the waiting house? 

He had been brought into being, 
had been given life, to do a job 
that his original had not dared to 
do, or had not wanted to do. He 
had carried out a killing his original didn't want to dirty his hands 
with, or risk his neck in doing. 

Or had it not been that at all, but 
the necessity of two men working 
on the job, the original serving as 
a focus for the puudly's watchful 
mind while the other man sneaked 
up to kill it while it watched ? 

No matter what, he had been 
created, at a good stiff price, from 
the pattern of the man that was 
Henderson James. The wizardry of 
man's knowledge, the magic of machines, a deep understanding of organic chemistry, of human physiology, of the mystery of life, had 
made a second Henderson James. It 
was legal, of course, under certain 
circumstances . . , for example, in 
the case of public policy, and his 
own creation, he knew, might have 
been validated under such a heading. But there were conditions and 
one of these was that a duplicate 
not be allowed to continue living 
once it had served the specific purpose for which it had been created. 

Usually such a condition was a 
simple one to carry out, for the 



duplicate was not meant to know he 
was a duplicate. So far as he was 
concerned, he was the original. 
There was no suspicion in him, no 
foreknowledge of the doom that 
was invariably ordered for him, no 
reason for him to be on guard 
against the death that waited. 

The duplicate knitted his brow, 
trying to puzzle it out. 

There was a strange set of ethics 
here. 

HE WAS alive and he wanted 
to stay alive. Life, once it had 
been tasted, was too sweet, too 
good, to go back to the nothingness from which he had come . . . 
or would it be nothingness? Now 
that he had known life, now that 
he .was alive, might he not hope 
for a life after death, the same as 
any other human being? Might not 
he, too, have the same human right 
as any other human to grasp at the 
shadowy and glorious promises and 
assurances held out by religion and 
by faith? 

He tried to marshal what he 
knew about those promises and assurances, but his knowledge was 
illusive. A little later he would remember more about it. A little later, 
when the neural bookkeeper in his 
mind had been able to coordinate 
and activate the knowledge that he 
had inherited from the pattern, he 
would know. 

He felt a trace of anger stir deep 
inside of him, anger at the- unfairness of allowing him only a few 



78 




 



short hours of life, of allowing him 
to learn how wonderful a thing life 
was, only to snatch it from him. It 
was a cruelty that went beyond 
mere human cruelty. It was something that had been fashioned out 
of the distorted perspective of a 
machine society that measured existence only in terms of mechanical 
and physical worth, that discarded 
with a ruthless hand whatever part 
of that society had no specific purpose. 

The cruelty, he told himself, was 
in ever giving life, not in taking it 
away. 

His original, of course, was the 
one to blame. He was the one who 
had obtained the pnudly and allowed it to escape. It was his fumbling and his inability to correct his 
error without help which had created the necessity of fashioning a 
duplicate. 

And yet, could he blame him? 

Perhaps, rather, he owed him 
gratitude for a few hours of life at 
least, gratitude for the privilege of 
knowing what life was like. Although he could not quite decide 
whether or not it was something 
which called for gratitude. 

He stood there, staring at the 
house. That light in the upstairs 
room was in the study off the master bedroom. Up there Henderson 
James, original, was waiting for the 
word that the duplicate had come 
home to death. It was an easy thing 
to sit there and wait, to sit and 
wait for the word that was sure to 



come. An easy thing to sentence to 
death a man one had never seen, 
even if that man be the walking 
image of one's self. 

It would be a harder decision to 
kill him if you stood face to face 
with him . . . harder to kill someone who would be, of necessity, 
closer than a brother, someone who 
would be, even literally, flesh of 
your flesh, blood of your blood, 
brain of your brain. 

THERE would be a practical side 
as well, a great advantage to be 
able to work with a man who 
thought as you did, who would be 
almost a second self. It would be 
almost as if there were two of you. 

A thing like that could be arranged. Plastic surgery and a price 
for secrecy could make your duplicate into an unrecognizable other 
person. A little red tape, some 
finagling . . . but it could be done. 
It was a proposition that Henderson James, duplicate, thought would 
interest Henderson James, original. 
Or at least he hoped it would. 

The room with the light could 
be reached with a little luck, with 
strength and agility and determination. The brick expanse of a chimney, its base cloaked by shrubs, its 
length masked by a closely growing 
tree, ran up the wall. A man could 
climb its rough brick face, could 
reach out and swing himself 
through the open window into the 
lighted room. 

And once Henderson James, orig


GOOD NIGHT, MR. JAMES 



79 



inal, stood face to face with Henderson Jarrics, duplicate . . . well, 
it would be less of a gamble. The 
duplicate then would no longer be 
an impersonal factor. He would be 
a man and one that was very close 
to his original. 

There would be watchers, but 
they would be watching the front 
door. If he were quiet, if he could 
reach and climb the chimney without making any noise, he'd be in 
the room before anyone would notice. 

He drew back deeper in the 
shadows and considered. It was 
either get into the room and face 
his original, hope to be able to 
strike a compromise with him, or 
simply to light out ... to run and 
hide and wait, watching his chance 
to get completely away, perhaps to 
some far planet in some other part 
of the Galaxy. 

Both ways were a gamble, but 
one was quick, would either succeed or fail within the hour; the 
other might drag on for months 



with a man never knowing whether 
he was safe, never being sure. 

Something nagged at him, a persistent little fact that skittered 
through his brain and eluded his 
efforts to pin it down. It might be 
important and then, again, it might 
be a random thing, simply a floating piece of information that was 
looking for its pigeonhole. 

His mind shrugged it off. 

The quick way or the long way? 

He stood thinking for a moment 
and then moved swiftly down the 
street, seeking a place where he 
could cross in shadow. 

He had chosen the short way. 




SO 




 



IV 

THE. room was empty. 
He stood beside the window, 
quietly, only his eyes moving, 
searching every corner, checking 
against a situation that couldn't 
seem quite true . . . that Henderson 
James was not here, waiting for 
the word. 

Then he strode swiftly to the 
bedroom door and swung it open. 
His finger found the switch and the 
lights went on. The bedroom was 
empty and so was the bath. He 
went back into the study. 

He stood with his back against 
the wall, facing the door that led 
into the hallway, but his eyes went 
over the room, foot by foot, orienting himself, feeling himself flow 
into the shape and form of it, feeling familiarity creep in upon him 



and enfold him in its comfort of 
belonging. 

Here were the books, the fireplace with its mantel loaded with 
souvenirs, the easy chairs, the 
liquor cabinet . . . and all were a 
part of him, a background that was 
as much a part of Henderson James 
as his body and his inner thoughts 
were a part of him. 

This, he thought, is what I 
would have missed, the experience 
I never would have had if the 
ptiudly had not taunted me. I 
would have died an empty and unrelated body that had no actual 
place in the universe. 

The phone purred at him and he 
stood there startled by it, as if 
some intruder from the outside had 
pushed its way into the room, shattering the sense of belonging that 
had come to him. 




GOOD NIGHT, MR. JAMES 



81 



The phone rang again and he 
went across the room and picked 
it up. 

"James speaking," he said. 

"That you, Mr. James?" 

The voice was that of Anderson, 
the gardener. 

"Why, yes," said the duplicate. 
"Who did you think it w^s?" 

"We got a fellow here who says 
he's you." 

Henderson James, duplicate, 
stiffened with fright and his hand, 
suddenly, was grasping the phone 
so hard that he found the time to 
wonder why it did not pulverize to 
bits beneath his fingers. 

"He's dressed like you," the 
gardener said, "and I knew you 
went out. Talked to you, remember? Told you that you shouldn't? 
Not with us waiting for that . . . 
that thing." 

"Yes," said the duplicate, his 
voice so even that he could not believe it was he who spoke. "Yes, 
certainly I remember talking with 
you." 

"But, sir, how did you get 
back?" 

"I came in the back way," the 
even voice said into the phone. 
"Now what's holding you back?" 

"He's dressed like you." 

"Naturally. Of course he would 
be, Anderson." 

AND that, to be sure, didn't 
quite follow, but Anderson 
wasn't too bright to start with and 
now he was somewhat upset. 



"You remember," the duplicate 
said, "that we talked about it." 

"I guess I was excited and forgot," admitted Anderson. "You 
told me to call you, to make sure 
you were in your study, though. 
That's right, isn't it, sir?" 

"You've called me," the duplicate said, "and I am here." 

"Then the other one out here is 
him ?" 

"Of course," said the duplicate. 
"Who else could it be?" 

He put the phone back into the 
cradle and stood waiting. It came a 
moment after, the dull, throaty 
cough of a gun. 

He walked to a chair and sank 
into it, spent with the knowledge 
of how events had so been ordered 
that now, finally, he was safe, safe 
beyond all question. 

Soon he would have to change 
into other clothes, hide the gun and 
the clothes that he was wearing. 
The staff would ask no questions, 
most likely, but it was best to let 
nothing arouse suspicion in their 
minds. 

He felt his nerves quieting and 
he allowed himself to glance about 
the room, take in die books and 
furnishings, the soft and easy . . . 
and earned . . . comfort of a man 
solidly and unshakably established 
in the world. 

He smiled softly. 

"It will be nice," he said. 

It had been easy. Now that it 
was over, it seemed ridiculously 
easy. Easy because he had never 



82 




 



seen the man who had walked up 
to the door. It was easy to kill a 
man you have never seen. 

With each passing hour he 
would slip deeper and deeper into 
the personality that was his by 
right of heritage. There would be 
no one to question, after a time not 
even himself, that he was Henderson James. 

The phone rang again and he 
got up to answer it. 

A pleasant voice told him, "This 
is Allen, over at the duplication 
lab. We've been waiting for a report from you." 

"Well," said James, "I . . ." 

"I just called," interrupted 
Allen, "to tell you not to worry. It 
slipped my mind before." 



"I see," said James, though he 
didn't. 

"We did this one a little differently," Allen explained. "An experiment that we thought we'd try 
out. Slow poison in his bloodstream. Just another precaution. 
Probably not necessary, but we like 
to be positive. In case he fails to 
show up, you needn't worry any." 

"I am sure he will show up." 

Allen chuckled. "Twenty-four 
hours. Like a time bomb. No antidote for it even if he found out 
somehow." 

"It was good of you to let me 
know," said James. 

"Glad to," said Allen. "Good 
night, Mr. James." 
