nmmm 

- stories-' m^fe 



VOL. 5, No. 9 ■ A FICTION HOUSE MAGAZINE • NOVEMBER, 19« 

t Novel of Alien Worlds 

SHANNACH — THE LAST Uigfi Brackett 80 

Even in the grip of alien horror a man could not throw away his lifetime goal, 
nor stand by idly as endless rows of alabaster shopes, sealed in their chain 
of stone, i ruled this gargoyle planet from the dead blackness of deep 
Mercuri< 



t> ,4 Pair of Star-Flung Novelets 

THE CONJURER OF VENUS Conan T. Troy 4 

A. world-famed Each scientist hod vanished on Venus. When Johnson found 
him he found loo the secret to thot glebe-shaking mystery — the fabulous 
Room of the Dreaming. 
AS IT WAS Paul L Payne 30 

In o cruel Cosmos one lived only to be killer or killed. The One proved Ihot. 
It tilled a hundred limes a day. Thlsbe II wos its blood-red preserve . . . and 
now, throwing (he challenge in Its myriad foces, was Pritchard, the brightest name in brg-gtfme hunting throughout the length and breadth of Galaxy A. 

y Short Stories from Beyond the Moon 

THE RHIZOID KILL Jack Bradley 19 

Into the forbidden swamp belt of Mercury scurried the get- rich -quick riffraff. 

Space-rat Mollord was no exception ... for that lurid land was beckorjing 

him with the greatest bait of all — Rhiioids. 
THE LUMINOUS BLONDE Hoyden Howard 26 

Some dames are bright. Some are brigriier. Like the fetching wife of the 

Commissioner for Economics for Mars. 
A PLANET NAMED JOE S. A. Lombino 55 

All right, it is pretty silly sending an officer all the way to Venus to locote 

a guy named Joe . . . especially when this, very guy may be your murderer. 
CAPTAIN CHAOS D. Allen Morrissey 44 

Science equipped David Corbtn with borrowed time; sent him winging out in 

a stale of suspension to future centuries ... to a dark blue world whose only 

defense was to seal tight the prying minds of foolish interlopers. 

► Planet's Star Feature 

THE V1ZIGRAPH 2 & 109 

Column upon column they stood hurling words of right and fright. 

T. T. SCOTT, PfWonf IACK Q'SUtff AN, fd/lor MALCOIM tEIS5, Mgr. fafttw 

n^ANET S Til HIES • Published bi-monthlr bjcWn Jtrmwitw FulliiJltmt Co., In*,. IBS* Summo* St. R'.-.n Jor4 C-ocn. 
Thr »nfii* eoirt'-ntdof tbfj rtiiiauiiu are rapy rijtit. , ,if: Mr :■«. fcurunnri* Fib! ruling Co., In.-, E^ ;.'- r »! *• .'V 
dau rafter Auuont IS. IJaO. u the Poit OOti* It Nnr Yolk, N. vnd.r ibe Ail of Moreh R. 1S78. AU ritiliU iwrwit 
While di>'' mrr <* limyi tnsrebwi. the pidilUhcri will n.,t 1,- m[*mju"lilt tor the reinrn o( sr r.il, rrlpU 
Ww 3M per tuiiy. l*or wlwILiuls ruto ftddiuu I Ad'triWnn DtmrUir, Firlion Home, Inc. M&i Summer Sual, 
->■*.-. I. i 



Heat rays flickering about his hoary head, his frail and withered 
body unbelievably contorted by half i dozen forte fields, his musculature rigid and his nerves screaming from a frightful overcharge, 
the beleaguered editor of PS once again rises from his dick cave 
and welcomes you. to these sunny columns. 

The VIZIGRAPH's next birthday cake shall be denied with 
thirteen candles. Way back in those dim days the editon set down ■ 
few letter-rules that still hnld good: double-spaced, typewritten 
letters on one side of page only; limit, three pages. The acid-throwers 
are as welcome as the back- slippers (more so, in fact, when the 
criticism is solid and constructive.) Bite the editor, he's fur game 
and ts rapidly developing the cornered-rat psychosis. But he's inoculated. Give the author his fair due, bite or pat, he well mar 
benefit from your words. And your fellnw-writers, bless 'em, are 
waiting, crouched, for your explosive outbursts. So roll 'em in and 
see whit you win. 

Letter victors in the September filly futurity are: (l) Marls 
Hartman; (2) Helen Hubet; (3) Marian Cos. 

OUT OF 2952! 

Am 1/e Edwin Corley 
3860 Camp Gp 
Gunter AFB, Alabama 

Dew Ed. 

Pleked up the following gibberish on my crystal set the other 
night. 

MUSIC - The torth mow. 

DAN: Come in, come in, Fan, So you want to teli me about science. 
6ciion, en? Good. We'll sit down and discuss it in a calm 
fashion. 

FAN: Good. That's all 1 want: »n open mind. Just get rid of those 

false null-A theories, and— 
DAN: Null-A? Oh, of course. Van Vogt 
PANi Yeah. Now, listen, and I'll— 

DAN: Personally. 1 thought bis VOYAGE OF THE SPACE 

BEAGLE was a little weak plot structure, you know. 

FAN: Look, I thought you never read — 
DAN: Stf mags? 1 don't, old bean, I don't— 

FAN: Then let someone who knows what he's talking about tell 
you. Now, in STF, we got wiiat are known as feuds. They're 
mostly between the fen, but sometimes a coupla writers get 
after each other— like the lime Lrwis Padgett and Henry 
Ki'ttner went gunning. 

DAN: But, my dear Fan, that's quite impossible. Those two name* 



FAN: 
DAN: 
FAN: , 



: finish? 



TBE VIZtGRAPB 



I 



same (Witter has caused about as much disturbance as the ;:om bomb, unJ — 

DAN: Wasn't thai a shrewd trick Ray pulled? 1 
mean, going od for years, writing what people 
thought were merely excellent abort stories, and 
then, bingo! Put them end to end and he's jot a 
book. Two books. 

FAN: tTurnfaf just a Unit |iwi) Arrrgggghhh . . . 

DAN: Sorty, old boy. Continue. 

FANi {lily fiagerieg a sledge innmtr) Also in 
science -fiction, we got great coniio' irsies, like, 
do we put the females on the cover or don't we. 

DAN Well? 

FAN: Huh? 

DAN: Do we ot don't we? 
FAN: Do we or don't we what? 
DAN: Put females on. 

FAN: Wotthchcll are you talking about? You pul 
oona si nit, but you don'l put on females! 

DAN: Not even on tie coven* 

FAN: Oh, so you're one of those, eh? Wanna turn 
Sif into Sexy Space Stories! 1 oughta — 

DAN: My dear Fan, forgive me, 1 know not what I 
do. Co on, tell me what science -fiction is. 

FAN: Now you're cooking! Science-fiction is — 

DAN: Personally, I would say Out stf is the most 
ambitious form of writing ever produced. 1 
mean: hundreds of creative minds, all taking the 
same starting point, the same initial spark, tad 
developing it. And yaa know what that spark is, 
Old beau:" Two words: WHAT IF? Wouldn't 
you say. Fan. old boy, that those two words art 
bellied every science-fiction story tw written? 
Yes, I can easily see why STF holds a great attraction fox thinking, searching minds! But, you 
know. Fan, there's something beyond the mere 
■lories that holds an even grcatci appeal for me: 
the completely honest friendship of this particular group of magazines. 1 mean, COLLIER'S 
won't admit 1 rival slick ever print* anything but 
THE ROMANCE OF HELEN TRENT. Ditto 
far ibe rest, from SATEVE POST to MUDVIL1E MEANDERINGS. And, to NEWSWEEK, TIME is just something none of us have 
enough of. But, Fan, what do you tee in the 
STF and fantasy magazines? Constant references 
to other competitive magazines — and not slurring commenti, hut genuine admiration and appreciation of talent and creatrreoess, from GALAXY and ASTOUNDING to FITBURE and 
PLANET. Wouldn't you say that such over-all 
frietidjhip and democratic thinking-habit* help 
make for a greater freedom of imagination? 

FAN: {Smiling hinstl] out lit bend with lit 
i.W. O Dammit ! I thot you (aid you didn't read 

STF mag*! 

DAN: Aba! No, dear Fan, I don't— {or 1 am from 
the year 2952. There, we Kid only NON. 
Science-fiction mags! 

SOUND; Pflfftfil (A* of Dan reluming to 2912. 
hotly pursued by the originator of this particular 

nil 

Still with me? Your July issue was pretty good; 
wish you'd take Murphy off the rovers and give him 
■now interiors— he always reproduces well on your 
paper. Congrats to Phil Dick for BEYOND LIES 
THE Willi And an idle thought just struck me: 
what ever happened to Nelson Bond and his ballads? 
J rememfw them as beiag closely akin to some of 
Service's best. 

Thinks to ill the fen who voted for me list lime. 
And those who wrote me. I'll answer all letters, but 1 
sample copy d all fanzines, so how about it? Oh, yes, 



give pics to Budrys — fot treading where, etc: Johnson 
(or being in honest reader, and not a frustrated 
science -nctioneer (even as you and I?): and to Mirtin Gross, because it might make him take off his 
purple glasses tie next lime the kce-pei lets him oat. 
So kuig till next time. 

Edwin Coblev 

P S. I'll :ake the pic on page 30 from the Mly isb, 
Ed's note: Pkk another, Ed. Digger's don gone. 
STARDOM. AT LAST 

Box 611 

^ ; Winters, Texas 

I've been rather busy of late and I just usually 
throw all the STF-mags i buy back into the corner to 
be dug out ind later reid with ease and pleasure. So. 
I don't know if this letter will reach you in time for 
your next issue or not. Neither do I care. 

The first STF-msgs I ever bought was PLANET 
and that was by accident at the early age of fourteen. I enjoyed the stories so much that I Sought all 
of the magazines with the funny names on the newsstand and I've been buying them ever since. Rsading 
them, too, I might add. 

But I believe thai once in every man's lifetime be 
finds his god, that object lor which he aims all bis 
life. It has alwiys been 1 subconscious urge oi mine 
to find a story worth writing about to the editor. 

Mr. Sullivan with the O' in front, I've found that 

Charles Dye wrote one of the best stories I've ever 
read. Hu lead novel, THE MAN WHO STAKED 
THE STARS, surprised me near out of my bide. I 
never eapected to sec a story with this tlieme, a real 
honest to goodness classic, in PLANET! 

The novels and sturies you've been printing were ill 
good, up to a certain extent, but nothing like thii 
thriller! How about giving notice at the start of 
V1Z1GRAPH just when, where, and bow this novel 
is going to be put in book Form. 

Because 1 have a feeling within myself that this 
Hory will go down in STF-history as a story equal to 
anything ever published by GALAXY, UNKNOWN, 
AMAZING, 01 ASTOUNDING. 

Many happy congratulations for s well-remeinbejed 

Charles Dye receives my vote along with Walter 
M. Miller, Jr, as ihe two lop story idlers of the year. 
Yours, 

Claude Hall 

DOG Of THE MOON 

47J5 Dreiel Blvd. 
Chicago, I1L 

Dear Ed, 

You know, I almost didn't buy be July PLANET. 

My money wis running low, and I didn't »rt any 
names I liked on ihe contents page, se for almost a 
week 1 manigcd to resist you. Yon know what finally 
broke down my resistance? The Moondrg Od the 
cover, That BOM was so had it was gcod, 1 couldn't 
even think about it without bleating into a gale of 
uncontrollable laughter. 

Now I'm glad I did buy it. 

1 haven't yet finished the iih, but so Jar, so to. 
Mostly rm raving about BEYOND LIES THE WUB. 
That ought to be anthologized. One of your competitors males 1 specialty of strange landfill critters, 
{Otttixuei at page 109) 



The CONJURER of VENUS 



By CONAN T. TROY 

A world-famed Earth scientist had disappeared on Venus. When 
Johnson found him he found loo f/te secret to that globe-shaking 
mystery — the fabulous Room of The Dreaming. 



THE city dripped with rain. Crossing 
the street toward the dive, Johnson got 
rain in hij eyes, his nose, and hij ears. 
That was the way with the rain here. It came 
.it you from ill directions. There had heen 
occasions when Johnson had thought the 
rain was falling straight up. Otherwise, how 
had the insides of his pacts gotten wet? 

On Venus, everything came at you from 
all directions, it seemed to Johnson. Opening 
the door of the joint, it was noise instead of 
rain that came at him, the wild frantic beat 
of a Venusian rhumba, the notes pounding 
and jumping through the smoke and perfume clouded room. Feeling states came at 
him, intangible, but to hi? trained senses, 
perceptible emotional nuances of hate, love, 
fear, and rage. But mostly love. Since this 
place had been desigr.ed to excite the senses 
of both humans and Venusians, the love 
feelings were heavily tinged with straight 
sex. He sniffed at them, feeling them somewhere inside of him, aware of them bat 
aware also that here was apprehension, and 
plain fear. 

Caldwell, sitting in a booth next to the 
door, glanced up as Johnson entered but 
neither Caldwell's facial expression or his 
eyes revealed that he had ever seen this 
human before. Nor did Johnson seem to 
recognize Caldwell. 

"Is the mighty human wanting liquor, a 
woman or dreams?" His voice was ail soft 
syllables of liquid sound. The Venusian 
equivalent of a hcadwaiter was bowing to 
him. 

"Ill have a tarmur to start," Johnson 
said. "How are the dreams tonight?" 

"Ze vill be the most wonserful of all 
sonight. The great Unger hisself will be 
here to do zc dreaming. There is no ozzer 
one who has quite his touch at dreaming, 
4 



mighty one." The headwaiter spread his 
hands in a gesture indicating ecstasy. "It is 
my great regret that I must do zc work 
tonight instead of being wiz ze dreamers. 
Ah, ze great Unger hisself!" The headwaiter 
kissed the tips of his fingers. 

"Um," Johnson said. "The great Unger!" 
His voice expressed surprise, just the right 
amount of it. "I'll have a tarmur to start 
but when does the dreaming commence?" 

"In one zooar or maybe less. Shall I make 
zc reservations for ze mighty one?" Aj he 
was speaking, the headwaiter was deftly 
conducting Johnson to the bar. 

"Not just yet," Johnson said. "See me 
a little later." 

"But certainly." The headwaiter was gone 
into the throng. Johnson was at the bar. 
Behind it, a Venusian was bowing to him. 
"Tarmur," Johnson said. The green drink 
was set before him. He held it up to the 
light, admiring the slow rise of the liny 
golden bubbles in ii. To him, watching the 
bubbles rise was perhaps more important 
than drinking itself. 

"Beautiful, aren't they?" a soft voice said. 
He glanced to his right. A girl had slid 
into the stool beside him. She wore a green 
dress cut very low 3t the throat. Her skin 
had the pleasant tan recently on Earth. Her 
hair was a shade of abundant brown and 
her eyes were blue, the color of the skies of 
Earth. A necklace circled her throat and 
below the necklace . . . Johnson felt his 
pulse quicken, for two reasons. Women such 
as tills one had been quickening the pulse 
of men since the days of Adam. The second 
reason concerned her presence here in this 
place where no woman in her right mind 
ever came unescorted. Her eyes smiled up at 
him unafraid. Didn't she know there were 
men present here in this space port city who 



1 



PLANET STORIES 



would snatch her bodily from the bar stool 
and carry her away for sleeping purposes? 
And Venusians were here who would cut 
b*r pretty throat for the sake of the necklace that circled it? 

"They are beautiful," he said, smiling. 

"Think you." 

"I was referring to the bubbles." 

"You were talking about my eyes," she 
answered, unperturbed. 

"How did you know? 1 mean . . ." 

"I am very knowing," the girl said, 
smiling. 

"Ate you sufficiently knowing to be here?" 

For an instant, as if doubt crossed her 
mind, the smile flickered. Then it came 
again, stronger, "Aren't you here." 

Johnson choked as bubbles from the tarmur seemed to go suddenly up his nose. 
"My dear child ..." he sputtered. 

"I am not a child," she answered with a 
firm surcness that left no doubt in his mind 
that she knew what she was saying. "And 
my name is Vee" Vee." 

"Vee Vee? Um. That is . . ." 

"Doa't you think it's a nice name?" 

"I certainly do. Probably the rest of it is 
even nicer." 

"There u no more of it. Just Vee Vee. 
Like Topsy, 1 just grew." 

"TTTHAT the devil arc you doing here 

VV on Venus and here in this place?" 

"Growing." The blue eyes were unafraid. 

Sombrely, Johnson regarded her. What 
was she doing here? Was she in the employ 
of the Venusians? If she was being planted 
on him, then his purpose here was suspected. 
He shrugged the thought aside. If his purpose here was suspected, there would be no 
point in planting a woman on him. 

There would only be the minor matter 
of slipping a knife into his back. 

In this dty, as on all of Venus, humans 
died easily. No one questioned the motives 
of die killer. 

■You look as if you were considering 
some very grave matter," Vee Vee said. 

"Not any longer," he laughed. 

"You have decided them?" 

"Yes." 

"Every last one of them?" 
"Oh, there might be one or two matters 
undecided somewhere, say out on the peri


phery of the galaxy. But we will solve them 
when we get to them." He waved vaguely 
toward the roof and the sky of space hidden 
behind the clouds that lay over the roof, 
glanced around as a man eased himself into 
an empty stool on his left. The man was 
Caldwell. 

"ZIock!" Caldwell said, to the bartender. 
"Make it snappy. Gotta have zIock. Finest 
damn drink in the solar system." Caldwell's 
voice was thick, his tongue heavy. Johnson's 
eyes went back to the girl but out of the 
corner of them he watched Caldwell's hand 
lying on the bar. The fingers were beating 
a quick nervous tattoo on the yellow wood. 

I haven't seen him," Caldwell's fingers 
beat out their tattoo. "But I think he is, or 
was, here." 

"Um," Johnson said, his eyes on Vee Vee. 
"How — " 

"Because that girl was asking for him," 
Caldwell's fingers answered. "Watch that 
girl!" Picking up the zlock, he lurched away 
from the bar. 

"Your friend is not as drunk as he 
seems," Vee Vee said, watching Caldwell. 

"My friend? Do you mean that drunk? I 
never saw him — " 

"Lying is one of the deadly sins." Her 
eyes twinkled at him. Under the merriment 
that danced in them there was ice. Johnson 
felt cold. 

"The reservations for ae dreaming, great 
one?" The headwaiter was bowing and 
scraping in front of him. "The great one has 
decided, yes?" 

"The dreaming!" Vee Vee looked suddenly alert "Of course. We must see the dreaming. Everyone wants to see the dreaming. 
We will go, won't we darling?" She hooked 
her hand into Johnson's elbow. 

"Certainly," Johnson said. The decision, 
was made on the spur of the moment. That 
there was danger in it, he did not doubt. 
But there might be something else. And be 
might be there. 

"Oh. But verj good. Ze great Unger, you 
will love him!" The headwaiter clutched 
the gold coins that Johnson extended, bowed 
himself out of sight. 

"Say, I want to know more — " Johnson 
began. His words were drowned in a blast 
of trumpets. The band that had been playing 
went into sudden silence. Waves of perfume 



THE CONJVR 

Nejin to flow into the place. The perfumes 
were blended, but one aroma was prominent 
among them, the sweet, cloying, soul-stirring 
perfume of the Dreamer. 

In the suddenly hushed place little sounds 
began to Appear as VenusUns and humans 
began to shift their feet and their bodies in 
ant id pat ion of whit was to happen. 

The trumpets flared again. 

On one side of the place, a big door began 
to swing slowly open. From heyond that 
slowly opening door came music, soft, muted 
strains that sounded like lutes from heaven. 

Vee Vee, her hand on Johnson's elbow, 
rose. Johnson stood up with her. He got 
the surprise of his life as her fingers 
clenched, digging into his muscles. Pain shot 
through his arm, paralyzing it and almost 
paralyzing him. He knew instantly that she 
was using the Karmer nerve block paralysis 
on him, His left hand moved with lightning 
speed, the tips of his fingers striking savagely against her shoulder. 

She gasped, her face whitened as pain 
shot through her in response to the thrust 
of his finger tips. Her hand that had been 
digging into his elbow lost its grip, dropped 
away and hung limp at her side. Grabbing 
it, she began to massage it. 

"You — you — " Hot anger and shock were 
in her voke. "You're the first man I ever 
knew who could break the Karmer nerve 
paralysis." 

"And you're the first woman who ever 
tried it on me." 
"But—" 

"Shall wc go watch the dreaming?" He 
took the arm that still hung limp at her side 
and tucked it into bis elbow. 

"If you try to use the Karmer grip on 
me again I'll break your arm," he said. His 
wice was low but there was a wealth of 
meaning in it. 

"I won't do it again," the girl said stoutly. 
"I never make the same mistake twice." 

"Good," Johnson said. 

The second time wc break our victim's 
neck," Vee Vee said. 

"What a jweet, charming child you — " 

"I told you before, I'm not i child." 

"Child vampire," Johnson said. "Let me 
finish any sentences before you interrupt." 

She was silent. A smile, struggling to 
appear oa her face, seemed to say she beJd 



ER OF VEXUS 1 
no malice. Her fingers tiglxened no Joe** 
son s aim. He tensed, expecting ti* nem 
block grip again. Instead with the tips at* 
her fingers she gently patted his arm. 

"There, there, darling, relax," the said. 
"I know a better way to get you than by 
using the Karmer grip." 

"What way?" 

Her eyes sparkled. "Eve's w»y," ahe 
answered. 

"Um!" Surprise sounded in his grunt 
"But apples don't grow on Venus." 

"five's daughters don't use apples any 
more, darling. Come-along." 

Moving toward the open door that led to 
the Room of the Dreaming, Johnson sew 
that Caldwell had risen and was followtnjt 
them. Caldwell's face was writhing in apprehensive agony and he was making warning 
signs. Johnson ignored them. With Vee 
Vees fingers lightly patting his arm, rhet 
moved into the Room of the Dreaming. 

II 

IT WAS a huge, semi- illumined room, 
with tier on tier of circling ramps rising 
up from an open spice at the bottom. There 
ought to have been a stage there at the bottom, but there wasn't. Instead there was an 
open spice, a mat. and a head rest. Up at 
the top of the circling ramps the room was 
in darkness, a fit hiding place for ghosts Of 
Venusian werewolves. Pillows and a thick 
rug covered the circling ramps. 

The soul-quickening Perfume of the 
Dreamer was stronger here. The throbbing 
of the lutes was louder. It was Venuiian 
music the lutes were playing. Human eats 
found it inharmonious it first, but ts they 
became accustomed to it, they began to detect 
rhythms and' melodies that human minds 
had not known existed. The room was pleasantly cool but it had the feel of dampness. 
A world that was rarely without pelting rain 
would have the feel of dampness in to 
dieinning rooms. 

The music playing strange harmonies in 
his ears, the perfume sending tingling feelings through his nose, Johnson entered the 
Room of the Dreamer. He suspected that 
other forces, unknown to him, were catching 
hold of his senses. He had been in dreaming 
looms many times before bat he hid cot 



8 



PLAXET STORIES 



grown accustomed to them. He wondered 
if any human ever did. A touch of chill 
always came over him .1; he crossed the 
threshold. In catering these places, it was 
as if some unknown nerve center inside the 
human organism was touched by something, 
some force, some radiation, some subtlety, 
that quite escaped radiation. He felt the 
coldness now. 

Vee Vee's fingers left off patting his arm. 

"Do you feel it, darling?" 

"Yes." 

"What is it?" 

"How would I know?" 

"Please!" Her voice grew sharp. "I think 
johnny Johnson ought to know.' 

"Johnny! How do you know my name?" 

"Shouldn't I recognize one of Earth's 
foremost scientists, even if he is incognito 
on Venus?" Her voice had a teasing quality 
in it. , 

"But— " 

"And who besides Johnny Johnson would 
recognize the Karmer nerve grip and be 
able to break it instantly?" 

"Hell—" 

"John Michael Johnson, knowa as Johnny 
to his friends. Earth's foremost expert in the 
field of electro-magnetic radiations within 
the human body!" Her words were needles 
of icy fact each one jabbing deeper and 
deeper into him. 

"And how would I make certain you 
were Johnny Johnson, except by seeing if 
you could break the Karmer nerve grip? If 
you could break it, then there was no doubt 
who you were!" Her words went on and on. 

"Who are you?" HU words were blasts 
of sound. 

"Please, darling, you are making a scene. 
I am sure this is the last thing you really 
want to do." 

He looked quickly around them. The 
Venusians and humans moving into this 
room seemed to be paying no attention to 
him. HU gaze came back lo her. 

Again she patted his arm. "Relax, darling. 
Your secrets are safe with me," 

A gray color came up inside his soul. 
"But — but — " His voice was suddenly weak. 

The fingers on his arm were very gentle. 
"No harm will come to you. Am I not with 

"That's what I'm afraid of!" he snapped 



at her. If he had had a choice, he might 
have drawn back. But with cir-umstances is 
they were — his life, Caldwell's life, possibly 
Vee Vee's life hung in the balance. Didn't 
she know that this wis true? And as for 
Martin— But Caldwell had said that she had 
been asking about Martin. What connection 
did she have with that frantic human genius 
he sought here? 

Johnson felt his skin crawl. He moved 
toward a nest of cushions on a ramp, found 
a Venusian was beating him to them, deftly 
changed to another nest, found it. Vee Vee 
flu wed to the floor on his right, moved 
cushions to make him more comfortable. 
She moved in an easy sort of way that was 
all flowing movement. He sat down. Someone bumped him on the left. 

"Sorry, hud. Didn't mean to bump into 
you." Caldwell's voice was still thick and 
heavy. He sprawled to the floor on Johnson's 
left. Under the man's coat, Johnson caught 
a glimpse of a slight bulge, the zit gun hidden there. His left arm pressed against his 
own coat, feeling bis own zit gun. Operating 
under gas pressure, throwing 3 charge of 
gas-driven corvel, the zit guns were not 
only almost noiseless in operation but they 
knocked out a human or a Venusian in a 
matter of seconds. 

True, the person they knocked unconscious would be all right the next day. For 
this reason, many people did not regard the 
zit guns as effective weapons, but Johnson 
hid a fondness for them. The feel of the 
little weapon inside his coat sent a surge of 
comfort through him. 

The music picked up a beat, perfume 
seemed to flow even more freely through 
the air, the lights dimmed almost "to darkness, a single bright spotlight appeared in, 
the ceiling, casting a circle of brilliant illumination on the mat and the headrest at 
the bottom of the room. 1 "ie curtain rose. 

UNGER stood in the middle of the spot 
of light. 

Johnson felt his chest muscles contract, 
then relax. Vee Vee's fingers sought bis arm, 
not to harm him but running to him for 
protection. He caught the flutter of her 
breathing. On his left, Caldwell stiffened 
and became a rock. 

Johnson had not seen Unger appear, One 



the coxjur 

tecond the circle of light had been empty, 
the next second the Venusian, smiling with 
all the impassivity of a. bland Buddha, was 
in the light. He weighed three hundred 
pounds if he weighed an ounce, he was clad 
in a long robe that would impede movement. 
He had appeared in the bright beam of the 
spotlight as if by magic. 

Vee Vee's fingers dug deeper into Johnsou's arm. "How — " 

"Shim. Nobody knows." 
No human knew the answer to that trick. 
Unless perhaps Martin — 

linger bowed. A little ripple of something 
!hat was not quite sound passed through the 
audience. Unger bowed again. He stretched 
himself flat on the mat, adjusted the rest 
to support his head, and apparently went 
to sleep. Johnson saw the Dreamer's eyes 
close, watched the chest take on the even, 
regular rhythm of sleep. 

The music changed, a slow dreamy tempo 
crept into it. Vee Vee's fingers dug at Johnson's arm as if they were try ing to dig under 
his hide for protection. She was shivering. 
He reached for her hand, patted it. She drew 
closer to him. 

A few minutes earlier, she had been a 
very certain young woman, able to take 
care of herself, and handle anyone around 
her. Now she was suddenly uncertain, suddenly scared. In the Room of the Dreaming, 
she had suddenly become a frightened child 
looking for protection. 

"Haven't you ever seen this before?" he 
whispered. 

"N — o," She shivered again. "Ob, 
Johnny ..." 

Under the circle of light pouring down 
from the ceiling, the Dreamer lay motionless. Johnson found himself with the tendency to hold his breath. He was waiting, 
waiting, waiting — for what? The whole 
situation was senseless, silly, but under its 
apparent lack of coherence, he sensed a 
pattern. Perhaps the path to the far-off stars 
passed this way, through such scented aud 
musical and impossible places as these 
Rooms of the Dreamers. Certainly Martin 
thought so. And Johnson himself was not 
prepared to disagree. 

Around him, he saw that the Venusians 
were already going . . . going . . . going . . . 
Some of them were already gone. Tim wa« 



ER OF YENVS % 
an old experience to them. They went rapidly. Humans went more slowly. 

The Venusian watchers had relaxed. They 
looked as if they were asleep, perhaps in ■ 
hypnotic trance, lulled into this state by the 
music and the perfume, and by something 
else. It was this something else that sent 
Johnson's thoughts pounding. The Venuaians were like opium smokers. But he wai 
not smoking opium. He was not in a hypnotic trance. He was wide awake and very 
much alert. He was . . . 

watching a sfrace ship float in an endlett 
void. 

As Unger had come into the spotlight, so 
the space ship bad come into his vision, out 
of nowhere, out of nothingness. The room, 
the Dreamer, the sound of the music, the 
sweetness of the perfume, Vee Vee and 
Caldwell were gone. They were no longer 
ia his reality. They were not in the range 
of hU vision. It was a* if they did not exist. 
Yet he knew they did exist, the memory of 
them, and of other things, was out on the 
periphery of his universe, perhaps of th* 
universe, 

AH he saw was the space ship. 

It was a wonderful thing, perhaps the 
most beautiful sight he had seen in his life. 
At the sight of it, a deep glow sprang inside 
of him. 

Rack when he had been a kid he had 
dreamed of flight to the far-off stars. He 
had made models of space ships.. In a way, 
they had shaped his destiny, had made him 
what he was. They had brought him where 
he was this night, to the Dream Room of 
x Venusian tavern. 

The vision of the space ship floating in 
the void entranced and thrilled him. Something told him that this was real; that here 
and now he was making contact with » 
vision that belonged to time. 
■ lie started to lib feet. Fingers gripped 
his arm. 

"Please, darling. You startled me. Don't 
move." Vee Vee's voice. Who was Vee Vee? 

The fingers dug into his arm. Pain came 
up in him. The space ship vanished. He 
looked with startled eyes at Vee Vee, at the 
Dream Room, at Unger. dreaming on the 
mat under the spot. 

"You . . . you startled me," Vee Vee 
whispered. She released the grip oa his aim. 



PLANET STORIES 



"But, didn't you §ee it?" 
"See what?" 
"The space ship!" 

"No. No." She seemed startled and a 
little terrified and half asleep, "I ... 1 was 
watching something else. When you moved 
I broke contact with my dream." 

"Your dream?" 

He asked a question but she did not 
answer it. "Sit down, darling, and look at 
your damned space ship." Her voice was 
t taut whisper of sound in the darkened 
room. Johnson settled down. A glance to his 
left told him that Caldwell was still sitting 
like a chunk of stone . . . The Venusians 
were quiet. The music had shifted, A slow 
languorous beat of hidden drums filled the 
room, There was another sound present, a 
high-speed whirring. It was, somehow, a 
familiar sound, but Johnson had not heard 
it before in this place. 

He thought about the space ship he had 
seen. 

The vision would not come. 

He shook his head and tried again. 

Beside him, Vee Vee was silent, her face 
ecstatic, like the face of a woman in love. 

He tried again for the space ship. 

It would not come. 

Anger came up instead. 

Somehow he had the impression that the 
whirring sound which kept intruding into 
his consciousness was stopping the vision. 

So far as he could tell, he was the only 
one present who was not dreaming, who was 
cot in a state of trance. 

His gaze went to Unger, the Dreamer , . . 

Cold flowed over him. 

Unger was slowly rising from the mat. 

The bland face and the body in the robe 
were slowly floating upward! 



Ill 

AN INVISIBLE force seemed to twitch 
at Johnson's skin, nipping it here and 
there with a multitude of tiny pinches, like 
Invisible fleas biting him. 

"This is it!" a voice whispered In his 
mind. "This is what you came to Venus to 
see. This . . . this . . ." The first voice went 
into silence. Another voice took its place. 
"This is another damned vision!" the 



second voice said, "This . . . this is somethirg that is not real, that is not possible! 
No Venusian Dreamer, and no one else, 
can levitate, can defy the laws of gravity, 
can float upward toward the ceiling. Your 
damned eyes are tricking you!" 

"We are not tricking you!" the eyes hotly 
insisted. "It is happening. We are seeing it. 
We are reporting accurately to you. That 
Venusian Buddha is levitating. We, your 
eyes, do not lie to you!" 

"You lied about the space ship!" the second voice said. 

"We did not lie about the space ship!" 
the eyes insisted. "When our master saw 
that ship we were out of focus, we were not 
reporting. Some other sense, some other 
organ, may have lied, but we did not." 

"I — " Johnson whispered. 

"I am your skin," another voice whispered. "I am covered with sweat." 

"We are your adrenals. We are pouring 
forth adrenalin," 

"I am your pancreas. I am gearing you for 
action. " 

"I am your thyroid. I , . ." 

A multitude of tiny voices seemed to 
whisper through him. It was as if the parts 
of his body had suddenly found voices and 
were reporting to him what they were doing. 
These were voices out of his training days 
when he had learned the names of these 
functions and hbw to use them. 

"Be quiet!" he said roughly. 

The little voices seemed to blend into a 
single chorus. "Action, Master! Do something." 

"Quiet!" Johnson ordered. 

"But hurry. We are excited." 

"There is a time to be excited and a time 
to hurry. In this situation, if action is taken 
before the time for it — if that time ever 
comes — we can all die." 

"Die?" the chorus quavered. 

"Yes," Johnson said. "Now be quiet. 
When the time goes we will all go together." 

The chorus went into muted silence. But 
just under the threshold the little voices 
were a multitude of tiny fretful pressures. 

"1 hear a whirring sound," his ears reported. 

"Please!" Johnson said. 
In the front of the room Unger floated 
ten feet above the floor. 



THE COXJURER OF VEXVS 



11 



"Mister, we are not lying!" his eye? re
"I sweat . . ." his skin began. 
"Witch Unger! ' Johnson said. 
The Dreamer floated. If wires suspended 
[ him, Johnson could not see them. If any 
I known force lifted him, Johnson could not 
I detect that force. All he could s»y for certain 
I that Unger floated. 

' Yaaah!" The silence of a room was 
broken by the enraged scream of a Venusian 
being jarred out of his dream. 
"Damn it!" A human voice said. 
A wave as sharp as the tip of a sword 
swept through the room. 
Unger fefl. 

He was ten feet high when he started to 
fall. With a bone-breaking, body- jarring 
thud, the Dreamer fell. Hard. 

There was a split second of startled 
silence in the Dreaming Room. The silence 
went. Voices came. 

"Who did that?" 

"What happened?" 

"That human hidden there did it! He 
broke the Dreaming!" Anger marked the 
i voices. Although the language was Venus[ ian, Johnson got most of the meaning. His 
hand dived under his coat for the gun 
bolstered there. At his left, Caldwell was 
muttering thickly. "What — what happened? 
1 was back in the lab on Earth — " Caldwell's 
voice held a plaintive note, as if some pleasant dream had been interrupted. 

On Johnson's right, Vee Vee seemed to 
flow to life. Her arms came up around his 
neck. He was instantly prepared for anything. Her lips came hungrily against his 
lips, pressed very hard, then gently drew 
away. 

"What — " he gasped. 

"I had to do it now, darling," she answered. "There may not be a later," 

Johnson had no time to ask her what she 
meant. Somewhere in the back of the room 
t human screamed. He jetked around. Back 
there a knot of Venusians were attacking 
! « man. 

"It's Martini" Caldwell shouted. "He is 
ben:" 

la Johnson's hand as he came to his feet 
the ut gun throbbed. He fired blindly at 
the ausi of Venusians. Caldwell was firing 
too. The soft throb of the guns was not 



mdible above the uproar from the crowd 
Struck by tlie gas-driven corvet dunes* 
Venusians were filling. But there seemed to 
be an endless number of them. 

"Vee Vee?" Johnson suddenly realized 
(hat she hid disappeared. She had slid out 
of his sight. 

"Vee Vee!" Johnson's voice became i 
shout. 

"To hell with the woman!" Caldwell 
grunted. "Martin's the important one." 

Zit, zit, zit, Caldwell moved toward the 
rear, shooting as he went. Johnson followed. 

A VOICE boomed through the room, in 
Venusian. "Let movement stop!" 
At the sound of that voice the Venusians 
stopped all motion. 

Again the voice boomed through the 
room. 

"Bring the human to me." 

The voice came from Unger. 

The knot of Venusians around the human 
came back to life. A knife flashed. 

"Bring him to me unharmed!" Ungec 
boomed. 

The knife went hastily out of sight. The 
knot of Venusians came untangled They 
carried a struggling human down the ramps 
toward the bottom of the pit. 

"It's Martini" Caldwell shouted. '"Let's 
knock these Venusians over, grab him, and 
break for the door." 

"Hold it," Johnson said. "It may not be 
that easy. We will go with them to Unger." 

Carrying Martin to the bottom of the pit, 
the Venusians jet him on his feet. Martin 
was tall, dark-haired, a slender length of 
living, nervous whipcord. His hair was 
tousled, his clothing torn. As Martin came 
to his feet, Johnson saw that blood was running down one side of his face. 

Unger was standing erect. His 300 pounds 
radiated anger, rage, hate. 

"Dreamer, he had a thing which the 
humans call a camera or a recorder." The 
speaker, an elderly Venusian, was outraged. 
He jerked a knife from its scabbard. 
"Dreamer, allow me the privihge of slitting 
his throat!" He held the knife high, awaiting only the signal to plunge it into Martin i 
neck. 

A fierce throb of anger seemed to flow 
through the Room of the Dreaming. 



13 



PLANET STORIES 



"All things in their time," Unger said. 
"Do you hold your knife for now." 

The fingers of the Vcnusian trembled as 
he slipped the knife back into its scabbard. 

"Dreamer, I obey. But remember, when 
the time comes, the privilege is mine. I spoke 
first!" Hot anger sounded in the Venusian's 

"It will be remembered, Tildaio," Unger 
said. He lifted his gaze. "Bring me this 
camera, this thing that the human was 

A Venusian carried the camera down the 
iteps and handed it to Unger. While the 
Venusians had never denied humans entry 
to the dreaming rooms, any kind of a camera 
or other recording device had always been 
strictly forbidden. Neither argument, persuasion nor offers of payment had ever 
moved a Dreamer to permit the recording 
of a dream performance. Under his breath, 
Johnson- cursed. The recorder was evidence 
that could not be denied. "The fool!" Johnson cursed. 

Unger took the device and examined it. 

"Hmmmm." His eyes sought Martin. 
"This is not only z camera, it is a very 
complex and compact recording device designed to make a permanent record of the 
sights, sounds, and many a( the other vihratory frequencies present in this room." 

"Well—" Martin said. 

"There is no point in attempting to deny 
it. The object speaks for itself. Why did you 
bring this recording deviic intu the Room 
of the Dreaming?" Unger's words were hard 
and cold. 

"No excuse!" Martin's words were hot. 
"Just a single question: "Why are they foxbidden in these rooms?" 

"Why?" Unger's woice suddenly lost its 
certainty. 

Martin's voice continued. "Why have you 
kept this information from us humans? Is 
it because these Dreaming Rooms, and the 
act of dreaming as practiced by you Venusians, is nothing but a hypnotic device, a trick 
used to cheat fools of their money?" 

"It—" 

"Fraud!" Martin shouted. The word 
seemed to roar through the room. 

Unger lost his poise. The Venusian 
seemed to writhe, to squirm,- to twist as if 
some onseen and invisible force was tortur


ing him. 

Johnson moved forward. Caldwell went 
with them. Martin saw them for the first 
time. 

"Johnny! Caldwell! Where did you come 
from?" 

Johnson's eyes were centered on Unger. 
The lit gun in bis hand was pnised and 
aimed at the eyes of the Venusian. 

"If anyone makes a move toward us, the 
charge in this gun will go into your eyes," 
Johnson said. "I suppose you know that 
under such circumstances the charge from a 
lit gun will kill." 

Unger stopped his squirming. He seemed 
suddenly to realize that other humans were 
present. His round, impassive face turned 
toward Johnson. 

"Ah, yes, you," he said. 

"Call off your dogs," Johnson said. "Tell 
these people to permit us to leave. " 

"But—" 

"You look at death. Dreamer!" 

"I know that. Death is not important. 
Have you considered that these dogs arc 
really wolves who will tear you to pieces at 
my nnd?" Unger's shifting gaze indicated 
the other Venusians in the room. Out of 
:he corners of his eyes Johnson saw that 
Taldero had drawn his kniEc again. Others 
were moving like jungle cats getting ready 
to pounce. 

'True, you can have your wolves kill us," 
Johnson said. "But our deaths will follow 
yours, not precede it." 

His voice was clear and firm. If there wis 
fear in him it was out of sight. He did not 
know how much most of the Venusians 
were understanding of what he was saying 
but one thing they certainly understood — 
the zit gun in his hand. 

"We are going out of here," Johnson 
said. "You are going with us as a hostage. 
Our lives for your life." 

Unger lifted his hand. "One minute. It 
you please. There are questions 1 want to 
ask. Who is this man?" He gestured toward 
Martin. 

"A very renowned human scientist," 

"Ah, and what is he doing on Venus?" 

"Don't tell him!" Caldwell spoke sharply. 
"It's none of his business." 

"It might be some of my business if I 
knew," Unger said. 



THE CONJURER OF VENUS 



13 



Waging voices were urging Johnson 
away from this place, screaming at him to 
get away while be had the chance. Inside 
; of him, tiny voices were shouting warnings, 
his skin was reporting sweat again, his brain 
was reporting the pressure of an emotional 
overload. Inside of him was still another 
voice insisting that here he dealt with illusion and hallucination, shouting at him, 
"You saw a space ship where no space ship 
could exist! In this place how can you 
determine reality?" 

THE expression on the face of the Venusian was very strange but it was some 
kind of a' smile. Seeing it, Johnson hesitated, 
spoke impulsively. "We three are a group 
of human scientists who have come to Venus 
to , . ." he hesitated. 

"Damn it, Johnny!" Caldwell gritted. 
"Tell him, Johnny," Martin spoke. 
"There may be more involved in telling him 
than we know. The recordings will tell." 

"We came here to investigate tiie dreaming," Johnson spoke. 

"Ah," Unger said. Shades of feelings 
played across his face. "You are the three 
humans who came asking about the dreaming! I have heard of you." 

"We asked for information, knowledge, 
understanding," Johnson's voice got hard 
again. "We sought these things. What did 
wc get?" 

"You asked for bread and we dreamers 
gave you a stone," Unger spoke. 

"What?" Johnson gasped. The shift to t 
religions framework startled him. He had 
not thought thai a Venusian understood such 
things. 

"Perhaps the stone we gave you was more 
palatable than the bread you aslced for," 
Unger continued. 

"But— " 

"However, when your request wis denied, 
you did not stop seeking-'" Unger asked. 

"Of course not! Wc don't belong to a 
race that stops seeking. We sought other 
••ays to get the information." 

"Is the information important to you?" 

"Yet." 

"What luck did you have with the other 
wars?" 

Johnson shook his head. Bitterness came 
up in biro. "None. The Dreaming Rooms 



were everywhere, the Dreamers were i 
group apart. The Dreamers would not talk, 
No other Venusian ever admitted knowing 
anything." 

"And so—" >j 5Ta 

"One of us, the most impetus and 
perhaps the most brilliant of us, became 
impatient." Imperceptibly Johnson nodded 
toward Martin. "We knew there was danger 
in the Dreaming Rooms. He ignored that 
danger. He slipped awiy from us. I think 
perhaps he hid from us to protect us from 
the danger he intended to face. We discovered that possibly he had come bete 
tonight. We did not know for sure that lie 
was here until a Venusian discovered the 
recorder in operation." 

Martin stepped forward and took the 
recorder from lingers hands. The Ve:.usian 
released it without reluctance. 

"So you came here tonight to find and 
help a friend?" Unger said. 

'Yes. He is impetuous and impatient. 
He wants answers." 

"And I've got 'em tight here." Martin 
clutched the recorder in a tighter grip. "Let's 
get out of this joint. I want to see what these 
wires have on them. Come on, Johnny. You 
cover that Dreamer and we will take him 
with us — " 

"One instant more," Unger spoke. "What 
was the vision that you saw?'' He addressed 
Johnson. 

"A—" • 

"Eeeeeech!" A woman's scream ripped 
through the room. Martin and Caldwell both 
turned. Johnson did not move. He kept hieyes rigidly fixed on Unger. The Venusian 
stood in the bright glare fiom the spot 
glanced toward the source of the scream. 

"Bring the human forward unharmed. 
Unger spoke. 

Fighting, scratching, clawing, douii. 
everything but spit and she would have done 
that if she had had the chance, Vee Vet 
was dragged forward. Johnson still did noi 
move. Neither his gaze nor the focus of 
zit gun ever left Unger's face. Out of the 
corners of his eyes he saw Martin leap 
forward. 

"Vee Vee!" Martin screamed. "What in 
the devil are you doing here? What the hell 
are you doing on Venus?"' 

Out of the corners of his eyes, Johnson 



14 



PLANET STORIES 



saw Vee Vee flow into Martin's arms. 
"Hank, Hank Darling, I came by the last 
rocket. I've been looking everywhere for 
you." Her arms were around Martin s neck 
and she was kissing him wildly. "I learned 
you might be here and J came here looking 
for you. When they caught you, 1 tried to 
escape and go for help. I couldn't get out. 
They caught me too, Hank." Again she 
kissed him. 

The word, "Hank," rang through Johnson's mind like a Ml. Very few people 
knew Ma/tin's nickname. He was very sensitive about fhis name, it was his most carefully guarded secret, known only to friends 
intimate enough not to use it. If Vee Vee 
knew Martin's carefully guarded name. 

"Oh, hell!" Something inside Johnson 
said. "Damn!" 

He glanced at the two, to make certain 
of what he was seeing out of the corners of 
his <Ves. The instant after he shifted his 
gaze he knew it was not the thing to do. 
He swung quickly back to look at Unger. 

The circle of light was empty. 

Unger had vanished. 

In the silence, Johnson could hear Vcqus* 
fen feet drawing closer, the soft rustle of 
knives being pulled from scabbards. 

rv 

JOHNSON stood without moving and 
stared at the empty circle of light. 
His eyes insisted. "He is not there. We 
looked away for a moment and when we 
looked back he was gone." 

The corners of his eyes said, "We caught 
a glimpse of something . . ." 
"What was it you glimpsed?" 
"We ... we arc not certain ... we 
think . . 

The human could not wait to get the 
message from the comers of his eyes. Steps 
were driving forward. He whirled in time 
to see Taldcro lunging at him. A naked 
fgkaifc glittered in the Venusian's uplifted 
Viand. Taldero's face was a gleaming mask 
*f triumph. The Venusian was already relishing the good feeling he would get from 
sinking his knife up to the hilt in this 
human's throat. Men were interlopers on 
Venus, space creatures to be destroyed, 
vcrntin that no honest Venusian could accept. 



Johnson dropped the zit gun. There was 
no time to use it. In this moment it was 
only in his way. One band caqght the uplifted arm. His body met Taldero's body. 
He was rocked backward by the fury of that 
charge. He caught himself. The other hand 
sought Taldero's body. The Venusian gasped 
with pin as the Karmer nerve block was 
forced home. He shuddered and went limp. 
The knife fell from his fingers. Johnson 
shoved him backward against another Venusian From the floor he snatched the gun 
and the knife. 

He could hear Caldwell's gun spitting. A 
semi-circle of Venusians were pressing toward the three hunans. Caldwell was holding them hack. Martin, unarmed, was clutching the recorder. Vee Vee stood in front of 
him tike some amizon preparing to do battle 
for her mate. 

"Vee Vee! Catch!" She turned startled 
eyes toward Johnson in time to snatch the 
gun he threw to her. 

"But what will you do — " 

"I've still got Taldero's knife. Back up 
against the back wall and try to hold them 
at bay. I think I know something." 

Johnson dived through the spotlight. The 
wall behind the light was decorated with a 
mural, a spot on Venus where the sun was 
breaking through clouds and illumining a 
vast, rain-swept valley. On Venus, where 
they saw the sun but rarely, the sight of Sol 
was considered abom the same as a glimpse 
of heaven. He felt along the mural. The 
comers of his eyes insisted, "He went this 
way." His searching fingers found a spot, 
pushed against it, A section of the wall slid 
soundlessly away. 

Sitting in a soft chair in the bidden room 
revealed there, Unger looked calmly at him. 

"You saw me go?" Unger said. "You are 
very, very seeing. No Venusian and up until 
now no human has ever seen an adept move. 
We have a mle about it . . 

"A part of my eyes saw you move and 
recorded the impression," Johnson stepped 
ifito the room. In his liand, the knife blade 
glittered. "Life ticks away very rapidly here 
tonight." He gestured outward where the 
screams of the Venusians mingled with the 
throb of the guru. "Call off your wolves or 
life will stop ticking for you. ' 

Unger seemed utterly unperturbed by the 



THE CONJURER OF VENUS 



15 



ught of the knife or the man behind it. 
"They ire not my wolves," he said. "I do 
not know that I can call them off but perhaps 
I can hold them at bay for a while." He rose 
with the easy grace of an athlete and moved 
to the opening. 

Out there three humans were backing 
against the wall. Johnson did not look at 
them. This time he would not take his eyes 
off Unger. 

"Peace!" The Dreamer's voice was practically a roar. 

The Venusians pressing dose against the 
three humans hesitated. In the distance a 
voice screamed, "I saw you — " 

"Inside here, you humans," Unger spoke 
quickly. 

Vee Vee, Martin, and Caldwell slid 
through the opening. Unger slammed the 
door, dropped a bar across it. Looking at 
him, Johnson saw that the Venusian was 
sweating. 

The humans were panting, Vee Vee 
looked at Johnson. Her eyes glowed. 
"Johnny! You did it!" Johnson looked away. 

Martin stared around the room. "So this 
ii die trick!" He spat out the words. "They 
distract your attention, then they jump into 
this hole. It's just a matter of moving very 
rapidly. Probably they spend years learning 
it and think they have something very important when they master ii." Bitter disappointment sounded in Martin's voice. He 
teemed to have forgotten the death they had 
so narrowly missed outside. He lifted the 
recorder as if he intended to smash it on the 
floor. 

Unger caught it, took it from the human. 
"I thought you wanted to see what went on 
inside the Room of the Dreaming." 

"I did, but I didn't think it was fraud. 
I sensed that something important was here." 
Martin's voice was the voice of a man who 
has lost a dream. 

"Why don't you look at the recording?" 

To hell with the recording. It will only 
i more fraud." 

"I jay to hell with it too!" Caldwell intercepted. "Our necks come first. Let's get out 
W here. Johnny — " 

"Just a moment," Johnson said. Sweat 
*r*i now visible on Unger's face, glistening 
in heavy yellow drops. 



"Why don't you see the recording?" 
Unger urged. From the angle in which his 
head was held, Johnson had the impression 
the Dreamer was listening. The human listened too, He could hear no sound unless it 
was a thin mumble of voices beyond tlie 
barred door. 

"The recorder is also a projector on the 
sound and visual tracks, is it not?" Unger 
asked, 

"Yes," Martin's voice was sullen. 

"Then shall we take a few minutes and 
see what the recorder caught in the Room 
of the Dreaming?" Without waiting for an 
answer he snapped the switches that rewound 
the wires and began to set up the recorder 
to function as a projector. "We will project 
the visual part against the wall there and 
listen to the sound. The other radiations you 
hive caught will need extensive laboratory 
equipment to interpret." 

"You seem to know a lot about this!" 
Martin challenged. 

"Do I? Ah . . ." Watching him handle 
the recorder Johnson had the impression that 
the Venusian had never seen one of these 
instruments but was swiftly grasping the 
meaning of the various dials anj switches as 
he came to them. If this was true, it was a 
marvelous mental feat. Wonder rose in 
Johnson. But his eyes never left Unger and 
his hand did not relax its grip on Talderos 
knife. 

"Watch," Unger said. 

A JET of light from the self-contained 
unit sprang out through the lens, 
flashing against the wall. Unger gestured 
toward it. "Watch," he repeated. 
"I'm watching you," Johnson said. 
"Suspicious?" 

"Don't I have a right to be?" 

The question went unanswered. Music 
from the sound track throbbed in the small 
room. The scene on the wall revealed Unger 
stretched flat on the mat. 

"Damned fraud!" Martin mutfered. 

Vee Vee moved close to Johnson. Her 
whisper was very soft. "I wonder if we will 
see the dreams again?" 

"I do not know. I am watching the 
Dreamer." 

"Yes. I know." She moved closer still. 
Her voice was even softer. "Darling," 



ft) 



PLANET STORIES 



"Shut up!" 

She shrank away from him. He was aware 
that her eyes were on him. Suddenly she 
laughed, softly. "Oh, good! You're jealous." 

Had she read his mind? "I am not jealous. 
Shut up. "Hiis is no time for talk." 

In spite of what he said she moved closer. 
Under his breath he swore at her. 

In the distance he seemed to catch the 
mutter of shouted voices. "I tell you I saw 
him!" one voice screamed. 

"Look!'' Wild excitement was in Martin's 
tone. "Look! He is floating." 

Jolinson felt his heart beat pick up. 

The projected scene revealed that linger 
was actually floating. 

"If the recorder caught it like that it 
actually happened that way!" Martin 
screamed. "You can't hypnotize a recorder." 

But was it real? Was the Dreamer really 
floating? Desperately Johnson wanted to see 
with. IB his eyes. 

"We will watch Unger for you," the 
cornets of his eyes whispered. 

Johnson dared to look at the projected 
picture. There was no mistaking the evidence. The Dreamer was floating. No wires 
lifted him. The recorder would have caught 
wires. 

"This floating is no fraud," Unger said 
softly. "We Dreamers know and manipulate 
and use forces — " 

"Anti-gravity!" Martin screamed. "With 
anti-gravity comes ships to the stars!" 

"We Dreamers know certain forces, certain energy states, which we manipulate — " 

Crash! 

The door went down. The bar was tore 
from its sockets by the sudden pressure applied against it, Through the opening a 
knife came, crashed against the wail. Then 
another and another. 

In Vee Vee's and Caldwell's hands the 
Jit guns throbbed. Venusians stumbed 
through the doorway. 

"This way," Unger said, moving toward 
llie farther wall. 

Martin snatdied the recorder from the 
table and turned the light beam on a 
Venusian trying to get through the door. 
He dodged backward. From the Room of 
the Dreaming a babble of angry voices 
arose. 

"Thu wav." Unrjer repeated. The door 



was open in the farther wall. The humans 

dived through it. Unger closed it and followed them. 

They found themselves in darkness. 
Martin turned the recorder on it. Hie light 
from it revealed a tunnel. Unger moved 
forward. Follow, please." 

"These Dreamers do know something," 
Martin was babbling to Johnson. "They have 
latched on to vital secrets of nature. I don't 
know what else they've got but that secret 
of floating is. . . ." 

"There are many secrets," Unger said as 
he moved ahead of them. "In the last 
analysis perhaps there is only one secret, one 
energy, but this energy takes many forms." 

"How do you do this dreaming? " Martin 
questioned. 

"It is a very complex process," Unger 
answered. "The music and the perfume are 
part of it. But we, the Dreamers, are the 
heart and the core and the soul of it. What 
you call hypnosis is involved in part. We 
Dreamers reach the minds of our audience. 
We bring up to the level of awareness the 
most cherished dream of those who are in 
rapport with us. We Dreamers see, feel, 
and share in the dreaming of our audience. 
To some extent wc direct their dreaming. 
They have no comprehension of what is 
involved. To them the Dreaming is a sacred 
thing. The Dreamers are minor gods." 

"But how do you float?" Martin repeated. 

"We take the force which you call gravity. 
It is an energy state. We tap this energy 
to reach the minds of our audience, to control and to come into rapport with them." 
The Venusian's breath was coming in 
gasps. 

"Yes. Go on." Martin was the hound on 
the scent of prey, the eager scientist following the clue no matter where it lead, knowing there was an answer and determined 
to have that answer no matter the cost. 

Unger stopped. A door was ahead. He 
fumbled with a catch. The door swung 
open. 

Tlain and the darkness of the night swept 
through the opening. In the far distance 
lightning walked across die sky. Outside was 
the streets of the city. 

"Seek safety!" Unger*j Toice wis 
hoarse. "It will perhaps be better if you 



THE CONJURER OF VENUS 



17 



leave Venus. I warn you fairly, my people 
are wolves. They hold the dreaming sacred. 
Sometimes they hold the Dreamers Sicred. 
But if they think you have stolen the secrets 
of the dreaming — Well, it would be better 
for you for wolves to tear you to pieces 
than it would be for my people to catch 
you." He leaned against the open door. 

"But the secret of the floating?" Martin 
insisted. 

"You have it on your recorder." linger 
answered. "It is a matter of frequency, of 
vibration and interwoven vibration. From 
the information on your recorder, you can 
develop the equations you will need. Go." 

"Good!" Martin's voice was a shout of 
exultation rising in the dark niglit. 

"My people will soon be searching the 
streets. Go." 

Martin and Caldwell went quickly 
through the opening. Johnson hesitated, 
"linger . . . Dreamer . . ," He sought for 
words. "You . . . you're a great guy." 

The Venusian's hand came to his arm. 
Vee Vee stood very close, watching, waiting, 
though Martin had already gone. 

"Thank you, my friend,' linger whispered. "I accept your words and the meaning that is behind them." 

"I . . ." Johnson's voice choked into 
silence. Here was a great Venusian and he 
knew it, a Dreamer whose dream went beyond race, beyond space, perhaps beyond 
time. 

"Come with us," Johnson said. "Come to 
Earth with us." 

"No." Unger's voice was almost a sob. 
"I may not leave this planet." 

"Why not? We will protect you. On 
Earth there will be great honor for you." 

"There is honor here for me among the 
Dreamers. You do not know it, my friend, 
but all the Dreamers of Venus are with 
me now in this moment while my life 
drains away. They give me honor. Mure than 
1 deserve." 

Horror flooded through Johnson. "While 
your life drains away? I don't understand." 

Unger leaned forward. "Look. . ," 

"C*ROM his back the hilt of a knife pro.T trudci. "One of the knives found a 
target." 

J— PLANET STORIES— No vcmb« r 



"The hopeless fools! Come. Wc will help 

you." 

"No human and no Vcnusian may help 
ine now. The Dreamers are with me. My 
life is going. Believe me, my friend, I 
know." The Veausian straightened up and 
coughed blood. 

"The fools were throwing at me and 
they hit you accidentally." 

"It was no accident," Unger said. "And 
the knife was aimed at me." 

"At you? Why? But the Dreamers are 
sacred." 

"Not if they break the rules. And I broke 
one of them. Some Venusian saw me leave 
the spot of light, the trick that you saw." 

"But it was only a trick." 

"As I did it tonight it was a trick," Unger 
whispered. "But as the rules go, it is no 
more a trick than the floating. Wc go into 
the light by a path that none may see." 

"Then you deliberately stepped out of 
the spot of light — " 

"Yes, my friend," 

"In heaven's name, why?" One mystery 
had been solved only to open a greater 
one. 

"Perhaps because I wanted you to see me 
go, and follow me. Some Venusian saw me 
go, the one that screamed, 'I saw him!" 
It was a chance I took. The rules of the 
Dreamers say that if any watcher sees one 
come or go, his life is forfeit." • 

"You wanted me to see you go. Unger, 
why?" 

"Because I saw your vision, your dream." 
Unger's voice was very weak. "Tell me, my 
friend, was not your dream that of a space 
ship flying through far-off voids, the pathway to the stars?" 

"Yes. Yes. That was what I saw. But . . ." 

"That is my dream too." Unger gasped. 
"It is a dream which you humans can bring 
to fruition. But it is not only a dreim, it is 
a prophecy. Some day you humans will sail 
such i ship to the far-off stars. Here, tonight 
a Dreamer helped that prophecy to fulfillment. When that ship sails to the stars, 
Venusians will sail with you because of what 
a Venusian did here tonight. Two dreams 
met tonight and will meet again in the far-off 
stars." 

"Lord!" Johnson whispered. Here was 
magic beyond comprehension. But if it was 



13 PLANET 

magic now, in one time to come it would 
be the laws of science, of energy, of space, 
and of time, when the records of the recorder had been translated. 

"Go now," the Venusian whispered. 
Johnson could have stayed, he would have 
lifted the 300 pound bulk in his arms. 
Unger forbade it. "And one other tiling." 

"What other thing?" 

"The dream of the woman. I saw that, 
too." 

Johnson suddenly realized that while 
Martin and Caldwell had vanished into the 
night, Vee Vee was still with him. 

"What about my dream?" she spoke. 

"Your dream was of the man with you." 
Unger whispered. "I saw it. I understood 
it. It was another factor in the web of 
dreams I was weaving." 

"She was dreaming of me!" Johnson 
Mid. "But she is in love with Martin." 

"Idiot!" Her voice had a cutting edge. 



STORIES 

"Of course I love him. He's my brother. I 
wanted to come with him here but he 
wouldn't let me. It was from him that I 
learned so much about you, including how 
to break (he Karmer grip, from his talk 
before he left Eardi, from his letters to 
me." 

"Your dream was of a space ship to the 
far-off stars. Her dream was of love, and 
of you." Unger sighed. 

"I can dream of space ships too," Vee 
Vee spoke. "I can do more than dream of 
them. I can fly there with them." 

"Good," Unger whispered as if now all 
things were complete. "That is all that is 
needed. Go now. Go!" 

His voice drove them. 

Hand in hand they ran through the rainy 
night. 

Ahead cf them, in some far-off sky, like 
a vision seen in a dream, a space ship 
floated. 




Ukb a wiNi it iuamtt wrtj wd tiulnl ptprl) 



AMERICANXANCfK_SOCIET¥. INC. 



THE RHIZOID KILL 

By JACK BRADLEY 

Rhizoids — fabulous gems that harnessed every brilliant sun 
of the Galaxy — these were the kill-stones thaf sent spacerat Mallard racing for the forbidden swamp belt of Mercury 
, . . info a lurid land that beckoned the get -rich -quick riffraff. 



THE first half mile into the swamp 
hadn't been so bad, but now Mallard 
began to fed really afraid. There were 
cainzs in here that no spaceman had ever 
•tea and against some of them the small 
blister on his hip would be about as effective 
m ft popgun. 

A tittle way ahead of him, he could dimly 
*■ ■ the naked body of the Mercuriin swamp 
msi and he swore enviously at the way she 



slipped through the dense fern growth, her 
webbed feet gripping the mud firmly. Once 
she held up her hand warningly and he 
slipped down behind a fallen tree fern to 
let a huge plant slug glide past. The thing 
was nearly forty fect in length and it could 
move with the speed of an express train. 

When it was gone, he got up and followed the swimp girl again. He hugged the 
helmet to him doscr and grinned at the 
19 



20 



PLANET STORIES 



feel of the strange metal in his hands. That 
helmet was his one last chance for all the 
things he had ever wanted and he would 
hold on to it as long as he had life left. 
With that helmet he could be free of Bill 
Olger and D'ulio, the Martian, and go back 
to Earth with more wealth than a space rat 
like himself had ever brought back. It was 
now, he reflected, one month from the night 
he had met them, back in Venusport . . , 

Mallard was sitting at a table in the 
Green Star the night they came in. Sitting 
there, drinking Sre, the raw native wine, 
and wondering if he could afford another 
glass of the stuff. He was surrounded by the 
riff-raff of the spaceways and his nerves were 
raw from a week-long bout with the Sre. 

The two men came in, looked the dingy 
place over for a moment, then made directly 
for his tabic. They were both big men, the 
Earth man a red-haired giant with the cold 
eyes and the hard, ruthless face of the space 
rat. Mallard had come to know plenty of 
men like him since be had been kicked out 
of the Patrol. Hard, bitter men, shrewd and 
utterly conscienceless. The Martian beside 
him he hardly noticed. His red, skeleton-like 
face was the typical Martian mask and Mallard wasted no time trying to form an estimate of him. No Earth man ever would 
koow what a Martian was like until he'd 
lived beside him for years- — sometimes not 
even then. And, anyway, Mallard wasn't 
too interested in cither of them. Not even 
when they came over and sat at his table. 

"I'm BUI Olger," the Earth man began 
without preliminaries. "This is my friend, 
D'ulio, one of the smartest scientists Mars 
has ever produced. We know about you. 
You're George Mallard, owner of the Space 
Lark." 

"If you're getting ready to make a touch 
you can save your breath," Mallard said 
sourly. "I haven't got a hundred credits to 
my name." 

"We're not getting ready to make a touch, 
Mallard." Olger said. "We're getting ready 
to let you in on the chance of a lifetime. 
Now, do you want to let us buy you a drink 
of something decent while we tell you about 
it, or would you rather keep on sitting here 
alone drinking this slop?" 

Mallard looked from his hard face to the 
spidery red mask of the Martian, then 



shrugged his shoulders and pushed out his 
empty glass. Olger beckoned to the Venusian 
waiter and presently Mallard was sipping 
a glass of pale green brandy that soothed his 
raw nerves like the almost forgotten touch 
of an Earth woman's hands. Bill Olger 
yanked his chair closer and bent his head 
over the table. 

"Look, Mallard, I'm not going to beat 
around the bush with you. I've kept pretty 
close tabs on you since you were kicked out 
of the Patrol and I know you're at the end 
of your rope. You've been picked up twice 
by the Patrol, on suspicion of piracy and, 
both times, you got away by the skin of your 
teeth. So our proposition is made to order 
for you, if you've got as much nerve as I 
think you have. The proposition is rhizoids." 

Mallard whistled softly. Rhizoids! Those 
incredible gems brought back from the 
fringes or" the impenetrable swamp belt of 
Mercury. Gems that grew, layer upon layer, 
like a pearl growing within an oyster, in the 
heart of a fungus shrub that looked like a 
dead, white stump. There were less than a 
dozen of those gems in all the Galaxy and 
they were worth upwards of a hundred 
thousand credits each. 

Mallard had seen one only once and that 
had been at a distance. It was worn by a 
Martian desert queen and he had never forgotten the exquisite beauty of the thing. 
Even yards away he could see the sultry fires 
imprisoned in that incredible stone and it 
made every other jewel he had ever seen 
look like a piece of cheap cut glass. 

"Sounds very nice, Olger," he said slowly, "There's just one little catch to it. The 
fungus stumps where those things grow are 
loaded with spores and those spores are the 
deadliest things in ail the System. A friend 
of mine. First Mate on the Jupiter run, went 
on an expedition to bring back some of those 
rhizoids a few years back and he told me 
what it was like. 

"They wear glassite suits while they're 
hacking the stumps apart to get at the 
rhizoids. The instant one of those stumps is 
touched it sends out a fine cloud of spores 
and when those spores settle down on a 
glassite suit it looks like the man was 
covered by hoar frost. They throw the suits 
away when they leave the scene. 

"One of the men, this mate said, h»p* 



the nmzom kill 



pcoed to step on a piece of one of those 
stumps, after he'd gotten out of his glassite 
■ott I got kind of side listening to the mate 
tell about whit happened then. Ever see an 
Earth wasp sting another insect and then lay 
its eggs in that insert's body, Olger? Welt, 
it vm like that. The man was paralyzed the 
minute the spores settled on him and he 
started screaming. A couple of minutes and 
tbe spores had paralyzed his vocal chords 
and after that he stopped screaming. He — 
well, he just kept screaming with his eyes, 
the mate said. They put a blaster to the poor 
devil's head before they left. 

"That's what those spores are like, Olger, 
ind I don't want any part of them, thanks. 
I don't mind taking a chance on dying from 
a ray gun but those rhizoids are only worth 
a hundred thousand credits apiece and I'd 
want a hundred million before I'd take a 
chance on dying like that." 

"And what if we could show you a chance 
to make your hundred million?" Bill Olger 
asked softly. 

Mallard's ringers tightened around his 
glass. "I'm listening." 

"You see," Olger began slowly, "the 
trouble up to now has been that no one 
could get those stones out of the fungus 
stumps unless he was protected by a cumbersome glassite suit and the swamp belt is 
too dense to bring those suits into. That 
meant they could only pick up a few they 
found growing around the rim of the belt. 
There are rumors that the natives have found 
t way to i kindle- the spores but they regard 
die fungus as sacred and won't help. 

"But, a couple of years back the Galactic 
Colonization Board finally managed to get 
one of the plants back to Earth. It isn't 
generally known but they really did it. They 
used a low powered force field and finally 
worked it into a glassite cage. They kept it 
quiet because they lost three of their men 
jetting the thing caged. 

"When they got the fungus stump back 
to Earth they began to experiment with it. 
Tbey started coating white rats with different chemicals and coverings, or injecting 
different drugs in them, and then sending 
Acrn into the age with the thing. They used 
op in awful lot of white rats. Mallard." 
George Mallard shuddered. "I can believe 



"The main thing, though, die thing; that 
matters to us, is that they put D'ulio. here, 
in charge of the experiments. And D'ulio 
had ideas of his own. He was just out of the 
Martian University and he just couldn't sec 
any point in working for Terrans for the 
rest of his life for a small salary. 

"The second week D'ulio worked on the 
fungus stump he discovered that the spores 
could be killed as fast as they were released 
by a plain, ordinary Overton ray. You remember the old Overton ray gun that was 
used in the war against the Martian desert 
tribes? The gun was originally meant to be 
rigged up on a ship but D'ulio made a 
smaller model that could be carried by two 
men and it worked on the spores as well as 
a big gun. 

"As soon as D'ulio was sure of his findings he opened the fungus stump, took out 
the rhizoid from it, then 'accidentally' 
burned the stump to a crip. He reported rh.it 
there was no rhizoid inside it. Sometimes 
they don't have, yon know, just as lots of 
pearls don't happen to be there when you 
open the oyster. He was fired for his carelessness. As soon as it was safe he contacted me. He knew I had ways of getting 
rid of the rhizoid that he didn't have. So, 
here we are. D'ulio has the equipment we 
need. We have the money to finance the 
expedition — and you have the ship. What do 
you say, Mallard?" 

"It would take the best part of fifty 
thousand credits to get the Space Lark 
ready for a trip like that," Mallard said 
doubtfully. 

"And I've got twice that, right here in 
my pocket, chum." Bill Olger reached into 
his pocket and banded something to Mallard 
under cover of the, table. Something that 
was smooth and round and hard. Mallard held it below the level of the table 
top and looked. Then he drew in his 
breath as sharply as if he had been hit 
in the stomach. 

At first glance, the thing looked like a 
large and very perfect Tcrran fire opal. 
But no opal ever gleamed with the unbelievably sultry fires that lived in this 
stone. It looked as though every sun of the 
Galaxy were imprisoned within its depths. 
George Mallard looked at the rhizoid in 
his hand for a moment longer, then turned 



PLANET STORIES 



to Bill Olger. When he spoke, his voice 

"We can be ready to blast off in fortyeight hours." 

THE Swamp Belt of Mercury! Mallard 
looked at the almost impenetrable 
growth of tangled fern trees and undergrowth and swore wearily. They had been 
here for three weeks, now, and it had been 
three weeks of pure, unadulterated hell. The 
dank, steamy air made every breath a painful 
effort and, day and night, giant insects 
made their life miserable. They could take 
die miniature Overton ray gun a little way 
into the swamp belt but at every step they 
had to be on the alert for the great reptiles 
that floundered through the dense undergrowth. And even more, for the deadly 
piant life that lay in wait. 

And always they were under watch from 
the'natives. Scaly-hided men, not much past 
the anthropoid stage, but the crude wooden 
spears they used could be very dangerous. 
The Overton ray gun was scaled down to 
near zero for use against the fungus stumps 
hut it could be turned up to full power for 
its original use as a weapon. And the gun 
had saved their lives on more than one occasion when those wooden spears began to 
fly past them. It was a tense, miserable life. 

But they did find the rhizoids. Not as 
many as they had hoped for, because the 
Overton gun could be taken into the swamp 
belt only a little way, but they found far, 
far more than had ever been brought out 
before. Day after day the tiny hoard of 
stones grew. Night after night the three men 
sat around the cabin of the Space Lark, 
gloating over them. At least Bill Olger and 
the Martian D'ulio did. Only Mallard was 
sullen and dissatisfied. Once he put his feelings into words. 

"Look. You two are all steamed up because 
we've got a handful of these things. A handful that's got to be divided three ways. Do 
you know how long your share's going to last 
once you hit the bright lights in Venusport? 
Well, I'll tell you. A year, two years. Maybe 
three years if you're careful. You might be 
satisfied with that but I'm not. Me, I want 
those hundreds of millions we were talking 
about when we started this thing. Yes, and if 
I can figure out some way of getting 



further into this damned swamp I'll get 
them, too." 

Olger looked at him in unconcealed disgust. "I can understand a man being a bum 
loser. Mallard, but not a bum winner. You 
know that we've already gone as far into the 
swamp belt as we can with the Overton 
and if you think I'm going into that hellhole 
without the ray gun, you're cra2y. It makes 
my skin crawl to think of the narrow 
escapes we've had, even with it. Be reasonable, fella." 

Mallard nodded glumly. He knew, of 
course, that Olger was right, but the nightly 
sight of the rhizoids, softly gleaming in his 
hands, was raising a fever in his brain that 
would not be stilled. If there was only some 
way lo establish contact with the natives, 
maybe get a guide. He fondled the rhizoid 
in his lingers and stared thoughtfully at the 
sultry fires within its depths. 

The next day he started making overtures to a native girl they had dubbed Tiny. 
The natives they had seen flitting about the 
swamp seemed to average around seven feet 
tall but Tiny was not much larger than an 
Earth girl. She seemed very young, barely 
out of her childhood, although they had no 
way of knowing the age of these natives. 
Like youngsters of any race, she was filled 
with curiosity and she often hung around the 
outskirts of the camp after her tribesmen 
had been driven away. 

Mallard set to work winning her confidence the same way he would have done 
with a wild animal. The first time she was 
alone he squatted down on the ground and 
made encouraging sounds toward the fern 
tree behind which she hid. Then he took a 
piece of Earth candy from his pocket, nibbled at it, made sounds of delight, and threw 
it on the ground before her. He walked away 
and when he looked back and saw her pick 
up the candy, he knew that he had made a 
start. In another two days, he was squatting 
on the ground, a few feet from her, trying 
to learn the rudiments of her language. 

It was no easy task he had set for himself. Her language was a series of barking 
consonants that were terribly hard for his 
Terran vocal chords to form and her thought 
processes were so primitive that it was like 
trying to talk to i four-yeai-old child ia 
a strange language. 



THE RHIZOtD KILL 



2:1 



But he did progress to the point where 
he could communicate simple ideas to her. 
Then he made the mistake of telling her 
that he wanted to find more of the rhizoid 
bearing fungus. Many, many more of them. 
When she understood what he wanted, 
she ran away and he did not see- her (gain 
for nearly a week. 

And when he did sec her again it was 
almost too late for her to be of any further 
use to him. He was prospecting alone, that 
day, Olger and D'ulio having set out to explore another section of the swamp belt. He 
had gone only a little way into the swamp 
when he saw Tiny struggling, half mad with 
fear, in the grip of two burly natives. They 
were tying her with vines to a fallen log 
and another native was coming forward, 
carrying something in his arms. 

Suddenly Mallard swore incredulously. 
The third native was carrying one of the 
white fungus stumps in his arms, carrying 
that deadly thing as carelessly as he would 
have carried a stick of wood! And llien Mallard saw that he was wearing a helmet on 
his head, a metal helmet, ringed by some sort 
of crystal stones. The helmet was pouring a 
protective flood of soft green light downward, completely covering the native's body. 
He seemed unharmed by the green light but 
the spores from the fungus stump were 
shriveling the instant they were touched by 
the light. 

Mallard leaped forward, then, his blaster, 
spitting wildly. His first shot brought down 
the native with the helmet and the other 
two went down a moment later. When he 
rushed forward and took Hie helmet off 
the dead native, Tiny cowered down on the 
ground, her child eyes rolling up fearfully 
at him. Mallard ignored her as he bent his 
head over the helmet. 

The thing was made of some purplish 
metal that was like nothing he had ever 
seen anywhere in the System. Certainly it 
had never been constructed by these primitive people and Mallard wondered briefly 
what alien race from what far distant star 
had left it here in these fetid swamps. 

But he was too filled with wild exultation 
to waste much time in idle speculation. The 
thing that mattered was that he now had a 
really perfect device for getting out the 
rhizoids. He alone had it! Let Olger and 



D'ulio keep their cumbersome Overton ray 
gun and squirm around the edge of the 
swamp belt with it, With this tiling he 
could go deep inside the belt and bring out 
all the rhizoids he could carry. 

And he was savagely determined to keep 
them when he brought them out. Let Bill 
Olger and D'ulio go back with him, carrying 
a basketful of those wonderful stones? Why, 
within hours after they hit Venusport, half 
the rifl-rafT of the space lanes would know 
about their discover)' and be heading for 
Mercury. No, when be lifted the Space Lark 
off Mercury, Olger and the Martian simply 
wouldn't be aboard. The thought of murder 
raised no particular horror in his brain. He 
had killed before. He whirled about and 
looked down at the cowering native girl. 

"You — belong me — now. You — take me 
— to these." 

He showed her a couple of the rhizoids. 
Tiny looked back at the swamp behind her 
and whimpered like a beaten puppy just 
once. Then she nodded her beau slowly. 
Mallard grinned with satisfaction as he bent 
down to cut her loose. 

THE girl led Mallard back into the very 
heart of the swamp belt. The journey 
was sheer nightmare. Hour after hour they 
plodded on while Mallard's body was soaked 
with sweat and his lungs seemed ready to 
burst from the steamy air. But the feel of 
those stones in his pocket somehow kept him 
plodding along after the naked girl ahead of 
him. Those stones had magic in them. 

It seemed long eons before he saw Tiny 
come to a halt and looked fearfully around 
her. From her evident fright, Mallard 
guessed she was in a taboo place. She made 
a furtive gesture and he hurried up to her. 
He readied the spot where she stood and 
drew in his breath with a shuddering gasp. 

The swamp had thinned out at this 
point and there before him was a whole 
grove of the white fungus stumps! They 
stood in serried ranks, like a yardful of 
ghosts and Mallard knew that within those 
white stumps there was a fortune that no 
space rat had ever dreamed of before. 

He broke into a stumbling run forward, 
the girl completely forgotten. At the edge of 
the grove he paused only a moment to make 
sure the shielding light of the helmet wu 



PLANET STORIES 



properly adjusted. Then he swung his blade 
down upon one of the white stumps. It split 
easily and he drew forth a perfect rhizoid, 
larger than any they had found so far. For 
i moment he held it shakily in his hand. 
Then he slipped it into the leather pouch he 
carried on his belt. 

In little more than in hour Mallard had 
rilled the pouch he carried. He was working 
like a madman, now, the sweat pouring 
from him in torrents, and he was numb with 
fatigue but the fever in his brain swept away 
.ill thoughts of stopping. 

He wanted more of these gleaming stones. 
He wanted to fill his pockets with them, 
tarry them away in his cupped hands. He 
was still moving forward on tottering feet 
when he heard Tiny scream. He whirled 
jbout savagely, his hand darting to die 
small blister at his belt. 

A tangled horde of Mercurian warriors 
was pourmg out of the swamp into the clearing. Their bestial faces were twisted with 
rage and their wooden spears raised menacingly. Even as Mallard turned and sprinted 
back, those wooden spears were flying past 
his head. He ducked down behind a log, 
:he native girl crouched, whimpering like 
■i puppy, beside him. 

Mallard put the helmet and the bag of 
rhizoids down beside him and began picking off the scaly hided warriors, one by 
)ne. He fired carefully, anxious to conserve 
he remaining charges in his small hand 
blaster. In his mind was a new dread. 

He knew that, long ago. Bill Olger and 
:he Martian would have returned to the 
Space Lark and found him gone. They 
would immediately set out looking for him 
and the sound of this fight would draw 
Jiem to him. They must not find him with 
his pouch full of rhizoids! Never would he 
shore those stones with any one else, that 
much he knew. 

Suddenly he saw something that caused 
him to open his eyes in stark disbelief. One 
of the warriors in that milling throng was 
wearing another helmet, an exact duplicate 
of the one lying beside him. And he was 
arrying a fragment from one of those deadly fungus stumps in his hands! Holding it 
ready to hurl the moment he was close. 

Mallard started to put on his own helmet, 
in'--, realized that in his prone position it 



would not shield him. He let it lie and 
started firing more rapidly, trying to reach 
the wearer of that helmet. He ducked aside 
as one of the spears barely missed him and 
heard a moan of anguish from die girl 
beside him. One of the spears had gone into 
her side and blood was pouring from the 
wound. 

From out in the swamp, theie was the 
sound of signal shots, followed by loud 
shouts. It was Olger and D'ulio and they 
were not far away. Mallard began firing at 
top speed, now, and the Mercurians fell 
like tenpins. The moaning girl beside him 
he ignored. And then the whole action exploded into nightmare. 

The Mercurian with the helmet stepped 
forward and called out a peremptory command to die girl. And she answered! Snatching up the pouch of rhizoids, she jumped 
clear of the log and started hobbling painfully toward her own people. At the same 
moment, Mallard saw big Olger and D'ulio 
leap out into the clearing, guns drawn. 

For one long moment. Mallard stared in 
horrified fascination at the girl carrying 
away the thing that mattered more than life 
itself to him. Then he had leaped clear of 
die log and was sprinting after her. As in a 
slow motion picture, he saw Olger and 
D'ulio firing into the tangled mass and taw 
the helmeted Mercurian warrior raise the 
fragment of deadly white fungus. 

For just a split part of a second he started 
to turn, to jump back and reach that protective helmet behind the log. But the limping girl was so close. Only anodier step. He 
reached forward for the leather pouch and 
the fungus landed directly at his feet! 

A cloud of fine spores lifted up like a 
puff of smoke and Mallard felt pain greater 
Qua he had ever known man could experience. He felt himself falling, literally pulled 
to the ground by the wave of paLi that was 
tightening every muscle in his body into an 
individual agonized knot. From a long way 
off he heard some one screaming and knew 
that it was his own voice. 

Mallard was no longer conscious of the 
action all around him. True, he could dimly 
sense the horde of saly hided Mercurians 
rushing panic stricken past him and he could 
bear that monotonous screaming that was his 
own vokc. But the only thing that really 



the nmzow KILL 



m«e<l for him was the hundreds of knots 
agony in his own paralyzed body. 
The only thing? From the corner of his 
he could see the pouch of rhizoids lying 
cat touching him and lie tried to force 
i agonized body into one last effort to 
ttt tt before he called out to Olger and 
t Martian to put the helmet on him. That 
[met would stop the searing pain, yes, 
i if only he could hold out for one moan longer — just one moment. Long 



25 

enough to hide those glorious gems with 
his body — . 

He tried and found that be could not 
move one inch. He gave up the effort and 
drew in one last breath to call out to them, 
to tell them to put the helmet on him. 

And he could not speak! The poison of 
the spores had already reached his Tocal 
chords. 

He was still screaming with his eyes when 
the others came up to him. 



952 m3 CROSS RJ 



THE LUMINOUS BLONDE 

By HAYDEN HOWARD 

Some dames are bright. Some brighter. Like the gorgeous wife 
•f the playboy Commish who combined all the stellar attributes 
necessary to slice in two parts an ultra modern spaceship, and 
a marriage, with one swoop of a dockhand. 



A S THE frilly-bloused rockette bent over 
l\ him to unbuckle his saftkorsctte, 
J- A- newly appointed Commissioner -ForEconomks-For-Mars J. Edwin Elbert 
pecked. But her fingernails tatted so hastily 
at Hie buckle that he raised his surprisingly 
youthful blue eyes to her face. She was 
blushing there too. A pretty little baby face. 

Skillfully he swallowed a rising belch that 
was & natural consequence of the cessation 
of gravity upon a paunch ovcrbloated with 
farewell champagne, Venus-dipped cold 
crab and too sweet apricot bread. 

"Director Hugens is to be congratulated 
upon his choice of rockettes," he rumbled, 
sneaking his fat, glossily manicured fingers 
about her wrist. The click of the powderoom 
door would warn him of his wife's return, 
"just the other day I was telling him that 
the new Bolo II should have only the best. 
I see he has exceeded even my most hopeful 
expectations." 

She giggled nervously. 

"Tell roc my dear, when docs the Bolo 
go into Hugens' celebrated centrigrav? This 
weightlessness is rather unsettling to one's 
stomach." 

"Can I get you a demamine pUl, sir?" 

"No, thank you. When does — * 

"Oh! At 1900 hours," she gushed. 

"The ship splits in half," she added helpfully, and dimpled in that winning way 
of little girls who will never grow up. 

"Remarkable. They tell me some sort of 
cable will tie us together." 

"Yes sir, when we are far enough out in 
space so there isn't any air friction, Mr. 
webley, the pilot, pulls a little lever and 
the nose flies off. He'll be all alone out there 
for forty-two days." 

"And only a thin cable connects out 
ptsscoger section to his control section?" 
N 



He was quite familiar with the details sinfl 
he had lobbied for the initial appropriation 
Her forearm had a nice warm smooch feel 
ing. 

"Oh, you understand it perfectly, sir 
When we're a mile apart a little rocket ii 
the side nukes us spin round and round 
Then 1 can take off these old iron shoes.' 
She followed his gaze to her legs aw 
tittered. 

He speculated that similar magnets mui 
be holding down the hem of her nyiw 
skirt. 

"And does this spinning about a comma 
axis continue until we near Mars?" 

"Yes sir, for forty-two daps. Excuse m 
sir, I think null gravity is making that lac 

iiL" 

After carefully wiping his palm on h 
coatslecve he replaced his unlit cigar in h 
broad, gleaming face. He wis in the smi 
ing sensuality of a daydream when the po' 
dcr-room door clicked. 

His wife was beautiful. 

Uptilting his cigar he watched her drif 
down the aisle. With one scarlet-tipped fii 
ger she prevented her diaphanous, skirt fror 
floating very high above her knees, A lovel 
lady. He champed on the cigar. It's n< 
every man whose wife is a natural blonc 
ex-starlet young enough to be his daughte 

But 2 little discipline was in order. 

"T ANDA, I wish you had remembcre 
J—J to have Hykato pack my golf things. 
"Edwin please, this null gravity is u] 

setting my tummy." 
"Weil, it's the least you could have done 
"And how would we have gotten it 

the ship?" her voice shrilled unexpectcdl 

"You embarrassed me enough as it was 
"Listen, I'm the Commissioner. No tw 



28 PLANET 

bit pilot is going to tell me what I can't 
take The luggage limit is ridiculous!" 

"What ate you complaining ibout? He 
let you take everything, didn't he?" 

"After you smiled at him." 

"I was only trying to be pleasant." 

"Pleasant is it? Last time you said it was 
to influence him to take all my luggage." 

"Yeah and you got sore because you 
weren't a big enough shot to swing the deal 
itlone," ber voice rasped through its ladylike veneer. 

"That's a lie. Furthermore I don't want 
to catch you smiling at him again." 

"I give up," she exclaimed and reached 
for a tclcmag. 

But he wouldn't drop it there. "I didn't 
like that fellow's looks. Pads in his shoulders, little waxed mustache. Who does he 
think he is, Captain Future?" 

"Ob, don't be funny. Just think what he 
thinks of you after what you said to him 
In front of all the other passengers and 
CKW." 

"Taking his side now?" 

"I am not." She gave a little sniff and 
fumbled for her handkerchief. "You're so 
mean ind masterful I'm surprised you don't 
make me go up front and tell him what a 
sap he is." 

"He was a sap smiling at my wife all 
right." He uplifted his cigar with a mollified grin. "He wasted a smile there. Twobit pilot, who does he think he is?" 

"He did smile at me though," she appended in a small voice. 

His voice snapped out again: "And you 
smiled back!" He ground his unlit cigar into 
the ash tray. "I think you were just now 
trying to flatter me; I think you were trying 
to turn me off the trick when you said you'd 
go up and tell him what a sap he is." 

"I was not," 

"Don't try to wiggle out of it. That's 
what you said." 

"All right, if you think I should, I will." 

"Well now — " He paused smiling and 
carefully trimmed the crushed end of bis 
cigar with a gold plated cigar cutter before 
he continued: "If you insist, go ahead." 

"There's not much time left," she said, 
pointing at the neon-dialed dock above the 
powder-room door. Beneath it hung an 
orange luminescent sign: U. S. Eastern 



STORIES 
Standard Earth Time Equivalent. 

"1850 hours," he snorted. "Don't try ti 
wiggle out on that account. You have a hat 
hour." 

"O. K., if you say so." she shrugged ant 
chewed the inside of her cheek. "This isn 
very nice." 

"Let's not get that way. You coolly sli 
the shaft in me enough. And stop powder 
ing your nose." 

Without another word she rose an( 
floated down the aisle, taking little care t< 
suppress her skirt. Somebody whistled am 
the Commissioner angrily craned his thid 
neck around. He couldn't see who had dom 
it But he suspected the three grinning Cade 
Astronauts in the last row of seats. 

As the door to the control room clangei 
shut, the powder-room door clicked opet 
and the rockette tapped out on her iroi 
shoe-soles. Commissioner Elbert rolled hi 
eyes and smiled, but she seemed preoccu 
pied with a smaller female with pigtails an 
the hiccups. 

Guess 1 11 have a look forward myself, h 
thought. Just like a woman to go up then 
wait in the hall a minute and come back. 

Rising, he floated past the rockette to 
ward the control room door. 

"Don't open that, sir. The ship's abou 
to separate." 

"What? It's only 1855 hours." 

"That is Eastern Standard Time, sir. Th 
dock at the other end of the aisle, over th 
men's room, gives the Standard Star Tim 
our ship schedule operates on." 

Those neon hands pointed at 1900. 

With a strangled yell he lunged for th 
door, but as his hand dosed about die hand! 
something clicked and it resisted his straii 
tng and then his pounding fists. 

A buzzer sounded and a cheery masculin 
voice spoke over the intercom. "Hello agai 
passengers, this is your pilot Hugh Weble 
wishing you a pleasant crossing. Please r< 
enter your safticorsettes. The Bolo II wil 
now separate." 

"Intercom," the Commissioner shoutet 
Shoving past the slack-jawed rockette, li 
literally swam down the gravityless aisl 
to the engineering hatchway. It opened * 
his shouts. 

"Yeah?" A giant with a handler* 
mustache peered up at him. 



THE LUMINOUS BLONDE 



I "I'm Commissioner Elbert. Call your pilot 
I at once. I ordei the ship not to separate.'' 

I TJASTILY the giant lifted the phone. 
I 11 Commissioner Elbert could hear the 
I steady buzz. 

I "Sorry sir, Webley's cut us off. He does 
I that so no one will interrupt him while he's 
w letting the auto controls." 
I "Get him somehow. My wife's up thefe." 
The giant coughed and strangled and 
turned his face away. "I'll keep trying 
sir," he gasped. "But sometimes he cuts us 
j off for days. He sleeps a lot." 

"Forehatch," the Commissioner shouted 
suddenly. "Unlock the forehatch." 

Wearily the giant clambered up. He 
[towered above Elbert. 

"Didn't you hear what I said," the Commissioner yelled. "Unlock the door to the 
control room." 

"Sorry sir, the lock's automatic." 
"Well dammit, blast it down." 
Noisily the giant scratched his crewcut. 
"Maybe I could crowbar it." 
"Quick, you fool." 
I "No, I can't. I can't sir. The ship might 
I separate while the hatch was open and cur 
I own air pressure would blow us all into the 
■ vacuum. I can't risk the lives of our passengers, sir." 

"I'm Commissioner Elbert. Give me that 
crowbar." 

The giant held it behind him. 
"That's an order." 

"Sorry sir, better reclaim your seat before 
the jolt." The giant signalled with his fingers 
at the tocketle. 

Elbert snatched at the crowbar. As the 
two men grappled for it, whirling like 
fighting cocks in the air, a tremendous surge 
burled them the length of the aisle. Another slammed them against the powder-room door. When the giant helped the 



bleeding Commissioner to his feet, artificial 
gravity held them down. 

Emitting motherly sounds, the rockette 
tried to wipe the blood from his forehead. 
But he shoved her aside. 

"I'll jue. I'll have your transport license 
revoked." 

"Please sir," the rockette squeaked, "I II 
bring you a sedative." 

"Hugens will hear about this, " he 
shouted, writhing in the engineer's brawny 
arms. But then he sobbed: "I sent her up 
there. My fault, my idea, she didn't want to 
go. She was worried about the time and I 
told her there was plenty of time." 

As he gulped the sedative he looked like 
a punctured balloon. 

"I don't want a sedative," he shouted. 
But he had just swallowed it. He sagged 
again. "My fault. I told her there was plenty 
of time." He rubbed his sleeve across his 
nose. 

After they had settled him groggily in 
his seat, the rockette drew the engineer aside. 
Her pretty little brow wrinkled. 

"Dan, I can't figure it. Why does he think 
it's his fault? Gee, when we were in the 
powder-room together she asked me about 
why the clocks told different times, and I explained how we figure time by positions of 
stars instead of the earth and sun apd all 
that stuff. You'd think she'd understood. 
She talked bright enough." 

The giant squeezed her arm affectionately, 
Lucky Webley, sap Commish, bright dame. 
Forty-two days and an alibi. 4 

He chuckled and walked his fingers up 
her arm. 

"Carol, you can't ever tell. All dames 
don't have the same amount of brightness 
you do. " 

She giggled and shivered a little at his 
hand. "We learned all about time in roikerte 

school." 



AS IT WAS 



By PAUL L. PAYNE 

In a cruel Cosmos one fiVed only to be killer or killed. The One 
proved that. It (tilled a hundred times a day. Thisbe II was its 
blood-red preserve . . . and now, throwing the challenge in lis 
myriad faces was Pritchard, fhe brightest name in big-game 
hunting throughout the length and breadth of Galaxy A. 



DAWN on Thisbe II was much like halo. The flanks of distant mountains flamed 

dawn on Terra, except for the color, curiously, as if their sides were smooth and 

— — The giant star Piramus lifted its ma- polished mirrors. 

genta disk above the little planer's fore- Yet nothing gleamed with such intensity 

shortened horizon and, in that brief mo- as the good ship Apollo, towering a bun
ment, sent orange corona flares shimmering dred and ten feet on her fins. Her surface — • 

out from its limb. An odd ionization effect chrome-plated nickel-steel coated with t 

raised faint ripples of light to flicker in the thick porcelain glaze — was expressly de
purple sky above. signed to bounce back every slightest beam 

As the sun ascended, the magenta bright- of light, 

coed into a crimson dazzle with a lavender So she stood now Like a flaming sword, in 




21 



32 



PLANET STORIES 



the center of a wide black circle, the area of 
yesterday's landing burn, and lay across it a 
wide fan of reflected sunlight. Presently, a 
thing like an enormous grasshopper-leg unfolded from her side. In its grasp was 
something that looked like a tray full of 
erect ants. The tray touched ground softly, 
the ants walked off and became men, and 
the long derrick folded back into the Apollo, 
taking the tray with it. 

The men left on the ground stood looking 
•bout them eagerly. After some of the 
barren, hostile worlds they had visited this 
one seemed little short of Paradise. From the 
eminence on which die ship stood they could 
look in every direction at rolling hills, 
among which clumps of feathery foliage rose 
profusely, and occasional startling upthrusts 
of rode, like clubs brandished from underground, leaning in every possible angle and 
having frequently such straight planes of 
cleavage that they almost seemed artificial. 
Olivc-hued hills and dramatic fish of rock 
alike marched off to a disturbingly cioseappcaring horizon, where began a sky that 
was not blue but lavender. 

They stamped the ground. It was one 
thing to have watched this wonder swell 
on the visiscreens as the ship tore around on 
ihs landing orbit, and to have craned and 
peered through the heavy leaded glass of the 
viewports after the landing in yesterday's 
sunset. Neither of these quite matched the 
delight of seeing it all with unaided and 
unimpeded vision. They smelled the air, so 
rich and invigorating after the ship's (mistiness. 

They were all young but one. And this 
one faced them now, a tall, saturnine nun, 
but with an amusement lurking In his dark, 
deep-set eyes. "Attention, cadet hunters." he 
said briskly, "let's have another equipment 
check." 

They rolled their eyes at him and quirked 
their mouths in simulated resignation. Yet 
the readiness with which they formed a semicircle about him showed their pride in obeying his orders, Tbcy knew they were lucky 
to be under Pritchard, the brightest name in 
planetary big game hunting throughout the 
length and breadth of Galaxy A. 

For each of them Iwd fought hard for hit 
place in this latest expedition to be led by 
fxitrhard. The ex-pilot-turned-sportsman 



regularly accepted certain hardy young neo-j 
phytes of the chase as assistants on his ex-| 
petitions; some aspired to follow in his I 
footsteps and others merelv sought the thrills! 
and danger that lurked along the unknownl 
trails of far-flung worlds. 

EACH one now showed his regular anc 
special equipment to Pritchard. Butt 
first, they held out their snappers — the ligh 
Thorp-Snc-1! hand rocket-tube that launchet 
a high explosive needle, deadly up to : 
thousand yards. Pritchard inspected load anc 
action, and then thumbed the gleaming edgt 
of each man's chopper, or ma tenet which hat 
been derived from the old Terran hatche 
and machete combined. It was really a long 
broad blade— sitb a flattcned-out, hatchet 
shaped headpP 

The special equipment consisted of . 
squawkie, the portable radio, carried by th< 
phlegmatic Sturgts; the cam-rec, a ligh 
camera and tape recorder combined, slunj 
over Kemp s plump shoulders; the flamer 
or flame-thrower, its full plastic tan) 
strapped to Majinski's back; the two packet 
of synthetabs or food concentrates enougM 
for a week for them all should they get losi 
— hung to the belt of red-headed McManusll 
and the first-aid kit strapped to Pritchard'J 
own lean shoulders. To the remaining fiv«J 
men would fall the pleasure of carrying all' 
this stuff back when the little scouting part*' 
returned. 

At last Pritchard beckoned to thl 
squawkic-man and spoke into its 'phragrnb 
"All set, Cap. See anything?" The voice oP 
Captain Savage, high above the rocket batJ 
teries in the towering nose, came back as 
thin rasping. His report was negative. "Musfr 
be a lull between the night carnivores anj 
the daytime ruminants. Looks like a few* 
nocks of birds far away." 

"Fine. We'll head east and dig.arounic 
in that jungle down there a bit. We'll turJ" 
back after noon chow." 

The captain's "Good hunting" ended witP 1 
a dick. Pritchard turned calmly and startej*' 
walking off the hard gloss the Apollo's hehp 1 
breathing stern tubes had made of this orxfl 
grassy spot, into the blackened wisps anP 1 
dust. The men followed him in a loos^ 
straggling group, ten men in all, swagger 1 
ing for the benefit of the envious eyes a I 



AS IT WAS 



•' »e remaining in the ship. 

McManus strode rapidly until he had 
ought up with the tail hunter. The redlaired boy's idolatry was plain in his wide 
blue eyes. 

"Why the jungle?" he said. "Why are you 
tickling the jungle, Mr. Pritchard?" 

"Just for a sample. Also as a check. The 
•hole planet's like this. Can't land anywhere 
without being near the jungles that seem to 
&U up every valley. I don't like cover like 
that so close to the ship. I want to see what's 

"Think we'll knock over anything?'' 
"Not trying for it," said Pritchard shortly. 

He punched the younger man on the biceps. 

"And unkink that trigger-finger of yours, 

hero boy." 

Mi Minus grinned shamefacedly. "Ah, 
change your tapes, will you? 1 only need one 
mistake to learn." 

Pritchard snorted. "On chat Deneb asteroid, you promised. You seemed to underitand. Then you thought you'd like one of 
those big clamshells for a souvenir. Remember what came out of those shells after you 
fired?" 

The boy moved his shoulders. "Remember! I dream about them regularly every 
tenth night." 

"I'm also thinking about a man named 
Munson." Pritchard's tone had become soft 
and musing. "That name mean anything to 

McManus shrugged. "There must be a 
million Munsons. None of 'em ever meant 
anything to me." 

"Every hunter remembers Munson," said 
™ 'ihard flatly. "And everybody on Terra 

>me thing squeaked under his foot, 
rhard flung himself sideways into the 
ickened stubble, rolled, and came up in a 
uch, snapper at ready, while McManus 
:<d blinking at him. Pritchard came back 
wly, narrowed gaze riveted on the spot 
ere he had stepped. McManus backed 
ly, raising his own snapper. The rest of 
men came running up. 
Pritchard knelt and picked up something, 
was stiff and charred and smelt acridly, 
pat the men clustering around could see it 
iud six legs. There was a dick and a whirr 
[ I— PLANET STORIES — Novtmbcr 



as Kemp started the cam-ree. 

Then McManus said, "I'll be damned" 
and picked up something else. It squealed 
and squirmed in his hand, and it also had 
six legs. 

"What is it?" queried Majinski ova his 
shoulder. "Rabbit?'' 

"Or squirrel," put in Greene, a rangy 
blond boy. 

"Some kind of rodent, anyway," said 
Pritchard. He ran a finger the wrong way 
through baby fur and the little sharp muzzle 
flicked around to snap at him. He stood up. 
"The mother shielded it from our stern jetwash. She died that Junior might live." He 
wiped his hands on his cordron breeches. 
"Bring it along, Tom. We'll drop it in the 
tall grass." 

By the time they reached the tall grass 
beyond the perimeter of the burn. Torn 
McManus had become attached to the little 
fur-ball, with its whiskery nose and knoblike feet, and found that it snuggled nicely 
in his breast pocket. Pritchard smiled indulgently and they all waded into the waisthigh grass. 

rpHEY went slowly, partly out of caution 
J- and partly because the long, thick -growing blades clogged and bunched around 
their legs. Little things went hopping and 
chittering out of their way, and the sun 
began to lay its heat on them. Birds, as yet 
unseen, called and cried and whistled in the 
dense growth ahead. 

They went down a long slope, and then 
bushes began to shouldernp above the grasstips and trees sprang upffcame arching their 
feathery fern-like trunks until they began to 
lace together overhead and others dangling 
enormous round leaves from long drooping 
stems. 

The transition to jungle was gradual, 
with more and more sunlight filtered out of 
the growing shade, and vines and creepers 
becoming abundant about the ankles. The 
choppers appeared and began swinging and 
slashing, and all were grateful for the shade 
and its attendant coolness. Something crashed 
heavily away, hidden by the dark browngreen wall before them. 

It began to be real jungle. Pritchard 
stopped before a sturdy hedge. He h«4 
chopped into it and found a long tough root 



PLANET STORIES 



34 

from which the heavy chopper only seemed 
to bounce back. 

"Hell," he grunted as McManus came up. 
"Joe, " he called, "let's have the fiamer here. " 

"Ah, what's the matter with you!" 
grinned McManus. He took his own chopper 
between both hands and raised it high over 
his head. "You must be . . . getting . . . old!" 
And he brought the heavy blade down with 
all his force. 

Pritchard had stepped back, amusement 
twisting his lips. Majinski was shouldering 
forward with the fiamer's nozzle ready. The 
chopper's edge chunked into the root — > 

And it came alive. The whole length of it 
nailed up into the air, flingirj^the whirling 
chopper off into the gloom. The next instant 
the air was full of writhing ropey lengths 
that whipped down on the men, lashing 
thick .branches off as they came. 

"Look out!" yelled Pritchard needlessly, 
as the men cowered and ducked, arms flung 
over their heads. 

Then something whipped about him hard, 
stinging and driving the breath from him. 
He felt himself swung up, his arms pinioned. 

He caught a glimpse of other bodies 
rising with him, heard hoarse screaming 
and yelling. 

Branches lashed by him and suddenly he 
was looking down on the jungle from high 
in the air, looking down on a sea of foliage, 
big, dish-shaped leaves lying atop the spreading ferns. Then he was curving down again, 
dizzy ingly. 

He saw it. A great maw, like the throat 
of an orchid, with a fringe of giant tentacles. 
It seemed to be rushing up at him. 

Fighting to free his arms, he realized 
they were not held below the elbows. By 
crossing over with his left hand, he could 
draw his snapper and shift its butt into his 
right. 

But he was descending into that obscenely 
working orifice, choking on its acrid stench, 
before he could manage it. The little needles 
went tseeu, tseeo, tseeu, down into the 
quivering pulp. They could be death for him 
at this range. Pritchard, dangling there in 
that moment of eternity, could only avert 
his face from the crisp blasts gusting back 
at him. 

Abruptly he was flying through the air, 



his arms free. The snapper arced off in one 
direction and Pritchard went into his own 
gyrating, twisting, writhing parabola. A 
frond slapped him. A branch snapped under 
his hip. He was falling into foliage. A thick 
stem slithered along his hand and he grabbed 
at it, to hang on through an insane pendulum 
swing that carried him whisperingly close 
to the ground. 

They found him crumpled at the foot of 
the tree against which he had been dashed. 

Yet, within five minutes, he was reporting 
back to the ship that the party was intact. 
The giant hydra-type plant, in its death 
throe, had Sung only him. The others had 
been held adangle in mid-air while it chose 
to feed on Pritchard first and, although he 
had been sent sailing, the tentacles gripping 
the others had simply loosened. One man, 
dropped upside down from ten feet, had a 
fractured collarbone, but they were even now 
cementing a flexicast in place and he would 
continue with the rest. Majinski had had the 
fiamer torn from his hand and they weren't 
able to find it. 

In fifteen minutes they were hacking 
steadily ahead again, more slowly now that 
they had no fiamer, and having to stop to 
trace every creeper to its root before they 
chopped through it. 

Pritchard straightened up from a tangle 
he'd been attacking and eased his bruised 
and aching back. He peered ahead into lightflecked gloom, die matted mass of vine, 
creeper and branch that grew so chokingly 
high they were virtually tunneling through. 
They would find no game this way, he reflected, their chopping and hacking and 
swearing spreading the alarm well ahead. 
The birds, for instance, had stopped singing. 
He glanced briefly to his left at young McManus grunting and swinging. 

"Tom." Pritchard's tone was casual, but 
his eyes were alert and hard. The red-headed 
man held his stroke and peered ludicrously 
tinder his armpit. 

"Freeze," said Pritchard. 

The boy went rigid. "What is it?" 

"On the branch above you." Pritchard's 
voice cracked out above the ringing blades. 
"Hold it, everybody! Hold it!" Then, in a 
lower tone, he gave orders, and the three or 
four cadet hunters near McManus slowly 
began to ease out their snappers. The cam-reC 



AS IT WAS 



clicked into action. 

"For the cripes sake, what is it?" whispered McManus, the red of exertion washing 
out of hit face until it was a dripping ivory 
mask. 

"I don't know." Pritchard began waving 
his arms slowly to attract the attention of 
the tiling eighteen inches above that red hair. 
"I'd call it a scorpion if it didn't look like 
a spider. I'd call it a spider if it didn't look 
like a scorpion. It's not quite as big as a 
sheepdog." He uttered a chirping whistle 
and continued to wave his arms. 

"For the love of God, blast it, then." 

"I didn't finish telling you about Munson," remarked Pritchard conversationally. 
"Way back in 2018, he started the Venusian 
War—" 

"Must we have a history lesson new?" 
said McManus through denched teeth. 

B 

THE thing above him made a convulsive 
movement, a quick clutching with its 
claws as if preparing to spring. McManus's 
face went from ivory to a dirty snow color. 
But the thing remained motionless, except 
that under its gleaming yellow carapace 
Pritchard could see its thorax pulsing evilly. 

"Munson," Pritchard went on dryly, his 
arms still flagging away, although the spiderI scorpion paid no apparent attention, "MunI son was a great scientist, He trapped a big 
I beetle and experimented on it for a week 
I Of so. Then he killed it for dissection. He 
Ibid no idea it was a Citizen of Venus." 
I "Oh, I see," said the other sarcastically. 
["You're afraid to shoot this thing. It might 
be what passes for human on this mud-ball. 
If it drops on me, of course — " 

"Shut up!" Pritchard dropped his hand 
Id his snapper. The thing had stood up slowk', its segmented tail curving stiffly up behead it. "I think it's going to strike. You 
■Ik too much." 

He brought the snapper up. "I'll do it, 
kiys. I've got the clearest shot — " 

A sharp hiss broke from the jungle. The 
pidion (as he thought of calling it) jerked 
■ ugly head about. Pritchard turned and 
lugbt his breath with a sharp intake. Mcilamis slowly lifted his head to follow 
fritchard's gaze. His chopper fell from his 



hand. All about them, men stood on tiptoe 
or stooped or craned sideways to look. Somebody said, "A woman!" Kemp panned the 
cam-rec about wildly until he caught her 
in its viewer. 

She stood, straight and slim, on a gnarled 
stub protruding from a thick tree-trunk, 
some ten feet from the ground and about 
twenty feet from Pritchard, who was nearest 
her. Her honey-colored hair fell in crudely 
cut locks to her shoulders, framing a youthful, cleanly-chiseled face from which graygreen eyes gazed steadily. A strip of hide 
between her legs joined another strip of hide 
at her waist, from which hung a plaited 
grass sheath holding a long, narrow-bladed 
knife. A third strip of hide had the obvious 
main function of binding down her billowing breasts, rather than concealing them. Her 
skin had been tanned an even nut-brown all 
over. 

From her lips came that sharp hiss again 
and she slapped her thigh smartly. The 
spidion was gone in a scuttling rush. McManus sagged weakly to the ground and 
drew a thick forearm across his forehead. 
"Geez, thanks, sister," he muttered. 

"What are you doing here?" The girl's 
voice rang out through the jungle's stillness. 

"Hunting," replied Pritchard. 

"Hunting what?" 

"Anything." He smiled up at her. "Anything big and tough. What are you doing 
here?" 

He could just make out the corner ot bet 
mouth lifting in disdain. "What do you 
mean by 'anything big and tough?' " 

Pritchard liked to have his own questions 
answered, too. "Who are you, anyway?" he 
rapped out sternly. "How come you speak 
Terran p^glish? Where's the rest of your 
party?" 

The girl only frowned down at him. "By 
what right do you come tramping in here 
killing all my people?" 

"All your what?" Pritchard blinked. 

"People, people, people. There are beings 
on this world who live and bre.ithe Had 
think just like you. But you seem to think 
it's all right to come in and kill them. Fur 
Sport." 

Gazing up into those blazing emerald 
eyes and that delicious figure, Pritchard felt 
an unaccustomed tingling through his nerves. 



PLANET STORIES 



Any woman, however crippled, deformed or 
aged, could provoke some excitement after 
the prison of deep space. But this beauty — 

He glanced sideways at McManus who 
had moved up alongside him. The redhead 
had a feral grin on his freckled mug. 

"Relax," muttered Pritchard from the 
corner of his mouth. "This one's for me." 

He said to the girl. "We haven't killed 
anything, certainly not any people." The 
vision of that carbonized carcass back on the 
burn flickered across his mind. "What do 
you think wc are, murders? You're the 
first person we've secn.'W 

She cut him off with an impatient gesture. 
"You're a pack of killers, all of you. I 
wouldn't expect you to understand.'' 

"Hey, Mr. Pritchard," called out Sturgis, 
"I'll bet she's from that Havilland group. 
Ask her." 

Pritchard cocked his head. "That's right! 
You are, aren't you? The Havilland Survey 
sent out by the Astrodetic Board. Unreported 
for four years. What happened? Where's 
your base?" 

The girl nodded briefly. "And you're 
Pritchard, the notorious big game hunter. 
I've heard about you. Nothing good, of 
course, but I've heard." 

PRITCHARD smiled his sweetest smite. 
"That's right. I'm well known fot my 
slaughter of helpless animiles. But, come on, 
now," he coaxed, "how about a report on 
your party? The Board will appreciate any 
little message you are to send it." 

The girl gripped 2 vine as if to steady 
herself. "Wiped out," she said tersely. 

"Oh." He nodded, lips pursed. Then, as 
if it were an afterthought, he said, "How?" 

"What does it matter?" The face above 
was momentarily tense, withdrawn. "With 
plenty of synthetabs — and the hydroponics 
laid out and producing— somebody still had 
to go out and kill. For fresh meat . . ." Her 
voice trailed off. 

"And — ?" Pritchard prompted. 
"Oh," sbe sighed wearily, "they came. 
They were the ones who got the fresh meat." 
She shuddered. 
"Who's 'they?' " 

"Please," she said, "I'd rather not discuss 
it any more. But I think you'd better leave. 
Certainly, you'd better not kill anything if 



you know what's good for you. Besides, 
you've done enough damage already." 

Pritchard cleared his throat. The men 
behind him were whispering and snickering. "Speaking of leaving," he said, "how 
about you? If the Survey was wrecked — " 

"I'm not interested in leaving," she said 
curtly. "I've got work to do here." 

"What work?" 

"I'm working w ith the people here." 

"Oh, there are natives?" 

"Certainly. This world is full of people." 

He scowled his impatience. "What's their 
cultural stage?'" 

She favored him with a one-sided grin. 
"Some are foraging. A few are gregarious. 
You met one just now. Fortunately, I got 
here in time to save her life." 

McManus's jaw dropped. "Save her life! 
You don't mean that crawly brute that tried 
to kill me just now?" 

"If she threatened you," said the girl with 
careful enunciation such as she might use to 
a child, "it was because you had disturbed 
her peace." 

"And it — she — was what you'd call a 
person?" demanded Pritchard. "Do you 
mean that you consider absolutely all the 
living, moving things here, people?" 

The girl nodded firmly. Pritchard gazed 
at her, pawing his chin. 

"Tell me," he murmured, do they kill 
one another for fresh meat?" 

She sighed. "They still do, but I'm trying 
to cure them of that. That's the work I'm 
doing. They oniy kill, after all, for food. 
I'm trying to cure them of the killing habit 
by getting them to switch to synthetabs, 
I've — " 

Tlie rest of her words were drowned in a 
tidal wave of laughter. The men exploded, 
beat each other, howled, and fell on tht 
ground. She stared down at them, and hei 
eyes began to smolder anew. 

Pritchard fought his own face straight anc 
wheeled on itiem. "Cut that out!" he yelled 
"As you were!" They gurgled back at him 
pleading their helplessness, hugging thcii 
sides. McManus gripped his checks and triec 
to squeeze his mouth straight, but strangled 
gusts still shook him. 

The spectacle weakened Pritehard's owr 
control and he turned quickly back to tin 
girl. Hie sight of her beauty, now in f 



jassionatc rage, cut sharply across his mirth, 
-le noticed with interest that the thin strip 
of hide across those heaving breasts was 
undergoing maximum strain. 

"Please allow me to apologize for my 
men," he said gravely. "I'm sure they don't 
, mean to be insulting. What is your name, 
by the way, so I can at least report it to the 
I Board?' 

Her chin was up. "Cornelia Boyce," she 
lid haughtily. 
"And how did you manage to survive 
the attack on the Survey camp?" 

"I was away." She was calming a little. 
"They came at sunrise but I wasn't there. 
I was out, learning to ride one of the — the 

jpeopic." 

Pritchard looked down quickly and 
roughed. Fresh gurgles sounded behind him. 
Ibe eam-rec whirred on. "But you are all 
right here? You an take care of yourself?" 

"I am in no danger," she said icily, "In 
our years I have won most of the people 
wet to my side. They protect me, In turn, 
ind in my own way, I protect them. I've 
earned how to make synthetabs and I also 
eed them from the 'ponies gardens. And 
kjw I'll do my best to protect them from 
©u. I'm sure I can't appeal to your decency 
ct I can appeal to your reason, and perhaps 
onvince you that this is a poor world to 

"Now, listen, Miss Boyce," Pritchard cut 
d patiently, "we're not here on a mission 
{ slaughter. I gather, and please correct 
k if I'm wrong, that you're one of that 
ip back on Terra that opposes big game 
ting." 

You are completely correct about that," 
Bbe interposed. 

I " — and are pushing through legislation 
mo make it illegal under the Spare Code. But 
■re already adhere to the Space Code. We 
mte most zealous, I assure you, to avoid 
Bagging anything parahuman, anything that 
fcilubits anything like human intelligence. 

That's precisely why you should abandon 
r bunting here. My good man, just what 
) you consider intelligence?" She held up 
■ hand to prevent his answering. "For 
xe, a good many of the what you would 
1 animals on this little planet have develi a spoken language. And I don't mean 



WAS 37 

a mother's warning to her cubs, or one male 
challenging another. I mean, for instance, 
the news I received this morning." She 
smiled. "Would you like to know what a 
little bird told me?" 

He nodded. "I'm all ears." 

"Well," she said thoughtfully, "it wasn't 
such a little bird, and it wasn't exactly news 
to me. After all, I'd seen yout braking jets 
in the ionosphere and heard the cavitation 
nimble when you were settling into denser 
atmosphere in your orbit. But, anyway, here's 
what my birdie told me: "A tiring with sunfire at both ends has come down out of the 
sky two flights from here. Now a flock of 
two-legged beasts from it are attacking the 
plants. We don't understand!' " Her face relaxed into a disconcerting smile. "They 
couldn't understand why you were so angry 
with the grass and the trees!" 

"Extremely funny," he said gravely. "It 
just happens to be meaningless, also." 

"Don t you see? They can communicate 
ideas!" 

"Fine," he nodded. "What of it?" 
"But— but that means they're intelligent. 
Too intelligent to be called animals'!" 

HE SHOOK his head. "On Terra only one 
animal developed communications to a 
high degree. But we long ago decided that 
some other animals were fairly intelligent, 
for all that they didn't appear to speak 
among themselves. On many other worlds — 
and I can name you a score I've visited — 
lots of so-called 'animals', apart from the 
intelligences we dealt with, had developed 
fairly complex methods of communications 
that would put the old Terran elephants 
and ants to shame. That still didn't make 
them what we called "people 1 ." • 

Her eyes were hot with scorn. "I know 
that! If you'd lived with the Thisbeans as 
long as I have you'd understand. Why — " 
"Now, look," said Pritchard with rising 
asperity, "we have satisfactory means of determining intelligence. If your 'people' are 
as you claim they're in no danger. But are 
you going to claim there are no killers here? 
They're what we're after, intelligent or not. 
Ana there are killers on every world, Miss 
Boyce.". 

She shook her head in despair at i.u 
stupidity. Tho^are no killers here, Mr. 



88 



PLANET STORIES 



Pritchard. There are no killers anywhere on 
any world. Only variant life forms trying to 
live and eat, eating only to live. If we help 
them to find food, and guide their impulses. . . ." 

Pritchard gave up. The argument wis 
futile. It struck him that the girl was mid. 
The horror of the attack on the Survey camp, 
followed by years of isolation from her 
kind, had left her in a hopelessly deranged 
state. 

And a little plan took shape in his 
mind. 

"That's all very fine," he said, cutting 
across her words, "but let me show you 
something that will prove to you we are 
not here to kill indiscriminately." 

He turned to McManus. "Let's have your 
little pet, Tom." McManus raised his eyebrows, but fumbled the button of his breast 
pocket flap loose and pulled out the wriggling, six-legged infant rodent. Pritchard 
took it and held it out toward the girl. 

"Here, Miss Boyce. My friend found 
this. He didn't bite its head off first thing. 
Now we'll turn it over to you for safekeeping." 

"Aw," growled McManus. 

"Quiet," Pritchard growled back at him. 
He lifted the wriggling little beast and it 
squeaked. "I guess I'd better not toss it." 

The eyes of Cornelia Boyce were large 
and glowing with maternal pity. She dropped lightly to the ground and advanced, 
holding out her hand. Pritchard pulled back 
the hand with the little wriggler in it and 
his other shot forward to grip the girl's 
wrist. 

She gasped and bent backward, striving 
to w rench loose. Her strength was such that 
Pritchard, turning to hand the cub back 
to McManus, almost lost his balance. 

"Stop it," she cried. "You don't know 
what — ' 

Her lips moved for another second, but 
the words were lost in the sudden tumult 
that erupted about them. The jungle exploded, almost seemed to come alive at their 
very feet. Dimly-seen shapes came lurching 
ana crashing toward them from every side, 
clambering and trampling and swinging 
from branch to branch. Here and there a tree 
cracked, splintered and fell. 

The men whipped out their snappers and 



backed against each other, eyes rolling nervously in grim set faces. The girl frantically 
twisted out of Pritchard's fingers and stuck 
two fingers in her mouth. 

A piercing, two-noted whistle stabbed I 
through the mounting din. It stabbed again, I 
and the uproar subsided into a confused I 
rustling and shuffling. Silence fell across the I 
dust-charged air. 

All about, in the jungle surrounding the I 
head of the path the scouting party had I 
hacked, the vegetation barely concealed a 
shoulder-to-shoulder wall of hulking beasts,! 
while smaller animals and what looked likel 
maned gorillas crouched or stood along 1 
the bending branches. Tusks protruded! 
from drooling jaws and hundreds of eyes! 
blazed forth steadily. 

"No shooting, no shooting!" Pritchard! 
was bellowing. "She has them under con-l 
trol, boys. Hold your fire." Then he took! 
a deep breath and turned toward Cornelia! 
Boyce. She had backed off to a safe distance! 
from him, her eyes twin pools of green 
contempt 

"My people." She bowed ironically. "At 
your service." 

Pritchard grinned tautly. "You win. Of 
course, my intentions were only of the best. 
I thought you ought to come back to Terra 
for a little observation and examination, but 
— " he waved lightly " — let's skip it." 

"You were lucky that I was able to st 
them," she said. "Next time I might n 
be able to in time. Now if you're w 
you'll just take your little ship and 
home." 

"Why, certainly, certainly," He bowe 
"la the meantime it was a pleasure to liava 
met you, Miss Boyce." 

"I'm sure," she replied coldly. She lifted! 
her head, and from her lips suddenly poured] 
an astonishing babble, a mixture of cough-] 
ing, grunting and chirping. There began tJ 
be movement in the brush, and some oi 
the tilings there began lurching and crash! 
ing off. 

"Where are they going?" Pritchard strovJ 
for a casual tone. 

"I'm deploying them along your trail, 
die said with equal calm. "They will esco 
you out of this jungle and report to m# 
when you re-enter the ship." 

"And you were really talking to them?T 



AS IT WAS 



St 



She shrugged, as if at a childish question. 
"Of course. 

He studied her, and his long features 
slid into a crooked, embarrassed smile. 
"Miss Boyce, I owe you an apology. Maybe 
you've got something here after all." 

She raised weary eyebrows. "If you're 
quite through looking at my body, you can 
go now." 

He laughed shortly. "I wasn't, especially. 
Although it's very — " 
"Goodbye!" 

He bowed again and turned. "All right, 
boys. You heard what the lady said. Let's 
pull oat of here. And let's keep our little 
hands away. from our snappers, eh? The 
lady's friends appear to be quite numerous 
and a little touchy." 

Ill 

WITH a few dry, nervous chuckles, the 
cadet hunters hefted their equipment 
and started back up the trail. Just as the 
girl had predicted, shapes rustled in the 
foliage close by their sides, accompanied 
by an occasional growl or whine or snort 
that was somewhat unnerving. Pritchard 
could occasionally discern the shaggy shoulders of the gorilla-type, and some other 
lithe and slinking or lumbering shapes — 
with here and there a hump of slate-gray 
hide- or a ridged, scaly back. 

The return along the hacked-out trail 
was easier and quicker than their coming, 
and soon they saw the tip of the Apolla'j 
bow in the sky beyond the shoulder of 
the hill. As they toiled back up the slope 
through the dogging grass, they became 
aware that the animals were not following 
(hem further, but backward glances could 
still make out some vague shapes in the 
foliage. 

Pritchard became aware, also, of McManus' s silence. The redhead, usually garrulous, had been silent from the start of 
their retreat, his square jaw damped hard 
shut. The Chief Hunter slapped the young 
man's broad back. 

"Relax, Tom. Men have backed down 
from women before. It's not considered bad 
form at all. Now and then they outmaneujver us, and that's all there is to it." 

A couple of the others chuckled, but 



McManus continued his stolid slogging op 
the hill without a sign. Pritchard shrugged. 
They all trudged across the burn, andtbe 
great grasshopper-leg let down the platform 
for them, 

Waiting for it to settle, Pritchard braced 
with one hand at the base of a towering 
fin and began slapping dust from his 
breeches. He heard Sturgis say, "Hey, 
watch that!" and the tsceu of a snapper. 

He jerked erect in time to see McManus 
lower his weapon, and hear a distant explosion. Down over the hill, in the tall 
grass, what appeared to be a huge boar or 
pygmy rhino was writhing and kickingSomberly, Pritchard watched its six twitching legs quiet down and stiffen. 

"That was a good shot, Tom," he said. 

McManus came toward him, grinning 
with relief. "I'd had about all I could take 
— " he started to say, and then Pritchard's 
fist slammed into his jaw. His feet left the 
ground and he fell heavily onto the hard 
ground under the tubes. 

Pritchard was picking him up again when 
he heard Sturgis's voice again. "You'd 
better make it snappy, chief. I think they're 
working up to something." 

Shapes were moving up through the distant grass. Wings were flipping or tilted in 
soaring across the jungle not far beyond. 
There came to the ship a dim, vast babble of 
cries, grunts, squeals, howls and barks. , 

They carried the inert McManus over 
lo the platform in a hurry. But Pritchard 
let his finger rest on the buzzer-button while 
he looked over the array of animals now 
gathering in plain sight, fanning out 
around the perimeter of the scorched 
ground. 

There were the slate-gray ones, like that 
which McManus had downed — stx-leggcd, 
suber-snouted, long-tusked, There were 
hulking, scaly-hided ones, resembling anteating bears — also six-legged. In fact, the 
six-legged skeleton seemed to prevail among 
the fauna of Thisbe II. The canine-like 
ones running this way and that were sixlegged, and so were certain slinking, feline 
types. On the other hand, the maned gorillas bad but four appendages, and so bad 
the ungainly-looking, leaping ones, that 
looked like hairless kangaroos except foe 
their wicked, underslung jaws. 



PLANET STORIES 



4t» 

Quite suddenly, this horde was charging 
Across tlie burn, converging on the shining 
cylinder towering above them, aiming for 
the platform still resting on the ground. 

" what' j he waiting for?"' Pritchard 
beard the whisper above the rising thunder 
about them, knew he was meant to hear 
it. He jabbed home the button and the 
rising Boor pressed their feet. He •stepped 
over to the squawkie and spoke into its 
'phxagm. "Chief on, Savage. Hold your fire, 
we're clear." Turning to the men on the 
now rapidly rising platform, he said, "No 
■hooting." 

Soberly, they all gazed down at the 
horde sweeping up below, swirling about, 
bumping into the fins and one another. 
Their silence, other than the noise of their 
thousands of feet and hooves, was oppressive and menacing. A few of the leaping 
ones soared up at the platform, wriggling 
in mid-air and pawing, but it had gone too 
high and they fetl back. 

Then Pritchard glanced up. His hand 
started for his snapper. Toward them 
through the air came a cloud of flying 
things — great leathery-winged birds, smaller, faster, feathered ones — rising on a line 
of flight that would carry them above the 
platform to a point of interception, claws 
distended, beaks open and eager. 

Thin and remote, a two-toned whistle 
sounded. Sounded again. The converging 
flocks wheeled, fluttered and fell away, 
gliding off toward the jungle. Far below, 
tlie milling horde flung up a varied array 
of heads, and then began to move, a drift 
that became a surge, trotting and hopping 
away across the burn. 

"Phew!" said someone behind Pritchard. 
"That girl really has an army." 

McMaous sat up, shaking his head and 
staring at the smooth shining hull of the 
Apollo swinging down to them. He felt his 
jaw and squinted up at Pritchard. 

"Quarters for you," the tall saturnine 
man said softly. 

LATE that evening Pritchard was in Lhe 
chart room talking with Captain Savage. The Apollo's ventilation system had 
been in operation for over thirty hours now 
and the blowers had sucked out the last 
vestige of mechanically purified air, with 



its taint of ozone, metal and oil. It was 
pleasant to rock gently in the gimbal chairs 
and sniff the lush night air of Thisbe II. 
Aloft, in the nose, tlie watch was idly work-' 
ing out a game of kru, that old Martian! 
solitaire involving domino-like counters. Thel 
auto scanner hooked to the magnar wasi 
ready to clang at the first blip on thej 
screens. Below, in the wardrooms, the cadet! 
hunters were amusing themselves with a 
runoff of the day's cam-rec spool { "Get) 
this line about the synthetabs!" . . . guffaws' 
of laughter) . Midway down the curving taiff 
section Tom McManus sulked in his quar-l 
tets, fingering the bruise on his jaw. 

"So we'll pick up in the morning, hey?"i 
mused the captain. His was a squat, ape-l 
like body, surmounted by a long, goat's! 
face and a grizzled skull. 

"Yes." Pritchard drained his tall glass 
"I'm not going to bother with her. If sh( 
can send a whole army of her animal; 
against us it's going to make hunting s 
little difficult. We could set down on tin 
other side and maybe get in a bit of shoot 
ing, but she'd catch up with us. Even i 
we try hunting from the air with the je 
cruisers. . . ." He shook his head. "It's toi 
dangerous. I've got to look out for thes 
boys, after all. No, I don't want to ge 
messed up with her in any way." B 
stared calmly at the wall, seeing once agaii 
that lithe body straining out of his grasp 
and knew himself for a liar. 

"Well. . . ." The captain rubbed hi 
nose, furtively eyeing the other man's pro 
file. He knew when a man was lying. 1 t 
was one of the things one developed lon ( 
before one got to be a hundred ana thirtee t 
years of age. He lowered his wrinkled ol s 
eyelids and went on, ". . , she's hung all 
here for four years. Maybe she isn't toi 
crazy at that. Of course, it's kind of tofl 
bad to leave a filly like her running aroun* ' 
loose." 

"We'll just hope we won't be too mucK 
criticized for not bringing her home,k 
Pritchard cut in quickly. "Thank God, w| 
shot all that cam-rec footage, It'll — " 

He lifted his head, his long nostrils flafc 
ing, "Murder! What's that stink cominB 
from?" 

The old man grimaced up at the air grille 
"Eeugh! Low tide on Venus!"* ju 



AS IT WAS 



Pritchard got up and went toward the 
intercom. "Something's died, I'd say, inside the ship or dose by." 

At that instant the intercom's tiny diaphragm screamed. Screamed, and broke off 
into a hoarse babble. The two men froze, 
scowling at each other. The babble rose 
igain into a sharp screaming "NO!" — and 
then stopped. 

Pritchard stepped to the 'phragm. "Qiief 
on. All stations and quarters report, please." 

Voices came back at him out of the wall. 
■Nose watch. All X here, Mr. Pritchard. 
What happened?'' 

"Stern watdi. All X, chief. What—?" 

"Wardroom, Greene on. All X. Something stinks, chief." 

"Engine room, All X." 

"Majinski on, retired to quarters. Peeyew!" 

Then, silence, pregnant with listening. 
"McManus," snapped Pritchard. 
"Louder," said the captain. "He may be 
asleep." 

''McManus!" The tall hunter shouted. 
TOM!" 

Then lie was out the door. The captain 
rode to the intercom. "All free hands to 
EcManus. Fast!" he barked, and then ran 
ter Pritchard who was already stepping 
■to the axial lift. 

McManus's quarters were well down in 
le tail. Pritchard found half a dozen men 
ustcred at his cabin door which they had 
itched open. Their eyes were watering and 
>ey were gagging at the incredibly foul 
ench roiling the air. 

"Where's McManus?" he demanded, 
uting to shoulder through them. The 
caught at his throat so that he choked 
ie words. 

cadet hunter clutched at his sleeve. 
Don't go in there, chief," he gasped, 
ou can't do Tom any good now." 
avage was at the wall intercom. "Meyer, 
God's sake, blow this ship out," he 
ed hoarsely, 
itchard shook off the detaining hand 
stepped to the open door. He looked 
at the dripping mess in the gimbal 
and jerked his head away. 
The pie-shaped cubicle was otherwise 
al it first glance. The hammock hung 
nded between its swivels. The view


port was properly scaled. The bath and disposal unit in one far corner stood in spotless order, as did the sectional drawer case 
opposite. 

What had come in here? And how hid 
it gotten in? The door had been clevtro* 
locked in its sliding frame and the men, 
who had quite properly not waited for the 
magnekey Captain Savage alone carried, had 
had to burn through the lock wiring. There 
was no other way into the room. 

Pritchard stepped over to the air grill. 
His eyes swimming in the terrible stench 
in the cabin, he nevertheless could discern 
how the heavy chrome mesh had been torn 
loose from its bolts to lie at the foot of 
the wall. He shot one tortured, speculative 
glance at the six-inch hole in the wall and 
then hastily backed out, hand to mouth 
against his rising gorge. 

The steel walls thrurnmed with the surge 
of the rewed-up blowers. But there was no 
answering draft screaming up into a gale 
from the air grills. The lights flickered 
briefly, and then the blowers' thrum died. 

"Shorted," a man muttered thickly. 

More men were coming, sliding down the 
long poles until they reached the stench 
which was now spreading up through the 
ship. As- soon as it hit their nostrils they 
gripped the poles to slow their descent, 
cursing. Down the passageway, two of those 
who had arrived first were now being sick. 

PRITCHARD leaned against the wall crying to keep his breathing shallow, Jiis 
eyes hard and steady on the open doorway 
and the lighted chamber beyond. Gradually, 
all eyes were turning to him, watting, their 
owners breathing in short, labored gasps. 

He stepped to the intercom. "AH hands 
to the muster deck," he managed to choke 
out, "That means everybody. And use extreme caution. Something has hoarded the 
ship and killed McManus. Listen to me. It 
is still on board! Arm yourselves and report to the muster deck immediately. Stun 
gis, step into the storeroom and break out 
the masks. Greene and Mjjinski. help him. 
Use the lift to bring tl»cm to the muster 
deck. Got it?" 

Several strangling voices replied in order. 
Pritchard and Savage crowded into the lift 
with the rest of the men and went aloft. 



PLANET STORIES 



"Wliat do you think it ij, son?" said 
Savage. Pritchard shrugged. "I don't know. 
Whit kind of thing or things could get 
through the ventilating system?" 

The old man pursed his lips. "That's 
right. That's how we smelled it first. And 
then the blowers kicked off when all that 
compression backed up to them. You're 
right, Mr. Pritchard, whatever it is, it's still 
in the ducts." 

The lift halted at the muster deck and 
the door slid open. "So here's what we'll 
do," said Pritchard as they stepped off. The 
old man heard him out and men nodded 
slowly, his rheumy eyes narrowing. 

They waited while the men arrived, the 
whole ship's company of twenty cadet 
hunters (less McManus, now) and five 
crewmen. They all stood around eyeing 
Pritchard and the captain. The air was 
heavy with that lurking stench, but it was 
not too thick here to be unbreatbable. 

As soon as the gas mask detail had 
shoved the last of the cartons off the lift 
Pritchard started for the controls. 

The muster deck was a heavily insulated 
divular chamber a bit forward from amidships. 

The entire ship could be controlled 
from there. In emergencies it could be detached from the ship and used as a temporary space raft, having all necessary supplies 
in its padded wall lockers. 

"First," announced Pritchard, "we're going to button this ship up tight." He reached 
for the ventilator switch and flicked it on. 

Little motors all over the inner and 
outer hulls began wheeling shut the valves 
that closed the six-inch holes that were the 
ventilating system's intake and exhaust 
ports. In a matter of seconds the Apollo 
would stop breathing the wine-like night 
air of Thisbe II. 

On the wall above the switch little green 
lights began to blink off one by one. As if 
gradually understanding his strategy, the 
men began to move up behind Pritchard, 
their eyes on the bank of fiery green points 
winking out. 

The last little gem flickered, died, and 
then, strangely, flamed up again. 

And, just as it went out for good, the 
entire muster deck gave a lurch. Feet 
scuffled, slipped, staggered. Here and there 



a body thudded to the steel plates of tl ^ 

floor. " 

Pritchard's voice rose thundering then (| 
th' abrupt commotion. "Grab hold! Somi h 
thing's got the ship — something — " 

The muster deck swung in a wild cird I 
men sliding helplessly, caroming off th l( 
walls. Pritchard s flailing hand caugi I 
something and his long bony fingers lace ^ 
about it m a grip of steel. ^ 
In benumbed fascination, he saw his boc B 
lengthen out, straining against that grit 
appearing to levitate from the deck. Th 
whole chamber tilted slowly until it seeme ( 
to hang below him. Men were slipping an I 
falling down into the curved well of it I 
farther wall, but some had grabbed out a 
holds here and there — a door-pull, or j 
stanchion, and dangled like Pritchard. 

At the last instant he understood that th 
Apollo was falling. He had just rime t< ,j 
pull himself up, to give his arm some pla ^ 
against the shock to come — 

The great pointed cylinder struck wii 
an awesome, deafening clangor — fell wit 
a single bounce across its landing bur: 
and settled to roll over approximately on< 
third its circumference. 

Pritchard's grip, he discovered later, w; 
to the handle of a locked chart drawer. — 
massive wrench of that impact straight 
his arm with a jerk, but at the same 
the drawer's lock broke. He fell away 
shower of sheet film just as the Apol 
rolled, and a curve of smooth steel ws 
swung out to catch him and break his fi 
into a plunging glide against a cushion 
stunned men's bodies. 

It was a miracle that nobody was serioi 
injured. The slowness of the ship's fall 
the outset, the curvature of walls, the genei 
fitness of trained minds and bodies — al 
combined to prevent anything more seriou: 
than cuts and contusions. 

Captain Savage was the first Pritcharc 
pulled out of the tangle. The wiry old mar 
was unhurt, though dazed. In spite of hi) 
age he gamely pulled himself together witi 
a terrier-like shake. 

"What hit us?" he croaked. 

"I think whatever was in the ship did it," 
said Pritchard. "But then, that must mean it'i 
outside now. Think wc sustained niudi 
damage?" 



AS tr WAS 



a 



The old man scoffed. "Mao, this ship was 
built for crash landings. The surface glue 
must be cracked. And all the supplies we 
broke out after landing must be all over 

He gazed aloft at the muster deck's controls, now high overhead. "Have to right 
her," he muttered, "but I can't get at them. 
I'll have to get to the master set, I guess." 
His gaze switched dubiously to the hatch 
fading to the nose, halfway up the curving 
wall. "I can set her back up on her tail, 
"::ing the beam tubes." 

"Majinski," called out Pritchard, "build 
i ladder or pryamid of men up that hatch 
so the captain can get to the controls. Sturgis, 
you and you and you — " he picked out half 
i dozen cadet hunters " — let's scout through 
:he ship. I want to be sure our friend has 

left" » 

It was awkward work, clambering over 
iirders and through crazily slanting doors 
rnd along upside down passages where, in 
■)cep space, they floated past with ease. They 
held their snappers ready while Pritchard 
opened door after door with the captain's 
.tugnekey. 

They found something in the compression 
amber of Number Two Blower. What they 
found, after taking down the side panel, 
«ii a long, flopping red thing — something 
like a ten-foot carrot, writhing and curling 
in on itself wetly. It was a foot thick at its 
big end. 

It fell out on the curving wall beneath the 
blower. They watched it soberly as it twisted 
rfaii way and that convulsively, contracting 
mad lengthening out. It gave off that same 
sickening odor. 

Is this what gave us all the trouble?" 
homebody demanded. 

\*o." Pritchard's nostrils flared slightly, 
ust a part of it, that's all. Most of it got 

'Most of it!" 

He nodded slowly. "It was leaving when I 
ed closing those ports. It was leaving by 
intake port — maybe the way it came in 
d the valve started to slice into it. In 
words, we had it by the tail. It tried 
nnk free and that's what tipped us over." 
"Y-y-you mean — ?" They stared at him, 
g to credit the comprehension dawnin their rnin-is. t 



"What else?" Pritchard's checks twitched 

in amusement. 

"Hey. that's big!" said Sturgis softly. 

"Quite big," murmured the tall hunter. 
"And quite intelligent if it came for Mc* 
Manus." 

Their jaws dropped and their eyes protruded glassily. 

"On the other hand," went on Pritchard 
musingly, "it might not be as smart as the 
person who sent it." 

IV 

rpHERE was flame in the night, blinding 
J- flame, and raucous, screeching thunder. 
And a great round of gleaming metal rising 
shuddering!)- on a cone of dazzling, roaring 
light. Rising to teeter at last on the tips of 
long, sweeping fins, teeter and rock and walk 
a bit on those blades of tempered nickelsteel, until the swaying tower ceased to gyrate sickeningly across the stars, its motion 
settling into a quickening, shortening arc 
that died away into a tremble, a vibration, a 
stillness. 

Captain Savage took his gnarled and stubby fingers away from the firing manuals and 
sat down, drawing a sleeve across his sopping 
brows. 

"Nice work," said Pritchard, "One push 
and no correction blasts. Thy hand hath not 
lost its skill." 

The old man took a deep breath and 
grinned. "It's work for a younger man. Next 
time I'm going to let you do it. Or Stttrgis." 

"There won't be a next time," said Pritchard flatly. 

The captain cocked a bright eye up it 
him. Pritchard gazed out a viewport. The 
horizon of Thisbe II lay like a worn hacksaw blade against the purple glow of Pinmus, rising, 

"Set watches," he said briefly. "The rest of 
the company can turn to for six hours. Then 
Sturgis, Greene, Kemp and I are going off 
in the jets." 

"Fishing, I suppose?" said Savage with 
gentle irony. 

Pritchard smiled coldly and shook his 
head. "No. Witch-hunting." 

Two plump silvery beetles screamed, 
through the thui stratosphere high above the 



r 



PLANET STORIES 



little planet. Behind them, dropping below 
the horizon, a needle stood gleaming in a 
black thumbprint. It was no longer possible 
to make out the smudge marring fat Apollo's 
alabaster flank, much less the team now 
hanging in buckets from eyebolts high in 
the nose, chipping away the cracked and 
carbonized glaze — cracked by last night's fall 
and carbonized by the hell-fires of the righting operation. 

In one beetle rode the wiry Sturgis and 
stocky Kemp. In the other, the rangy blond, 
Greene, handled the controls while Pritchard studied the face of Thisbe II rolling 
slowly under them. 

"Got any ideas yet as to what hit us last 
night?" said Greene. 

"Nope." After righting the ship, they'd 
turned on the floodlights, but neither then 
nor in the broad light of day was there any 
sign of trace of their visitor. A burial detail 
had laid McManus the traditional six feet 
into the crust of Thisbe II. The long red 
thing iiad flopped and tossed startlingly as 
they sank hooks into it and dragged it off 
into the grass. 

"Must have been the tail of something 
big, hull? How come it got past the radar?" 

Pritchard shrugged and continued to peer 
attentively ahead. 

"Sure is a mighty pretty hunk of country," sighed the blond boy. "In places it reminds me of the stuff around the Cumberland Gap. If it weren't for that lavender 
sunlight, that is." 

Pritchard didn't answer, his eyes steadily 
sweeping the terrain unfolding ahead. 

"That was a hell of a thing happened to 
poor Tom last night," Greene went on. "Do 
you figure he had much pain before it finished him?" 

Pritchard made no response. 

"Tom was a right good boy, and a hard 
man to beat once he had the diance to get 
his feet under him. Remember the time big 
Hayes hit him?" 

There was no answer. Greene sat relaxed, 
one foot on the rudder bar and an index 
finger curled indolently around die jet firing 
toggle. 

"Boy, old Hayes let him have it before 
Tom was set. Just like you clipped him 
yesterday." 

"J thought you'd say that." Pritchard's 



voice was even, "You an' the rest of the boys 
want to be sure I don't forget that, don't 

you?" 

"I wasn't meaning a thing, chief," complained the other. "Hell, we understand. 
Tom made a mistake and — and — well . . ." 

"You can pass the word," said Pritchard 
softly, his eyes remaining hard on the vista 
ahead. "Ynu can paw the word that 1 
haven't forgotten the last thing Tom McManus had from me. Nor am I likely to — " 

He grabbed the mike. "Cut, Sturgis, cut! 
Cut and glide — after me." 

Greene, following instructions meant for 
him, too, snapped the jet toggle dosed. The 
high-pitched thunder that had been chasing 
them across the sky was chopped off into 
utter silence. 

"What you got?" he managed to say and 
then Pritchard's hip swung against him, 
neatly bowling him off the seat as the tall 
hunter thrust his feet toward the rudder bar. 

"Stand by to fire," snapped Pritchard over 
his shoulder. The younger man lurched toward the rocket controls in the nose in front 
of Pritchard as thejet cruiser heeled silently 
over into a dive. 

THE bowl of Thisbe II tilted up toward 
them and its features steadied in the face 
of that arrowing plunge. Dead ahead lay a 
meandering thread of river stitching up a 
wide, jungle-filled valley. At one point the 
river either split in two or broadened momentarily into a lake. At any rate, there was 
an island, right above the little flight-sight 
bead on the jet cruiser's prow. * 

The island swelled into detail. It was 
fairly large, for up from its center thrust 
one of those strange rock mountains, the 
three straight planes of its deavage converging in a jagged, towering peak, making it 
seem an elongated triangular pyramid that 
had been driven forth at a slant and had 
then had its extreme tip snapped off. The 
primrose light of Piramus high above reflected now io a dazzling shimmer from one 
flank. 

At its base, or at the base of one impossibly machine-smooth wall, there was a 
semi-circular mark, as if someone had carelessly strewn dirt across the olive-hued turf. 
The grains and clods of this dirt resolved 
themselves, as the jets whined on down, into 



AS IT WAS 



45 



t twinkling, tumbling cluster of ants — with 
gnats hovering and darting. Then they became something larger. 

Greene turned to shout excitedly at Pritchud, but at that instant Sturgis's voice 
cracked from the two-way mike Pritchard 
had hung above him. 

"Hey, chic/, aren't those some of that 
girl's animals?" 

"Right," barked Pritchard. "That's a big 
rumpus down there. Follow me on down for 
a look. Then I think we'll try a couple of 
pisses. " 

"Passes? At what?" 

"Those are Miss Boyte's 'people', all 
right. They're fighting." 

There was no further chance to talk. 
Pritchard arid Sturgis gripped their separate 
toggles almost simultaneously and their jets 
roared into life, feeding power to their 
dives for a pull-out. The ground -contact 
alarm chattered its warning that they were 
coming too close. . 

As soon as the jets took hold, the pilots 
leaned back, pushing hard against the rudder bars. The tail elevators lifted into the 
(Upstream, and the two silver beetles howled 
through a long pendulum swing that flung 
them far off into the sky. 

But the trained eyes aboard them had 
ticked off the essential derails of the amazing battle being waged through the tall 
grass toward the mountain. 

"Holy rockets!" came from the blond 
rt«d in front of Pritchard. "That's a regular battle line they're holding. Did you see 
hose babies fighting!" 

"Hey, chief," cracked Sturgis, "What 
mes on down there, anyway? Who's fightqg whom? Or what's fighting which?" 

Pritchard trimmed off into level flight before answering. "As far as I can make out, 
Cornelia Boyce's people are under attack, 
but I can't figure out who's doing the artackng. They're trying to hold that defense arc, 
tut they're being snowed under. They're 
i". lung it from the air as well as on the 
Hound. I recognize the animals inside that 
hoe. They're her people, all right. But I 
't make out the attackers." 
He banked the cruiser around toward that 
miles-distant little spine of mountain. 
Sturgis's ship followed him around as if 
eacd by a wire. 



"They looked like reptiles and big insects." 

"That's what they looked like to me. I 
don't remember seeing any of them yesterday — except for that bad dream I tried to 
shoot away from McManus." 

"Anyway, there's sure a mob of them," 
cut in Sturgis, "The water all around that 
island is alive with them." 

"That kid was right about one thing," 
said Pritchard. "There's a much higher level 
of intelligence here than you'd find in Terran animals, for instance. But never mind 
that now. Listen, boys, this is a planned and 
directed attack. And we're going to buy 
ourselves a stack of chips and sit in on the 
game. But, first, did anybody see the girl?" 

"No," cracked the mike, and Greene 
shook his head. 

"Well, I've got a hunch she's down there. 
She's mixed up in this somehow. I've a feeling a big battle like this is pretty unusual. 
This has all the earmarks of a war of extermination. And if those are her 'people' protecting her— something, or somebody, has 
her cornered." 

"Could be," came Sturgis's voice. "But, 
then, who's this somebody or something?" 

"I don't know. I don't care. This scrap's 
nothing to us. But we want the wench, boys. 
We want her on account of last night. And 
maybe for a couple of other reasons. She'd 
better come home for a little psychotherapy, 
for one thing. Now, here's our plan of 

attack . . ." 

LIKE the pointer of a sundial, the jagged 
spear of mountain lay its deep blue 
shadow across the curve of battle, as if to 
mark off the dwindling hours and minutes 
of life for those who struggled, writhed and 
lay with glazing eyes in that long ribbony 
grass, now mashed and matted flat for acres 
in every direction, its pliant green-brown 
blades stained and mottled dark. 

Red-eyed and snorting, the slate- gray 
boars stood shoulder to shoulder from one 
end of the arc to the other. As each one 
fell, the others closed ranks, shuffling 
backwards until their hides rubbed together 
again. Close behind them stood a thinning 
line of great scaled bears, clawing and biting 
what got past the boars. In and out among 
all their stiffly planted legs ran the lesser 



PLANET STORIES 



Ofnhwfj and the canines, snapping and 
worrying at the things creeping through the 
grass. Behind, in the shrinking zone of defease, roved the six-legged bovincs and 
equincs, and the leaping ones, and the 
shaggy-maned gorillas, prancing, goring, 
trampling, crushing. Overhead circled and 
hovered a swarm of hawks and condors, 
plunging and tearing. 

Against them came a nightmare horde. 
Those that could not fly or swim made 
clumsy rafts from odds and ends of vegetation and branches plundered from the 
jungle; some scurried across on swaying 
creepers, all along the banks. 

Crawling, creeping tilings, reptilian and 
crustacean and multi-legged, undulating and 
gliding, disappearing into the grass to 
emerge at the last deadly moment. Scurrying, 
spiny things were there in force — scuttling 
over the mashed-ftat grass in beady-eyed 
haste to be in at the kill, Above them flew 
skull -headed, mandible-snapping horrors, 
with membranous wings. 

There were no tactics other than individual duel and the wearing down by sheer 
weight of numbers. Aloft, the winged ones 
met, clashed and fell, buzzing and flapping. 
Below, tusk and fang and claw and beak 
and hoof mandible rent and tore and worried and stung. The long, vicious lizards 
and the sudden-striking snakes kept coming 
through only to go down under churning, 
stamping hooves or be shredded by horns 
and claws and fangs. 

Yet the battle was unequal. Slowly and 
wearily, the defenders gave before the superior numbers, the more skillful killing. 
The bodies they left dotting die- meadow 
began to outnumber the crushed remains of 
the tilings they fought. 

Deep in a deft in the base of the mountain crouched a young Terran female. 
Every inch of her brown body shaking 
in helpless terror. 

Cornelia Boyce's left hand gripped the 
handle of her long knife, still in its sheath. 
She would need it any time now. 

For The One was coming for her at last. 
Why it had ordertd Its people againsts hers, 
calling them with Its vicious mind from 
the far corners of this world, instead of 
coming for her directly, she didn't know. 
Perhaps It regarded her as the lesser ob


jective and relegated the task of smash in >■ 

her and her converts to this horde, wbil 
It moved against the ship. Perhaps It regarded the ship of the hunters with the same 
contempt It had had for the Survey ship 
and was moving against her first — and was 
using this battle to toy with her, show hei 
death, as it were. Perhaps there was some 
other reason. It didn't matter. Nothing 
mattered any more, for this was the end. 

It had tolerated her. For four of Thisbt 
II's years — not quite three Terran years — 
The One had left her alone, almost, it would 
seem, keeping out of her way. It was as 
if It realized that she, the only one of her 
kind to survive the debacle at the Survey 
camp, was essentially harmless. It had not 
minded her attempts to win over and tame 
and domesticate some of the people. After 
all, she had converted only the weaker and 
gentler of them with her synthetabs; she 
had gained control over only a small percentage of the killers, the lesser carnivores. 
No, she had never really threatened The 
One's dominance. 

Pritchard was right. Now that her carefully woven veil of illusion was torn away, 
she knew that there were killers. Everywhere. Always had been. Killers, killers, 
killers . , .„ 

The One proved that. It killed a hundred 
times a day. This world was Its preserve and 
It roamed and fed and slew as It chose, only 
occasionally for food. Perhaps this was the 
only reason for existence, hi the last analysis — in a cruel Cosmos one lived only to be 
killer or killed. 

It mattered not. This was the end. Angered by the advent of more of her kind, It 
had no doubt decided to wipe out both her 
and them, recognizing in them all a degree 
of intelligence which, in force, could 
threaten Its control. It would move against 
the ship, if indeed It had not already done 
so. 

But It would certainly destroy her. This 
attack would have no other meaning. 

But she would cheat It, The One could 
not move faster than her knife! 

There was not much time now, and certainly no hope. The battle raging before her 
was mounting to its inevitable bloody .climax. 

Her people could not hold out much 



AS IT WAS 



47 



ger. Their courage and faith and loyalty 
_ght not survive so terrible an ordeal, 
'ere not some of the birds already winging 
ny to di:!ant refuge? 
It was too bad. She would have liked to 
t the tall hunter once more before she . . . 
Iii eyes had been so piercing! She had forwten what a man could be like. If only she 
d not been so balky yesterday! 
But it was not to be. He had come, in 
e of those two jet cruisers, thundering 
ross the killer-infested meadow, and he 
d gone. He had seen and not understood. 
Itles between alien beasts were of no conto to him. He might even return, to make 
m-rec footage from aloft of this amazing 

)pe flashed. She could signal him! 
; could she use? 

iw could she catch a roving eye in a 
ule-a-minute jet? 

; tossed up her head, eyes suddenly 
wed. 

Jiething came screaming around the 
■oountain above her, followed by a second 
•creaming something. 

Then hell erupted beyond the batdc line, 
blast followed concussive blast, causing die 
ig gorillas to cower and the other ones to 
ifurge about in helpless panic. Between the 
prring blasts sounded the rippling crackle 
' dual-mounted automatic snappers. 
The screams faded off into the sky. A 
inned silence reigned along die battle 
ximeter. An acrid smoke drifted over the 
ourid. 

Then, just as groups were sporadically rewing their death-grips here and diere, the 
m screams sounded beyond the mountain 



WO laps around the track and then to 
the showers!" yelled Greene, his finn dancing over the rocket release and 
ipper buttons. 

Leaning back against the rudder bar, 
itchard grinned. "You forget the passes 
Nig the river banks. They make it four 



Then he threw a quick glance over his 
ulder, but he couldn't make much 
mgh the welter of rising dirt columns. 



They came around the monntnin in a tight 
curve. As they flattened for a run on the 
meadow they could see tilings scurrying for 
tlie water. The meadow itself was a churned 
and pitted mess. Bodies were thickly strewn 
everywhere. 

"There she is!" yelled Sturgis. "You were 
right, chief. See her — over by the mountain?" 

A tiny figure, mounted on a six-legged 
equine, was riding furiously back and forth. 
The defense arc was swelling outward, as 
her "people" rose to the offensive and began 
charging the demoralized attackers. 

Then the two ciuisers were racing 
through their run on the as yet unstrafed 
portion of die meadow furthest from the 
mountain. Sturgis's craft bucked as it rode 
die shock -waves from Greene's rocket blasts. 
As they shot in a wide curve around die 
other side of the mountain Pritchard said, 
"We'd better skip our last pass. Let's just sit 
down and work in dose. I don't want her to 
get away." 

They cut jets and Boated in over the jungle, side-slipping to lose speed. With 
feather-light fingers at their controls, the 
cruisers skimmed the trampled meadow 
grass and touched down their wheels. As 
they rolled, Pritchard and Sturgis flung open 
cockpit windows and let bright fire from 
their flamers spew over the ground, while 
Green and Kemp sprayed right and left 
with their snappers. 

Things struggled in the crisping, burning 
grass, crackling and roasting. Even as lie 
turned the nozzle this way and that, Pritdiard's face was a mask of disgust. All around 
the slowing ships, Cornelia's "people" galloped and raced with a vengeful, slaying 
lust. 

"All out," said Pritchard, "Everybody 
take a fiamer. We'll have to burn a path to 
the girl." 

They dimbed out and began walking toward the mountain four abreast, flame billowing ahead of them. There seemed to be 
only dead things in their path. 

Then, suddenly, the girl was there, astride 
a magnificent six-legged equine type of animal, shaggy of coat and rather broad in the 
head. She had ridden around the wall of fire 
and her mount was trembling and shaking 
its bead. 



PLANET STORIES 



48 

They turned off the flamers and stared up 
at her. Rumbling, whinnying sounds came 
from the equine's throat. She grunted and 
cooed back, as if soothing it. Then she 
turned her eyes on the men below. 

"We wish to thank you." Her pale face 
was drawn and there was a suspicion of 
tears in her voice. "You came just in time," 

She seemed small and absurdly girlish 
perched on that long back. Those inadequate 
strips of hide were still her only covering. 

Pritchard nodded shortly. "If you'll be so 
good as to keep your be — people — out of 
our way, we'll sterilize this island. Just burn 
off all the cover and see to it there'* none of 
them left. Why don't you herd your — uh — 
friends over onto what we've already — " 

"That won't be necessary," she cut in. 
"They'll all be gone in another minute." 

"What makes you so sure of that?" 

"The One is probably calling them off." 

"The— what?" 

She* put her face in her hands. Pritchard 
frowned his puzzlement. How had so helpless a child managed to survive in a world 
like this? 

"I'd like very much to know what this is 
all about, Miss Boyce," he said gently. "In 
fact, the reason we happened along is that 
we are looking for you. We thought you 
might be able to explain what happened 
last night." 

As he told her, she lifted her face from 
her hands and her brimming eyes grew 
round. Before he had finished describing 
what they had found in the blower, she was 
shaking her head in despair. 

"This is all your doing. This world was at 
peace until you came. Now The One is 
aroused. You see, it was The One that went 
into your ship — " 

"The One?" A crispness came into his 
voice. "Miss Boyce, I think you'd better 
start at the beginning and give us a complete explanation. Just exactly what is this 
'One' you keep talking about?'' 

SHE dosed her eyes again. A slight shudder can through her body and she shook 
her head dazedly. 

"The One," she murmured, "is after us 
all now. It began by entering your ship. 
Then It sent Its people against mine — against me. It won't stop until It has de


stroyed us all, and It — It's something Ti 

just as lief not describe. 

"My people call it something which I 
have translated as "The One'. To them, it 
means 'first', or 'leader', or something like 
that. It was in control of all the people here 
on Thisbe when the Survey arrived, and I'm 
afraid It still is. It wants to remain in control. You see. It's quite intelligent. " 

"1 can believe that," Pritchard said. "It 
not only figured out how to get into the 
ship, but it also figured out how to find McManus." 

"Oh, no, I don't believe it just wen! 
after him. Wasn't his cabin the nearest to 
the place it entered?" 

"Well, yes, as a matter of fact, it was." 

"Oh, you don't understand The One as I 
do," she cried. "It would never be satisfied 
with just one. It came into your ship to feed 
on all of you. McManus was just the first 
person It found. From what you tell me, It 
wasn't even finished with him. There 
wouldn't be — anything — left . . 

"Then why did It go away?" 

"I couldn't tell you. Perhaps when your 
blower short-circuited, it arced a little. The 
One is very sensitive to fire. But It'a not 
through. It will come back, one way or another." 

"I think we can deal with it if it does," 
Pritchard smiled. "And it sent these unpleasant things at you? How can it do that?" 
He shot an appraising glance around the torn 
and bloody meadow with its mounds of 
dead and dying things. 

When he turned back the girl was weeping, Sobs she could not suppress were shaking those nut-brown, rounded shoulders. "It 
has some kind of mental control," came her 
muffled voice. "Besides, they fear" It dreadfully. Oh, my people, my poor people." 

"Well, now, look," soothed Pritchard, 
"it's all over now. You'd better come back 
with us. I guess you've learned you can't 
make people out of all these animals. Besides, you've got an interesting story to tell 
the Board — " 

"D-damn the B-B-Board," she said a 
little unsteadily. "Then you'll take me with 
you?" 

Pritchard smiled his broadest smile. "But' 
of course!" 

"Then let's hurry," she pleaded. *"W«j 



AS IT WAS 



hive so little time." 
"Why? What's the hurry?" 
"The One! The One!" she burst out in 
bidden anxiety. "It'll come for us any minHe, don't you understand?" 

"Okay, okay," soothed Pritchard. He and 
the others were smiling at her excitement, 
■hen her equine suddenly reared so suddenly that she tumbled off. They started to her 
assistance, but she landed light as a cat on 
met feet. She stared wildly about her. 

The ecjuine uttered a growl and galloped 
Bcf. The girl remained crouched, her eyes 
darting in every direction. 
> "Now what?" said Pritchard. 
I "The One,'' she breathed. "It's somenbere near. My sextuped would never have 
Bolted like that otherwise." 
I "Oh, for Pete's sake," said Pritchard, taking her arm. "Come on — " 
I "Say, Mr. Pritchard, what's that thing 
Lwcr there?" Kemp pointed off to his left. 
I "Oh, God, no . . ." Cornelia's voice was 
L quavering moan. 

I Pritclurd glanced where the stocky lad 
mis pointing. What appeared to be an ex■rptiori.il ly tall and unusually red grass 
pLdc was wavering gently, as if bending to 
■ mild breeze, about fifty yards off. 

"Hell," muttered Sturgis, "that face is 

Pritchard started walking toward it, the 
thers following him. "Let's fan out a bit," 
e said, "until we see what this is." 

"Come back, come back," came the girl's 
poized whisper behind them. "Don't go 

Thev ignored her. At a distance of ten 
■rds Pritchard halted. They all watched 
9th consuming curiosity. 

The slender red thing was growing. Or, 
(her, it was pouring out of the ground, 
Ittnbs of dirt sticking to its glistening scart wetness, its delicately tapering tip now 
UK ten or twelve feet in the air. 

Pritchard shifted the flamer tank on his 
boulders and started to say, "I think — ", 
fern a maned gorilla loping across the 
leadow some hundred yards away gave a 
►Men scream and broke into a wild, shamling run in the other direction. Another 
lirnal gave bellowing voice, and another — 
nd abruptly there was commotion, spread4— PLANET STORIES— November 



ing over the island toward the mountain. 

Pritchard cleared his throat. "Get around 
it, boys. Let it keep coming, but when I say 
the word give it a lick of fire." 

The waving red spire stood some fifteen 
feet high now. As he circled into his position with the others, he noticed two things 
simultaneously. Another little scarlet tip was 
questing up through the trampled grass 
dose to the first one. And, out of the corner 
of his eye he could sec the animals that were 
Cornelia's people streaming either way along 
the base of the mountain, in a frenzied rout 
to get to the river on the other side. 

Then Cornelia's hands were clenching hij 
arm, her voice panting hysterically in hi* 
ear. 'Run, Pritchard! You don't know what 
you're up against. Oh, believe me," she 
sobbed, 'please, please, please believe me. 
This is The One." 

His eyes focusing on the growing scarlet 
tips — the second one had grown almost as 
high as the first— Pritchard smiled indulgently. "We're going to stay for the fun," 
he said. "What happened to all your friends? 
Stampeded, didn't they?" 

She opened her mouth to reply but her 
answer was cut off by Greene's sudden 
scream. 

Greene screamed as McManus had 
screamed last night. Screamed and sank 
writhing to his knees. Some kind of frothing 
slime was running down over his shoulders 
and chest, dissolving the acid-repellent cordron jacket, running down over Greene from 
what had been his head. 

From between the bases of the now thick, 
tall red tongues, another jet of liquid 
squirted toward Sturgis. He leaped sideways 
and it missed him clean. "Holy Damn!" he 
shouted. 

Pritchard gripped the flamer's trigger. 

"Give it hell!'' he roared. 

rpHREE streams of fire converged in a ball 
X of flame on the twin red spires. They 
disappeared in the rippling, booming fire. 

"Hold it!" Pritehard shut off his flamer 
and the others followed suit. Holding the 
nozzle before him, he walked to the place 
where the things had been. 

There was nothing there, except a hole 
where the tangled grass had been disturbed, 
and a kind of pit in the ground, into which 



50 



PLANET STORIES 



loose dirt was still dribbling. He backed a 
step and turned the flamer on, playing fire 
into the pit and around it. Then he shut it 
off. 

"You fool," came the girl's voice at his 
elbow. "You damned fool. You just won't 
believe me, will you?" 

Pritchard lifted his gaze toward what had 
once been Cadet Greene, Richard Harrison 
Greene, a rollicking lad from the Cumberland Gap. Thomas Guilfoyle McManus, a 
man with a red-haired soul. McManus, first, 
and, now, Greene. The hunter's face was 
turned to stone. 

"Keep your eyes peeled," he said harshly 
to the others and stalked off to the place 
where the squirt of liquid had landed after 
missing Sturgis. Some thirty feet from 
where it had been ejected, there was no 
grass but a four-foot smear where the ground 
bubbled and frothed. The stench hovering 
over tins spot was incredible, even to the 
man who had encountered it before. 

He turned to confront Cornelia who had 
followed him. "I don't know whether I can 
get it through your thick head or not," she 
bit out, "you've simply got to get out of here. 
You can't—" 

"Get this through your thick head, Miss 
Boyce." said Pritchard between clenched 
teeth. "This thing, whatever it is, has killed 
two of my men. I'm quite ready to believe 
il is intelligent, possibly the most intelligent 
organism on this planet. But it's a killer just 
the same and we're going to kill it. None 
of your idealistic theories are going to stop 
us, either." 

She stared at him, beginning to shake her 
head a little wildly. "You can't kill it! That's 
what I'm trying to tell you. It can't be k— " 

There was a sudden crash. Cornelia 
whirled and screamed. The three men and 
the girl stood transfixed. 

Over by the river one of the jet cruisers 
was on its side, resting on a crumpled wing. 
The other was forty feet in the air, and 
rising, held in the coil of an impossible red 
monstrosity rearing its long wet self into the 
sky. 

It was a worm, a very long, thin worm 
at least a hundred feet long, not counting 
what remained underground. It towered 
some fifty feet into the air, about thirty-five 
feet more of it wrapped around the cruiser. 



At its tip two fifteen-feet-long feelers 
writhed and wriggled, as if still smarting 
from the scorching they had received. 

The coil slipped a little. The cruiser, looking more than ever like a beetle at this moment, slid slowly out and fell. And again it 
crashed into the cruiser on the ground and 
rolled ponderously off it. 

"Good . . . God!" came Sturgis's voice 
shakily at Pritchard's elbow. The Chief 
Hunter was still too appalled to speak. He 
stared as the worm's rope-like body came 
curving down out of the sky, down to the 
cruisers again. Seeing how that red length 
alternately thinned to a one-foot thickness 
and swelled again to three feet and more 
as it oozed around the cruiser that had remained on the ground, he had a vision of 
how it had entered the Apollo, shrinking 
itself to a mere six-inch thread that poured 
through the intake port, seeping along the 
duct, swelling, bulging at McManus's airgrill . . . and coming out of the ground, 
probably close to the ship, it had evaded the 
radar field. 

Cornelia's agonized face swam before his 
eyes. He felt his body shaking in the grip of 
her slender hands. Words — 

" — fool, run! Listen to me! It's busy 
smashing your ships. We have a chance. Run 
— to the mountain! Oh, dear God . . ." 

At first he was like a sleep-walker. They 
turned him around and pushed him into a 
stumbling run, but his head turned back, his 
eyes large and almost vacant on that scene 
by the river. 

Then he was running. It was a good two 
hundred yards to the mountain, but the grass 
was mashed to a springy tangle under their 
feet and they had only to skirt the thicklystrewn bodies. The girl took the lead, the 
men not far in the rear, the nozzles of their 
flamers flapping out behind them. 

A crash, followed by a dull roar, came to 
them. They shot quick glances over their 
shoulders. The fuel tanks of one of the 
cruisers had let go and fire was blooming 
from the now distant beetle. The worm was 
arching wildly away, and then sinking in a 
curve to the ground. 

"How fast — can it go — on the — surface?" 
panted Pritchard. 

"Much faster — than under — ground!" 
Cornelia muttered. 



AS IT WAS 



El 



was leading the way to the thin, 

O rough ridge that marched up the mounbetween two of its smooth planes of 
e. She sprang to the ridge and began 
ig lightly up it. At twenty feet she 
jped. 

["he men were slower. The ridge was 
hing but saw-toothed points of raw rock, 
& and glassy and glittering. They had 
had the girl's practice with it. 
2ie motioned Kemp past her and called 
rn to Pritchard. "This is our only hope, 
j never seen The One on any of these 
mtains. I'm sure It can't climb the smooth 

And we can hold It back with our 
lets. Good girl." 

But hadn't we better get a little higher?" 
ried Sturgis. 

Higher!" echoed the girl. "We've got 
>et to the top!" 

Tantically, they climbed, talcing insane 
nccs, fantastically insecure holds, scramig, cutting their hands on the raw rock 
es, living a nightmare . . . 
it last Kemp and Cornelia, weak with 
■ waustion, sank against the ridge, gasping 
aod heaving. Sturgis, next in line, had no 
eath with which to berate them. He could 
Jy crouch there and stare helplessly at 
cm both. 

Pritchard braced his feet and dared to 
look down. The One was a straight red line 
;s the meadow, a gleam of highlight 
Its wet side where the afternoon sun 
It. (Unconsciously he thought of It 
as Cornelia did, as a person.) It was 
ing for the foot of the ridge. 
They all stared down, sucking in their 
ired breaths. Waiting for It to reach the 
and start climbing, Pritchard found 
If studying It detachedly. He realized 
is courage and reason were somehow 
wiving. 

It was, after all, a worm. It differed from 
lix-inch Terran night-crawler only in that 
measured about a hundred and fifty feet 
length, and was proportionately much 
ier, like a snake. It also differed in those 
-like tips that probed out into slim, 
knte points or contracted into thick stubs 
six feet long. Those tips were inves


tigating the jagged rock of the ridge now. 

And he saw that there were tips at the 
other end, too. But one was missing. Only 
a round stump accompanied the other long 
trailing feeler. It was a fair index of The 
One's terrible strength, Pritchard thought — 
realizing where the rest of that tip was now 
—that, in trying to wrench Itself clear, It 
had knocked over a hundred-foot, fivethoosand-ton space ship. 

"It's coming," said Kemp in a shrill, 
brittle voice. The hunter shot a glance at 
the stocky youth and saw he was fighting 
hysteria. 

The One was rippling slowly up the ridge. 
Pritchard guessed Its speed was greater than 
it seemed at that distance. Like a scarlet river, 
It poured steadily up. 

'After I've used this,™ said Cornelia in 
an even, conversational voice, "you gentlemen can have it if you don't mind having 
to pull it out of me." She held up her long 
knife, and there was no expression on her 
face. 

Kemp and Sturgis could only stare at her. 
Pritchard couldn't warn her by asking them 
to take it away from her, and anyway this 
was no place for a wrestle. 

"And why do you think we would want 
that?" he asked in as pleasant a tone as he 
could manage. 

"So much better than a flamer or jumping," she replied. Take my advice and — " 

"I wish you would pull yourself together," said Pritchard. "You're frightening 
Kemp up there." 

Startled, Kemp stared back down at his 
chief, and then he closed his mouth in a 
firm line. Pritchard congratulated himself 
that the remark was a stone that had slain 
two birds. 

"You don't honestly think there's a way 
out of this," extaimed Cornelia, "with — 
with — * 

"What I wouldn't give for my snapper!" 
breathed Kemp. 

"Or one of those five-inchers," and Sturgis 
jerked his head at the little tumbled beetles 
over at the river. 

"There isn't a rocket tube down there I'd 
trust now," said Pritchard. "They're all 
bunged out of alignment. Some of the snappers might still be in shape to use . . .* His 
voice trailed off. Something was raking 



51! 



PLANET STORIES 



shape in his thoughts, something revolving 
about a word Cornelia had uttered— the 
word "jump." 

"Well, what can we do?" muttered 
Slurgis tensely. The worm was still well 
below, but coming steadily up. They could 
see the little scarlet tips now, questing over 
the jagged edges. Behind was all humping 
redness. 

" We were very foolish — " Pritchard 
checked himself. "I was very foolish. I permitted us to be outmaneuvered. The one 
thing that monster doesn't want is for one 
of us to get back to the cruisers — " 

"I've been thinking," Sturgis cut in. 
"Why don't we empty all our flamer tanks 
along the ridge here, climb all the way to 
the top and then, as soon as it's almost there, 
spark the fuel and give it a good roasting?" 

Pritchard shook his head. "I thought of 
that. You forget how volatile that stuff is. 
By the time it gets there— no, I've got a 
better use for the darners." 

He began unstrapping the tank from his 
shoulders. "Kemp, pass yours on down. No, 
hang on to it, just in case. Sturgis, you take 
my position and hold It off as long as you 
can — " He glanced at the gauge on the .light 
plastic tank and shook his head grimly. 
"Okay, children, let's get going— to the 
top." 

The mountain wasn't really much of a 
mountain, being only some five hundred feet 
high. Their first frantic scramble up the 
ridge had carried them almost two-thirds of 
the way. 

Behind them, the worm was flowing 
steadily upward, like .a river of blood, along 
the narrow ridge, 

"Kemp," panted Pritchard as the short 
young man finally and painfully inched over 
the knife-edged peak. 

Kemp turned, stretching out a hand to 
Cornelia to help her up and over. "Yes?"' 

"I'm putting this girl in your charge. She's 
your responsibility — " 

"What are you going to do?" put in 
Cornelia quickly. 

Pritcliard looked up into those gray-green 
eyes so intent upon him. A pang of regret 
stabbed through him. He was no longer 
seeing her sweet -lined body. Here W'as a girl 
he could have ridden the starways with. A 
person with enough courage and resource 



to have held her own in this killer-infested 

Eden. 

"I'm taking a powder, as they used to 
say back on good old Terra. I'm gambling. 
Gambling that I can get back to the one 
cruiser that hasn't burnt up all its wiring, 
and call the ship." He slapped the leg-pocket 
of his breeches. Kemp nodded. The pocket 
contained a ready-packed emergency chute. 

CORNELIA shook her head slowly. 
"You'll never make it — " 
"He might," said Kemp. 
"I'll bet I can," said Pritchard. "I've got 
to." 

"The One will get you," she said. "It can 
get into one of those things easily. It'll take 
only a IittLe of Its digestive juice . . ." Her 
face puckered and those emerald eyes shone 
brighter, but she fought for and regained 
control. 

"So?" Pritchard smiled. "You'll be well 
rid, then, of that notorious big game hunter, 
Elmer Pritchard." 

"I don't want to be rid of him," she said 
softly. "I want him with me — at the end." 

He bowed. "Thank you, Miss Boyce." 

"Gill mc Cornelia, please." 

"And you," he said, "may call me Elmer 
— a name I permit no one to use — " he bent 
forward "-—but you, now." 

Their Ups brushed and clung. 

"Fine time for love-making," muttered 
Kemp. 

Below them, a flamer squealed suddenly. 
Sturgis, unknown to them, had lingered 
behind. Now, a hundred feet down the 
ridge, he fired a burst at the worm — a warning burst, for the dread feelers hung high 
above his head on a long, curving tendon 
of red wetness. 

The flamer had an effective range of only 
thirty feet, but the slimy scarlet rope curved 
away, dropping off to one side and extending 
out into the air. The feelers contracted to, 
mere knobs and the end thickened into a 
club. 

A haymaker, drawing back, poised and; 
cocked. Pritchard saw it and howled, "Sturgis! Duck!" 

But there was to be no ducking that swing] 
Sturgis hugged the thin spine of crag andj 
threw up a blossom of fire. But the ropes 
came flailing about, slashing through L thq 



I AS t 

I iwe, and neatly flicked him off. 

II They watched the body arcing out over 
B tbe meadow, the spare flamer of Pritchard 
H twisting after it, and saw it sink on down, 
H to stop suddenly against the turf. 

I Kemp began to curse. Pritchard pulled 

■ die emergency chute pack from his leg
■ pocket and began snapping the light harness 
I about his long frame. 

I "Cut that out," he said coldly. "Just hang 
Kemp, and watch. If I've got this baby 

■ figured out right, It's going to lose interest 
I in vou two in about as many seconds." 

f "Good-bye, Elmer," came Cornelia's voice 
rlornLy. 

Tiie worm's first half was recovering from 
the follow-through of that swing, draping 
itself back along the ridge yard by relentless 
rird. Pritchard turned, holding the chute 
coed in his fist. He forced a grin that he was 
ifraid looked more like a grimace. "So long, 
kiddies," he said, and jumped. 

At this point the leaning peak overhung 
the ground and he flung himself as far out 
ts possible, trying for distance. The smooth, 
limost polished wall slanted away from him 
ind the meadow swung upward. 

He pulled the cord at the last minute. As 
i>e filmy neosilk billowed above him, and 
he harness seemed to jerk him back up from 
be onrushing ground, he managed to twist 
i sluice back up at the ridge. 
The One was motionless. That was good. 
I It had seen him. 

m Then he drew up his knees. The ground 
■unmed into him and he lay there, stunned, 
■King the filmy folds flutter down over him. 
I Then he was up, bruised but whole, on 
■h knees and scrabbing out from under the 
pent gray stuff. By crawling under every line 
he avoided entanglement and in a minute 
ns clear and running, unsnapping the 
harness as he went. 

Mot until he was well away from the 
fanntain did be dare a glance over his 
boulder. Then he almost stumbled, at the 
bill terror gusting through him, freezing 
mm muscle. 
The worm was a red festoon, drooping 
kom the ridge. Even as he looked, Its 
rfcole length came off, to fall writhing out 
if sight momentarily at the base of the 
I aabun. 

He hadn't expected that He had planned 



■ was a 

for It to back laboriously down the wjy H 
came, giving him a decent margin of time. 
But it had crossed him up. Now he had 
seconds instead of minutes. 

He put his head down and dug in, pumping his tired, aching legs furiously. This was 
the worst gamble of his career, against the 
longest odds. He had no idea how fast the 
worm could go on level ground. 

Suddenly, he was racing a shadow. In 
the slanting light of Piramus, setting 
through die afternoon, something like an 
elongated caricature of a snail's head crept 
across the grass beside him — two long 
slivers of tapering purple shadow. 

Then he saw his flamer, lying almost 
dead ahead where it had landed after being 
catapulted off the ridge. Sobs rasping his 
throat, he slanted toward it, dove and 
rolled, to Come up clutching it. 

There was a spattering sound close by, 
a spatter that changed to an angry fi22ing. 
Pritchard swung the nozzle up in the very 
face of the glistening red column swaying 
toward him. He squeezed the handle-grip. 

Through the booming flame, he saw the 
shape twisting aside and followed ft with 
fire. It went down to the ground, backing 
away into a swelling body. The worm 
writhed desperately away from that searing 
plume of licking flames. 

Pritchard wheeled and ran toward the 
cruiser that had not burned. 

Evil-smelling juice slashed across the upturned belly of the ship as he savagely 
wrenched open the buckled door and rumbled in, dragging the flamer in after him. He 
stumbled across the roof-struts and lunged 
for the upside-down radio panel. 

The cruisers' radios were on their own 
battery-powered circuits. He snapped the 
power on and heard the slow hum and sputter of the warming tubes. He poked in the 
button labeled AUT. EM. SIG. a standard 
repeating distress call on a tight beam. 

Then he was flung against the opposite 
wall. As he stniggled back to his feet, pressure against them told him the cruiser was 
rising, and he knew very well it, was not 
doing so under its own power. 

A glistening red wall bulged against the 
door-frame through which he had come. 
Pritchard realized that once again the 
cruiser was being hoisted aloft in the worm's 



u 



PLANET STORIES 



coil. It wis going to drop him, to kill him 
quickly, rather dun poke inside and face 
bis flame*. 

Pritchard snatched the flamer and staggered toward the opening. Jabbing the nozzle into that scarlet slime, he gripped the 
handles. 

ROARING heat beat back at him. He 
braced himself, ignoring his own 
singeing flesh and crisping hair. 

The cruiser struck ground with a crash. 
He was flung sideways, threw up an arm, 
and heard it snap. He dragged himself to the 
door which now was turned to the ground. 
Gritting his teeth against the pain, Pritchard 
hung his head through the opening and 
peered out. 

It was a crazy nightmare. The meadow 
was a ceiling, to his inverted eyes, against 
which a giant red riband rolled and writhed 
in fantastic configurations. Every melting 
convolution, every arching loop, expressed 
pain and wrath. And, now and again, a livid 
blotch appeared along its length, alternately 
turning purple and yellow, and dripping 
streamers of drool. 

Then came a sound, a great tearing sound 
in the sky. Pritchard hauled himself back 
into the ship and crawled to the radio. He 
switdied off the automatic signal and cut 
in the transmission band. 

" — the hell you got down there?" came 
Captain Savage's rasp. "Is that you up on 
the rock, Mr, Pritchard? Mr. Pritchard—" 
"Captain!" yelled Pritchard. "Step on it! 
Come down on that monster. I'm all right. 
Come ahead!" 

Then lie snatched up a pair of solar goggles and worked his way to a viewport, in 
time to see the Apollo, a magnificent column 
of metal in the sky, descend on a pillar of 
Incandescence — at the bottom of which lay 
Bomething that bubbled and cooked, rising 
in a last great arch of simmering agony. 



The snaggle-toothed horizon of Thisbe II 
was rising across the dull indigo disk of setting Piramus. Pritchard and Savage sat in 
their gimbal chairs in the Forward Lounge. 
The old man's wispy white hairs stirred in 
the evening breeze sucked in by the blowers. 

"And every time I wonder if my hunting 
days aren't over," sighed Pritchard. Experimentally, lie worked on the flexicast on his 
right arm. 

"Huh," grunted the captain. "Not you. 
One week on Terra and you'll be telling 
yourself the next time it just can't be as bad. 
Or that this wasn't as bad as it seemed. Anytiiing, you'll tell yourself. Anything to 
start—" 

Cornelia appeared in the doorway. "Good 
evening, gentlemen," she said coolly. Shewas wearing cordon slacks and a soft neosilk blouse, that seemed to enjoy clinging 
to her contours. 

"Good evening," croaked Captain Savage. He stood up, and stretched restlessly. 

"Oh, don't go," said Cornelia. 

"Well, if we're blasting off in the morning, I've got things to do. These days it's 
the old men who do all the work." He 
chuckled as he eased past her through the 
door, and gave her shoulder a little pat. 
"Good hunting." 

The girl watched him go down the passage. "Whatever did he mean by that?" 
she inquired. " 'Good hunting'." 

"Oh, it's just an expression," said Pritchard vaguely. 

She came over to him and turned about 
on her bare feet. "No shoes that fit," she 
said. "How do you like what I managed 
to scrounge from the men?" 

He pulled her down to him .with one 
la2y reach of his good arm. "I'm afraid," he 
murmured; "that I liked you better the way 
you were." 

"You know," she spoke mufSedly against 
his shoulder, "you're something of a beast" 



A PLANET NAMED JOE 

By S. A. LOMBINO 

There were more Joes on Venus than you could shake a raygun at. Perhaps there was method in Co/one/ Walsh's 
madness — murder- madness — when he ordered Major Polk 
to scan the planet for a guy named Joe. 



V-^OLONEL WALSH had a great sense 
j of humor. I hated his guts ever since 
we went through the Academy together, but he had a great sense of humor. 

For example, he could have chosen a 
Second Looie for the job on Venus. He 
Bight even have picked a Captain. But he 



liked me about as much as I liked bim, and 
so he decided the job was just right for * 
Major. At least, that's what he told me. 

I stood at attention before his desk in the 
Patrol Station. We were somewhere in Area 
Two on Earth, takeoff point for any operations in Space II. The duty was fine, and I 



56 



PLANET STORIES 



liked it a lot. Come to think of it, the most 
I ever did was inspect a few defective tubes 
every now and then. The rest was gravy, 
and Colonel Walsh wasn't going to let me 
get by with gravy. 

"It will be a simple assignment, Major," 
he said to me, peering over his fingers. He 
held them up in front of him like a cathedral. 

"Yes, sir," I said. 

"It will involve finding one man, a 
Venusian native." 

I wanted to say, "Then why the hell don't 
you send a green kid on the job? Why me?" 
Instead, I nodded and watched him playing 
with his fingers. 

"The man is a trader of sorts. Rather 
intelligent." He paused, then added, "For 
& native, that is." 

I had never liked Walsh's attitude toward 
natives. I hadn't liked the way he'd treated 
the natives on Mars ever since he'd taken 
over there. Which brought to mind an 
important point. 

"I always figured Venus was under the 
jurisdiction of Space III, sir. I thought our 
activities were confined to Mars." 

He folded his fingers like a deck of cards 
and dropped them on his desk as if be were 
waiting for me to cut. 

"Mmmm," he said, "yes, that's true. But 
this is a special job. It so happens this 
Venusian is the one man who can help us 
understand just what's happening on Mars." 

I tried to picture a Venusian understanding Mars and I didn't get very far. 

"He's had many dealings with the natives 
there." Walsh explained. "If anyone can 
tell us the reasons for the revolt, he can." 

If Walsh really wanted to know the reasons for the revolt, I could give them to 
him in one word: Walsh. I had to laugh 
at the way he called it "revolt" It had been 
going on for six months now and we'd 
lost at least a thousand men from Space II. 
Revolt. 

"And this man is on Venus now?" I 
asked for confirmation. I'd never been to 
Venus, being in Spare II ever since I'd left 
the Moon run. It was just like Walsh to 
ship me off to a strange place. 

"Yes, Major," he said. 'This man is on 
Venus." 

At the Academy he had called mc Fred. 



That was before I'd reported him for sleeping on Boiler Watch. He'd goofed off on 
a pile of uranium that could've, and almost 
did, blow the barracks sky-high that night. 
He still thought it was my fault, as if I'd 
done the wrong thing by reporting him. 
And now, through the fouled-up machinery 
that exists in any military organization, he 
outranked me. 

"And the man's name, sir?" 

"Joe." A tight smile played on his face. 

"Joe what?" I asked. 

"Just Joe." 

"Just Joe?" 

"Yes," Walsh said. "A native, you know. 
They rarely go in for more than first names. 
But then, it should be simple to find a man 
with a name like Joe. Among the natives, I 

"I don't know, sir." 
"A relatively simple assignment," Walsh 
said. 

"Can you tell me anything else about this 
man? Physical appearance? Personal habits? 
Anything?" 

Walsh seemed to consider this for a 
moment. "Welt, physically he's like any of 
the other Venusians, so I can't give you 
much help there. He does have a peculiar 
habit, though." 

"What's that?" 

"He has an affinity for Terran cigarettes." 
I sighed. "Well, it's not very much to go 
on." 

"You'll find him," Walsh said, grinning. 
"I'm sure of it." 

THE trip to Venus came off without ■ 
hitch. I did a lot of thinking on. that 
trip. I thought about Mars and the revolt 
there. And I thought about Colonel Leonard 
Walsh and how he was supposed to be 
quelling that revolt. Ever since Walsh hid 
taken command, ever since he'd started 
pushing the natives around, there'd been 
trouble. It was almost as if the whole 
damned planet had blown up in our faces 
the moment he took over. Swell guy, Walsh. 

Venus was hotter than I'd expected it to 
be. Much too hot for the tunic I was wearing. It smelled, too. A funny smell I 
couldn't place. Like a mixture of old shod 
and -after-shave. There were plants everywhere I looked. Big plants and small ones. 



A PLANET NAMED JOE 



57 



tocM blooming with flowers I'd never seen 
before, and some as bare as cactus. 

I recognized a blue figure as one of the 
Wives the pilot had told me about. He was 
fell, looking almost human except that 
■Bathing about him was elongated. His 
(enures, bis muscles, everything seemed to 
fc»ve been stretched like a rubber band. I 
bept expecting him to pop back to normal. 
Iwtead, he flashed a double row of brilliant 

I wondered if he spoke English. "Hey, 
tor." I called. 

He ambled over with long-legged strides 
bat closed the distance between us in 
■toads. 

"Call me Joe," he said. 

1 dropped my bags and stared at him. 
Miy be tins was going to be a simple assignBent after all. "I sure am glad to see you, 
pe," I said. 

"Same here, Toots," he answered. 
The guys back in Space II are searching 
ugh and low for you," I told him. 

"You've got the wrong number," he 
uid, and I was a little surprised at his use 

Terran idiom. 

You are Joe, aren't you? Joe the trader?" 
I "I'm Joe, all right," he said. "Only thing 
[I ever traded, though, was a pocketknife. 
Got a set of keys for it," 

Oh," I said, my voice conveying my 
[disappointment. I sighed and began wondering just how I should go about contacting 
the Joe I was looking for. My orders said 
\ I was to report to Captain Bransten immediately upon arrival. I figured the hell with 
Captain Bransten. I outranked him anyway, 
I and there wasn't much he could do if I 
I decided to stop for a drink first. 
I "Where's the Officer's Club?" I asked 
I the Venusian, 

I "Are you buying information or are you 
I just curious?" 

I "Can you take me there?" I asked. 
I "Sure thing, Toots." He picked up my 
I bags and started walking up a heavily ovcrI grown path. We'd probably walked for 
I about ten minutes when he dropped my 
| bags and said, "There it is." 
I The Officer's Gub was a plasteel hut with 
I window shields that protected it from the 
| beat of the sun. It didn't look too comfortable but 1 really wanted that drinlc I 



reached into my tunic and slipped the native 
thirty solars. 

He stared at the credits curiously and 
then shrugged his shoulders. "Oh well, 
you're new here. We'll let it go." 

He took off then, while I stared after liim, 
wondering just what he'd meant. Had I 
tipped him too little? 

I shrugged and looked over at the 
Officer's Club. From the outside it looked 
as hot as hell. 

On the inside it was about two degrees 
short of that mark. I began to curse Walsh 
for taking me away from my nice soft job 
in Space II. 

There wasn't much inside the club. A few 
tables and chairs, a dart game and a bar. 
Behind the bar a tall Vcnusian lounged. 

I walked over and asked, "What are you 
serving, pal?" 

"Call me Joe," he answered. 

He caught me off balance. "What?" 

"Joe," he said again. 

A faint glimmer of understanding began 
to penetrate ray thick skull. "You wouldn't 
happen to be Joe the trader? The guy who 
knows all about Mars, would you" 

"I never left home," he said simply. 
"What are you drinking?" 

That rat! That dirty, filthy, stinking, 
unprincipled . . . 

But then, it should be simple to find a 
man with a name like Joe. Ainong the 
natives, I mean. 

Sure. Oh sure. Real simple. Walsh was 
about the lowest, most contemptible . . . 

"What are you drinking, pal?" the 
Venusian asked again. 

"Skip it," I said. "How do I get to the 
captain's shack?" 

"Follow your nose, pal. Can't miss it." 

1 started to pick up my bag as another 
Venusian entered. He waved at the bartender. 

"Hello, Joe," he said. "How's it going?" 

"Not so hot, Joe," the bartender replied. 

I listened in fascination. Joe, Joe, Joe. So 
this was Walsh's idea of a great gag. Very 
funny. Very . . . 

"You Major Polk, sweetheart?" the 
Venusian who'd just come in asked. 

"Yes," I said, still thinking of Colonel 
Walsh. 

"You better get your butt over to the 



PLANET STORIES 



captain's shack," he said. "He's about ready 
to post you as overdue." 

"Sure,'' I said wearily. "Will you take 
my b.ig$, please?" 

"Roger," he answered. He picked up the 
bags and nodded at the bar. 

"So long, Joe," he said to the bartender. 

"See you, Joe," the bartender called back. 

CAPTAIN BRANSTEN was a mouse;-, 
unimpressive sort of man. He was 
wearing a tropical tunic, but he still resembled a wilted lily more than he did an 
officer. 

"Have a seat, Major," he offered. He 
reached for a cigarette box on the desk and 
extended it to me. He coughed in embarrassment when he saw it was empty. Quickly, he pressed a button on his desk and the 
door popped open. A tall, blue Venusian 
stepped Irthely into the room. 

"Sir?" the Venusian asked. 

"We're out of cigarettes, Joe," the Captain said, "Will you get us some, please?" 

"Sure thing," the Venusian answered. 
He smiled broadly and closed the door 
behind him. 

Another Joe, I thought. Another damned 
Joe. 

"They steaL them," Captain Bransten 
said abruptly. 

"Steal what?" I asked. 

"Cigarettes. I sometimes think the cigarette is one of the few things they like 
about Terran culture." 

So Walsh had taken care of that angle 
too. He does have a peculiar habit, though. 
He has an affinity -for Terran cigarettes. 
Cigarettes was the tip I should have given; 
not solars. 

"All right/' I said, "suppose we start at 
the beginning." 

Captain Bransten opened his eyes wide. 
"Sir?" he asked. 

"What's with all this Joe business? It 
may be a very original name but I think its 
popularity here is a little outstanding." 

Captain Bransten began tc chuckle softly. 
I personally didn't think it was so funny. 
I tossed him my withering Superior Officer's 
gaze and waited for his explanation. 

"I hadn't realized this was your .first time 
an Venus," he said. 

"Is there a local hero named Joe?" I 



asked. 

"No, no, nothing like that," he assured 
me. "It's a simple culture, you know. Not 
nearly as developed as Mars." 

"I can see that," I said bitingly. 

"And the natives are only now becoming 
acquainted with Terran culture. Lots of 
enlisted men, you know." 

I began to get the idea. And I began .o 
appreciate Walsh's doubtful ancestry more 
keenly. 

"It's impossible to tell exactly where it 
all started, of course," Bransten was saying. 

I was beginning to get angry. Very angry. 
I was thinking of Walsh sitting back in 
a nice cozy foam chair back on Earth. 

"Get to the point, Captain!" I barked. 

"Easy, sir," Bransten said, turning pale. 
I could see that the Captain wasn't used to 
entertaining Majors. "The enlisted men. 
You know how they are. They'll ask a 
native to do something and they'll call him 
Joe. 'Hey, Joe, give me a hand with this.' 
Or 'Listen, Joe, how'd you like to earn 
some cigarettes?' Do you follow?" 

"I fallow, all right," I said bitterly. 

"Well," Bransten went on, "that sort of 
thing mushrooms. The natives are a simple, 
almost -childish people. It appealed to them 
— the Joe business, I mean. Now they're all 
Joe, They like it. That and the cigarettes." 

He cleared his throat and looked at me 
apologetically as if he were personally responsible for Venusian culture. In fact, he 
looked as if he were responsible for having 
put Venus in the heavens in the first place. 

"Do you understand, Major? Just a case 
of extended idiom, that's all," 

Just a case of extended idiot, I thought. 
An idiot on a wild goose chase a hell of a 
long way from home. 

"I understand perfectly," I snapped, 
"Where are my quarters?" 

Bransten asked a Venusian named Joe to 
show me my quarters, reminding me that 
chow was at thirteen hundred. As I was 
leaving, the first Venusian came back with 
the cigarettes Bransten had ordered. 

I could tell by the look on his face that 
he probably had half a carton stuffed into 
his pockets. I shrugged and went to change 
into a tropical tunic. 

I called Earth right after chow. The 
Captain Assured me that this sort' of 



A PLANET NAMED JOE 



5» 



fcing was definitely against regulations, but 
be submitted when I twinkled my little gold 
ieif tinder his nose. 

Walsh's face appeared on the screen. He 
» *s smiling, looking like a fat pussy cat. 

"What is it, Major?" he asked. 
This man Joe," I said. "Can you give 
rse any more on him?" 

Walsh's grin grew wider. "Why, Major," 
be said, "you're not having any difficulties, 
are you?" 

None at all," I snapped back. "I just 
thought I'd be able to find him a lot sooner 

Take your time, Major," Walsh beamed. 
"There's no rush at all." 
"I thought . , ." 

"I'm sure you can do the job," Walsh cut 
tfi. "I wouldn't have sent you otherwise." 

Hell, I was through kidding around, 
fLook . . 

"He's somewhere in the jungle, you 
know," Walsh said. 

I wanted to ram my fist into the screen, 
right smack up against those big white 
teeth. Instead, I cut off the transmission and 
• itched the surprised look on his face as 
bis screen went blank millions of miles 

1 *.!}'. 

He blinked at the screen, trying to realize 
I d deliberately hung up on him. 

Polk!'' he shouted, "can you hear me?" 

I smiled, saw the twisted hatred on his 
features, and then the screen on my end 
»ent blank, too. 

He's somewhere in the jungle, you know. 

I dunked Captain Bransten for his hospitality and went back to my quarters. 

As I saw it, there were two courses for 
me to follow. 

One: I could say the hell with Walsh 
and Venus. That would mean hopping the 
next ship back to Earth. 

It would also mean disobeying the direct 
order of a superior officer. It might mean 
demotion, and it might mean getting 
bounced out of the Service altogether. 

Two: I could assume there really was a 
pry name Joe somewhere in that jungle, a 
toe separate and apart from the other Joes 
on thij planet, a trader Joe who knew the 
Martians well. I could always admit failure, 
■f course, and return empty handed. Mission 
pot accomplished. Or, I might really find a 



guy who was trader Joe. 

I made my decision quickly. I wanted to 
stay in the Service, and besides Walsh may 
have been on the level for the first time in 
his life. Maybe there was a Joe here who 
could help us on Mars. If there was I'd try 
to find him. It was still a hell of a trick 
though. 

I cursed Walsh again and pushed the 
buzzer near my bed. 

A tall Venusian stepped into the room. 

"Joe?" I asked, just to be sure. 

"Who else, boss?" he answered, 

"I'm trying to locate someone," I said. 
"I'll need a guide to take me into the 
jungle. Can you get me one?" 

"It'll cost you, boss," the Venusian said. 

"How much?" 

"Two cartons of cigarettes at least.* 

"Who's the guide?" I asked. 

"How's the price sound?" 

"Fine, fine," I said impatiently. And the 
Captain had said they were almost a childish 
people! 

"His name is Joe," the Venusian told 
me, "Best damn guide on the planet. Take 
you anywhere you want to go, do anything 
you want to do. Courageous. Doesn't know 
the meaning of fear. I've known him 
to . . ." 

"Skip it," I said, cutting the promotion 
short. Tell him to show up around fifteen 
hundred with a complete list of what .we'll 
need." 

The Venusian started to leave. 

"And Joe," I said, stopping him at the 
door, "I hope you're not overlooking your 
commission on the deal." 

His face broke into a wide grin. "No 
danger of that, boss," he said. 

When he was gone I began figuring out 
a plan of action. Obviously, I'd just have to 
traipse through the jungle looking for a guy 
named Joe on a planet where everyone was 
named Joe, Everybody, at least, but the 
Captain, the small garrison attached to the 
Station, and me. 

I BEGAN wondering why Walsh had 
gone to so much trouble to get rid of 
me. The job, as I saw ft, would take a hell 
of a long time. It seemed like a silly thing 
to do, just to get even with a guy for something that had happened years ago. He 



PLANET STORIES 



surely must have realized that I'd be back 
again, sooner or later. Maybe he had another little junket all set for me. 

Or mavbe he didn't expect me to come 
back. 

The thought hadn't occurred to me before 
this, and I began to consider it seriously. 
Walsh was no good, rotten dear through. 
He was failing at the job of keeping Mars 
in hand, and he probably realized that a few 
more mistakes on his part would mean the 
end of his career with Space II. I chuckled 
as I thought of him isolated in some Godforsaken place like Space V or Space VII. 
This probably bothered bim a lot, too. But 
what probably bothered him more was the 
fact that I was next in command. If he were 
transferred, I'd be in charge of Space II, 
and I could understand how much that 
would appeal to Walsh. 

I tried to figure the thing out sensibly, 
tried tp weigh his good points against his 
bad. But it all came back to the same thing. 
A guy who would deliberately go to sleep 
on Boiler Watch with a ton of uranium 
ready to blast a barracks to smithereens if 
it wasn't watched, would deliberately do 
just about anything. 

Sending me off on a wild goose chase 
after a character i.amed Joe may have been 
i gag. But it may have been something a 
little grimmer than a gag, and I made up 
my mind to be extremely careful from 
here on in. 

The guide arrived at fifteen hundred on 
the dot. He was tall, elongated, looked 
almost like all the other Venusians I'd 
seen so far. 

"I understand you need a Grade A guide, 
sir," be said. 

"Are you familiar with the jungle?" I 
asked him. 

"Born and raised there, sir. Know it like 
the back of my hand." 

"Has Joe told you what the payment will 
be?" 

"Yes, sir. A carton and a half of cigarettes." 

1 thought about Joe deducting his commission and smiled. 

"When can we leave?" 

"Right away, sir. We won't need much 
really. I've made a list of supplies and I 
can get them in less than an hour, I suggest 



you wear light clothing, boots, and a hat." 

"Will I need a weapon?" 

He looked at me, his eyes faintly amused. 
"Why, what for, sir?" 

"Never mind," I said. "What's your 
name, by the way?" 

He lifted his eyebrows, and his eyes 
widened in his narrow face. He was definitely surprised. 

"Joe," he said. "Dsdn't you know?" 

WHEN we'd been out for a while 1 
discovered why Joe had suggested the 
boots and the hat. The undergrowth was 
often sharp and jagged and it would have 
sliced my legs to ribbons were they not 
protected by the high boots. The hat kept 
the strong run off my head. 

Joe was an excellent guide and a pleasant 
companion. He seemed to be enjoying a 
great romp, seemed to love the jungle and 
take a secret pleasure in the work he was 
doing. There were times when I couldn't 
see three feet ahead of me. He'd stand stock 
still for a few minutes, his head barely 
moving, his eyes darting from one plant to 
another. Then he'd say, "This way," and 
take off into what looked like more impenetrable jungle invariably to find a little 
path leading directly to another village. 

Each village was the same. The natives 
would come running out of their huts, tall 
and blue, sliouting, "Cigarettes, Joe? Cigarettes?" It took me a while to realize they 
were addressing me and not my guide. 

Everybody was Joe. It was one beautiful, 
happy, joyous round of stinking, hot jungle. 
And I wasn't getting any nearer my man. 
Nor had I any idea how 1 was supposed to 
find him. I began to feel pretty low about 
the whole affair. 

Joe, on the other hand, enjoyed every 
moment of the trip. In each village he 
greeted the natives cheerfully, told them 
stories, swapped gossip and jokes. And 
when it was time to leave, he would lay 
goodbye to all his friends and we would 
plunge into the twisted foliage again. 

His spirits were always high and he 
never failed to say the right thing that 
would give a momentary lift to my own 
depressed state of mind. He would talk for 
hours on end as we hacked our way through 
the jungle. 



A PLANET NAMED JOE 



•1 



"I like Venus," he said once. "I would 
never leave it." 

"Have you ever been to Earth?" I asked. 
"No," Joe replied. "I like Terrans too, 
you understand. They are good for Venus. 
And they ace fun." 

"Fun?" I asked, thinking of a particular 
species of Terran: species Leonard Walsh. 

"Yes, yes," he said wholeheartedly. 
The)- joke and they laugh and . . . well, 
you know." 

"I suppose so," I admitted. 
Joe smiled secretly, and we pushed on. 
I began to find, more and more, that I had 
aarted to talk freely to Joe. In the beginning he had been just my guide. There had 
been the strained relationship of employer 
taa employee. But as the days lengthened 
into weeks, the formal atmosphere began to 
";. I found myself telling him all 
•bout Earth, about the people there, about 
my decision to attend the -Academy, the 
rigid tests, the grind, even the Moon run. 
was a good listener, nodding sympa;ically, finding experiences in his own 
ife to parallel my own. 
And as our relationship progressed from 
casual one to a definitely friendly one, Joe 
teemed more enthusiastic than ever to keep 
ip our grinding pace to find what we were 
coking for. 

Once we stopped in a clearing to rest, 
Joe lounged on the matted greenery, his 
ong body stretched out in front of him, 
the knife gleaming in his belt. I'd seen him 
jfash his way through thick, tangled vines 
tth that knife, his long, muscular arms 
powerfully slicing through them like strips 
of silk. 

How far are we from the Station?" I 
iked. 

"Three or Tour Earth weeks," he replied. 
I sighed wearily. "Where do we go from 
kere?" 

"There are more villages," he said. 
"We'll never find him." 
"Possibly," Joe mused, the smile creeping 
er his face again. 
■ "A wild goose chase. A fool's errand." 
I "We'd better get started," Joe said 

W I got to my feet and we started the march 
Mgiio, Joe was still fresh, a brilliant contrast 



the same feeling I'd had a long time ago 
on my sixteenth birthday. One of my friends 
had taken me all over the city, finally dropping me off at my own house where the 
whole gang was gathered for a surprise 
party. Joe reminded me of that friend. 

"There's a village ahead," he said, and 
the grin on his face was large now, his eyes 
shining, 

SOMETHING was missing here. Natives. 
There were no natives rushing out to 
greet us. No cries of "Cigarettes? Cigarettes?" I caught up with Joe, 
"What's the story?" I whispered. 
He shrugged knowingly and continued 
walking. 

And then I saw the ship, nose pointing 
into space, catching the rays of the sun like 
a great silver bullet. 

"What . , . ?" I started. 

"It's all right," Joe said, smiling. 

The ship looked vaguely familiar. [ noticed the crest of Space II near the nose, and 
a lot of things became clear then. I also saw 
Walsh standing near one of the huts, a stun 
gun in his hand. 

"Hello, Major," he called, almost cheerfully. The gun didn't look cheerful, though. 
It was pointed at my head. 

"Fancy meeting you here, Colonel," I 
said, trying to match his joviality. Somehow 
it didn't quite come off. ■ 

Joe was walking beside me, waving at the 
colonel, beaming all over with happiness, 

"I see you found your man," Walsh said. 

I turned rapidly. Joe nodded and kept 
grinning, a grin that told me he was getting 
a big kick out of all this. Like a kid playing 
a game. 

I faced Walsh again. "Okay, what's it all 
about, pal?" 

"Colonel," Walsh corrected me. "You 
mustn't forget to say Colonel, Major." He 
emphasized my rank, and he said it wtrh % 
sort of ruthless finality. 

I waited. I could see he was just busting 
to tell me how clever he'd been. Besides, 
there wasn't much I could do but wait. Not 
with Walsh pointing the stun gun at my 
middle. 

"We've come a long way since the Academy, haven't we. Major?" 

"If you mean in miles," I said, looking 



PLANET STORIES 



62 

Around at the plants, "we sure have." 

Walsh grinned a little. "Always the wit," 
he Hud drily. And then the smile faded 
from his lips and his eyes took on a hard 
lustre. "I'm going to kill you, you know." 
He said it as if he were saying, "I think it'll 
rain tomorrow." 

Joe almost clapped his hands together 
■with glee. He was really enjoying this. Another of those funny Tcrran games. 

"You gave me a powerful handicap to 
overcome," Walsh said, "I suppose I should 
thank you, really." 

"You're welcome," I said. 

"It wasn't easy living down the disgrace 
you caused me," 

"It was your own damn fault," I said. 
"You knew what you were doing when you 
decided to cork off." 

Beside me, Joe chuckled a little, enjoying 
the game immensely. 

'"You didn't have to report me," Walsh 
said. 

"No? Maybe I should have forgotten all 
about it? Maybe I should have nudged you 
and served you orange juice? So you could 
do it again sometime and maybe blow up 
the whole damn Academy!" 

Walsh was silent for a long time. When 
he spoke his voice was barely audible. The 
teat was oppressive, as if it were concentrated on this little spot in the jungle, 
focusing all its penetration on a small, unimportant drama. 

I could hear Joe breathing beside me. 

"I'm on my way out," Walsh rasped. 
"Finished, do you understand?" 

"Good," I said. And I meant it. 

"This Mars thing, A terrible fix. 
Terrible." 

Beside me, a slight frown crossed Joe's 
face. Apparently he couldn't understand the 
seriousness of our voices. What had happened to the game, the fun? 

"You brought the Mars business on yourself," I told Walsh. "There was never any 
trouble before you took command." 

"The natives," he practically shouted. 
They . , . they . . 

Joe caught his breath sharply, and I 
wondered what Walsh was going to say 
About the natives. Apparently he'd realized 
that Joe was a native. Or maybe Joe's knife 
had something to do with it. 



"What about the natives?" I asked. 

"Nothing," Walsh said. "Nothing." He 
was silent for a while. 

"A man of my calibre," he said then, his 1 
face grim. "Dealing with savages." He 
caught himself again and threw a hasty 
glance at Joe. The perplexed frown had 
grown heavier on Joe's face. He looked at 
the colonel in puzzlement. 

WALSH turned from Joe and raised the 
stun gun. I wondered if he had yet 
realized that Joe was one of a million Joes 
scattered all over this planet, that Joe was 
all the natives on Venus. That Joe was all 
the natives everywhere throughout the 
galaxy. I looked at Walsh's eyes. He was a 
sick man, alone with his thoughts in the 
middle of a stinking jungle. 

"I'm on my Way out. Major," he said, 
"but you won't get a chance to succeed 
where I've failed. No. Oh no. I'll see to 
that." 

"And you had to come all the way to 
Venus to do it?" 

"Don't joke," Walsh snapped. "Don't 
joke, Major. It's not funny. It's not funny 
at all." 

"It's pretty sad, I'd say." 

"You can't afford to say anything," 
Walsh remarked drily. "You're going to be 
dead in a very few minutes." 

Joe's eyes widened, and I saw indecision 
cross his features as he tried to understand 
what had happened to the game. 

"What'U they say back on Earth when 
they hear about this?" I asked. 

"When will they hear about it? Four, 
five months from now? By then, my little 
trip will have been forgotten. Besides, I'm 
here on a routine check. Everyone knows 
that." 

"A routine check on Venus? Mars is your 

territory." 

"One of my men is up here," Walsh said. 
"That gives me temporary jurisdiction. At 
least enough to visit the planet and see bow 
conditions arc. Anyway, I'll be home long 
before Joe here carries your body in." 

Joe shook his head imperceptibly but 
Walsh didn't catch it. 

"A casualty in the jungle," Walsh continued. The native will return to the Station and explain the accident. I'll be back 



A PLANET NAMED JOE 



83 



arth long before he reaches there." 
Sure," I said, "nice and simple. You 
me and Joe delivers the news and takes 
rap. Good old sucker Joe." 
That's about enough out of you,'' Walsh 

Go ahead, Colonel," 1 shouted. "Pull 
trigger. Then run off and leave Joe 

I said that's enough out of you!" Walsh 
xitcd. 

turned to face Joe. His mouth was 
wn across his face in a tight emotionless 
. He stepped in front of me and stared 
Walsh.. 

Get out of the way," Walsh commanded. 
: shook his head slowly. "This is not 
you told me. A friend, you said. A 
ise. You said you wanted to . . ." 
Get out of the way, you damned 

With one swift movement Joe leaped 
ward. The knife gleamed in his hand 
j there was momentary panic on Walsh's 
v. 

The shin gun snapped up. It crackled 
:c in the Venusian jungle, its blast blind; me for a moment. It shuddered through 
's left arm and paralyzed it momentarily. 
3ut the hand with the knife was hacking 
iv at Walsh's throat, the blood dripping 
*n over the silver planet on the collar 
his tunic. 

I made my report to Bransten. 
1 told him the body of Colonel Leonard 
'ilsh had been discovered in the jnngle. 
was barely alive when he'd been found, 
administered aid but his knife wounds 
proved to be fatal. He died shortly after 
id him. 

Awful," the captain said, "awful." 

nodded sympathetically. 

Did he say anything? Did he give you 

idea. I mean, did he say who did it?" 
Yes," I said. "He told me who mur■ : htm." 

Vt were standing near the platform of 
ship, waiting for them to prepare for 



Pell who. Major?" he asked. "Who 
be say did it?" 

oe," I explained. "A native named 



HAVE A 

MURDER. 




HAVE 

TWO! 

buy 

TWO COMPLETE 

DETECTIVE BOOKS 

— the magazine thai gives y«ji . 

NOT JUST ONE 

of the recent beat-iielleri In Ik* 
mviicr' Held 

BUT TWO! 

for 35c 

landless delightful, Npln«-<-hillta£ 
excitement by the bent mystery 
writer*) of today — «*bo»e banks, 
separately, would cost yoa 93. 00 

A SIX-DOLLAR VALUE 
TWO COMPLETE 

DETECTIVE BOOKS 

FOB THIRTY- Fl VI! CBSPTS 
AT VOCB IVEWSST.WW 



CAPTAIN CHAOS 

By D. ALLEN MORRISSEY 

Science equipped David Corbin with borrowed time; sent htm 
winging out in a state of suspension to future centuries . . . to a 
dark biue world whose only defense was to seal tight the 
prying minds of foolish interlopers. 



I HEARD the voice as I opened my eyes. 
I *'as lying down, still nut aware of 
where I was, waiting for the voice. 
"Your name is David Corbin. Do you 
understand?" 

I looked in the direction of the sound. 
Above my feet a bulkhead loomed. There 
64 



were round dials set in a row above i 
speaker. Over the mesh-covered speaker, two 
knobs glowed red. I ran the words over jn 
my sluggish mind, thinking about an answer. 
The muscles in my throat tightened up in 
reflex as I tried to bring some unity into the 
jumble of thoughts and ideas that kept form


CAPTAIN CBAOS 



. One word formed out of the rush of 



I shouted a protest against the strangeness 
the room. I looked to the right, my eyes 
[lowing the curving ceiling that started 
the cot. The curve met another straight 
Jkhead on the left. I was in a small room, 
tr in color, like dull metal. Overhead a 
ight light burned into my vision. I wonted where in the universe I was. 
"Your name is David Corbin. If you 
iderstand, press button A on your right." 
I stared at the speaker in the wall. The 
esh-covered hole and the two lights looked 
ie a 'caricature of a face, set in a panel of 
lis. I twisted my head to look for the 
■■in 1 pushed away from the close wall 
t I couldn't move. I reached down to the 

bhtness that held my body, found the wide 

"rip *hat held me and fumbled with the 
ckle. I threw it off and pushed myself up 
*n the hard cot. I heard myself yell in 

uprise as I floated up towards the light 

rcrhead. 

I was weightless. 

How do you describe being weightless 
hen you are born into a world bound by 
a vjty. I twisted and shut my eyes in terror, 
nere was no sensation of place, no feeling 
up or down, no direction. My back 
nped against the ceiling and I opened my 
s to stare at the cot and floor. I was coaitrating too hard on remembering to be 
rightened for long. I pushed away from the 
metal and the floor moved up to meet 



"If you understand, press button A on 
ur right." 

What should I understand? That I was 
bating in a room that had a curved wall . . . 
it nothing was right in this hostile room? 
When I reached the cot I held it and 
cw myself down. I glanced at the planes 
the room, trying to place it with other 
ooms I could see in my mind. Gray walls 
ith a crazy curved ceiling ... a door to my 
ft that appeared to be air tight. 
I stared at my familiar hands. I rubbed 
Km across my face, feeling the solidity of 
lesh and bone, afraid to think too hard 
myself, 

"My name . . . my name is . . .* 
—PLANET STORIES— November 



"Your name is David Corbiu." 

I stared at the speaker. How long did diis 
go on? The name meant nothing to me, but 
I thought about it, watching the relentless 
lights that shone below the dials. I stood up 
slowly and looked at myself. I was naked 
except for heavy shorts, and there was no 
clue to my name in the pockets. The room 
was warm and the air I had been breathing 
was good but it seemed wrong to be dressed 
like this. I didn't know why. I thought about 
insanity, and the room seemed to fit my 
thoughts. When the voice repeated the 
message again I had to act. Walking was 
like treading water that couldn't be seen or 
felt 

I floated against the door, twisting the 
handle in fear that it wouldn't turn. The 
handfe clanged as I pushed it down and I 
stared at the opposite wall of a narrow gray 
passageway. I pushed out into it and grasped 
the metal rail that ran along the wall. I 
reasoned it was there to propel yourself 
through the passageway in this weightless 
atmosphere. 

It was effortless to move. I turned on my 
side like a swimmer and went hand over 
hand, shooting down the corridor. I braced 
against forward motion and stopped against 
a door at the end. Behind me I could see 
ilae opened door I had left, and the thought 
of that questioning voice made me want to 
move. I swung the door open, catching a 
glimpse of a room crowded with equipment 
and ... 

I WILL always remember the scream of 
terror, the paralyzing fright of what 
I saw through the portholes in the wall of 
the room. I saw the blackest night, pierced 
by brilliance that blinded me. There was no 
depth to the searing brightness of countless 
stars. They seemed to press against the glass, 
blobs of fire against a black curtain burning 
into my eyes and brain. 
It was space. 

I looked out at deep space, star systems in 
dusters. I shut my eyes. When I looked 
again I knew where I was. Why the little 
room had been shaped like quarter round. 
Why I drifted welgntlessly. Why I was . . . 

David Corbin. 

I knew more of the puzzle. Something 
was wrong. After the first shock of looking 



86 



PLANET STORIES 



out, I accepted the fact that I was in a spice 
ship, yet I couldn't read the maps that were 
fastened to a table, nor understand the 
function or design of the compact machinery. 

WHY, Why, Why? The thought kept 
pounding at me. I was afraid to touch anything in the room. I pressed against the 
clear window, wondering if the stars were 
familiar. I had a brief vivid picture of a 
night sky on Earth. This was not the same 
sky. 

Bade in the room where I had awakened, 
I touched the panel with the glowing eyes. 
It had asked me if 1 understood. Now it 
must tell me why I didn't. It had to help me, 
that flat metallic voice that repeated the same 
words. It must tell me . . . 

"Your name is David Corbin. If you 
understand, press button A on your right." 

I pressed the button by the cot. T^e red 
lights blinked out as I stood in patient 
attention, trying to outguess the voice. I 
recalled a phrase . . . some words about 
precaution. 

Precaution against forgetting. 

It was crazy, but I trusted the panel. It 
was the only thing I saw that could help 
me, guard me against another shock like 
seeing outside of the clear portholes. 

"It is assumed the experiment is a success," the voice said. 

What experiment? 

"You have been removed from suspension. Assume manual control of this ship." 

Control of a ship? Going where? 

"Do not begin operations until the others 
are removed from suspension." 

What others? Tell me what to do. 

"Rely on instructions for factoring when 
you check the coordinates. Your maximum 
deviation from schedule cannot exceed two 
degrees. Adopt emergency procedures as you 
see fit. Good luck," 

The voice snapped off and I laughed 
hysterically. None of it had made sense, and 
1 cursed whatever madness had put me here. 

"Tell me what to do," I shouted wildly. 
I hammered the hard metal until the pain 
in my hands made me stop. 

"I can't remember what to do," 

I held my bruised hands to my mouth, 
and I knew that was all the message there 
was. In blind panic I pushed away from the 
panel. Something tripped me and I fell back 



in a graceless arc. I pushed away from the 
floor, barely feeling the pain in my leg, and 
went into the hall. 

Pain burned along my leg but 1 couldn't 
stop. In the first panic of waking up ir. 
strangeness I had missed the other doorin the passage. The first swung back to reveal 
a deep closet holding five bulky suits. The 
second room was like my own. A daff 
haired, deep chested man Jay on the CO) 
His muscular body was secured by a wide 
belt. He was as still as death, motionlesi 
without warmth or breath as I hovered ova 
him. 

I couldn't remember his face. 

The next room held another man. He « .:■ 
young and wiry, like an athlete cast in 
marble, dark haired and big jawed. A glassy 
eye stared up when I rolled back his eyelid. 
The eyelid remained open until I closed it 
and went on. Another room . . . another 
man . . . another stranger. This man was tall 
and raw boned, light of skin and hair, ai 
dead as the others. 

A flat, illogical voice had instructed me 
to revive these men. I shivered in spite of 
the warmth of the room, studying the blsfj 
box that squatted on a shelf by his head. 
My hand shook when I touched the metal. 
I dared not try to operate anything. Revive 
the others . . . instructions without knowledge were useless to me. I stopped looking 
into the doors in the passageway and went 
back to the room with the portholes. Everything lay in readiness, fastened down star 
charts, instruments, glittering equipment. 
There was no feeling of disorder or use in 
the room. It waited for human hands to 
make it operate. 

Not mine. Not now. 

I went past the room into another, where 
the curves were more sharp. I could visualize 
the tapering hull leading to the nose of the 
ship. This room was filled with equipment 
that formed a room out of the bordered area 
I stood in. I sat in the deep chair facing the 
panel of dials and instruments, in easy reach. 
I ran my hands over the dials, the rows of 
smooth colored buttons, wondering. 

The ports on the side were shielded and 
I stared out at static energy, hung motionless 
in a world of searing light. There was no 
distortion, no movement outside and I 
glanced back at the dials. What speeds were 



CAPTAl.X CHAOS 



6? 



wording? What speeds and perhaps, 
distance? It was useless to translate 
markings. They stood for anything I 
guess, and something kept pricking 
mind, telling me I had no time to guess. 

ight of time again. I was supposed to 
according to . . . plan. Did that mean . . . 
time ... in time. I went back down the 
tugeway. 



fourth small room was the same. 
Except for the woman. She lay on a cot, 
ng and beautiful, even in the death-like 
Tobility I had come to accept. Her beauty 
graceful lines of face and her figure — 
oth tapering legs, soft curves that were 
cd out of flesh colored stone. Yet not 
ic I held her small hand, then put it 
on the cot. Her attire was brief like the 
of us, shorts and a man's shirt. Golden 
ir curled up around her lovely face. I 
idered if she would ever smile or move 
graceful head. 1 rolled back her eyelid 
looked at a deep blue eye that stared 
k in glassy surprise. Four people in all, 
ding on a blind helpless fool who 
[n't know their names or the reason for 
it dependence. I sat beside her on the cot 
til I could stand it no longer. 
Searching the ship made me forget my 
ir. I hoped I would find some answers. I 
mt from the nose to the last bulkhead in 
frenzy of floating motion, looking behind 
door until I went as far as I could, 
ere were two levels to the ship. They 
di ended in the lead shield that was set 
sere the swell of the curve was biggest, 
meant the engine or engines took up half 
I ship, cut off from the forward half by 
• instrument studded shield. I retraced 
■ steps and took a rough estimate of sue. 
e ship, as I called it, was at least four 
ndred feet long, fifty feet in diameter on 
! inside. 

The silence was a force in itself, pressing 
wa from the metal walls, driving me back 
the comforting smallness of the room 
ere I had been reborn. I laughed bitterly, 
nking about the aptness of that. I had 
:rally been reborn in this room, equipped 
irh half ideas, and no point to start from, 
remise to seek. I sensed the place to 
from was bade In the room. I searched 
carefully. 



Minutes later I realized the apparatus by 
the cot was different. It was the same type 
of black box, but out from it was a metal 
arm, bent in a funny angle. At the tip of 
the arm, a needle gleamed dully and I 
rubbed the deep gash on my leg. I bent the 
arm back until the angle looked right. It 
was then I realized the needle came to a 
spot where it could have hit my neck when 
I lay down. My shout of excitement rang 
out in the room, as I pictured the action of 
the extended arm. I lost my sudden* elation 
in the cabin where the girl lay. The box 
behind her head was completely closed, and 
it didn't yield to the pressure I applied. It 
had a cover, but no other opening where 
an arm could extend. I ran my fingers over 
the unbroken surface, prying over the thin 
crack at the base helplessly. If some sort of 
antidote was to be administered manually I 
was lost. I had no knowledge of what to inject or where to look for it. The chamber of 
the needle that had awakened me was empty, 
That meant a measured amount. 

In the laboratory on the lower level I 
went over the rows of cans and tubes fastened to the shelves. There were earths and 
minerals, seeds and chemicals, testing equipment in compact drawers, but nothing 
marked for me. I wondered if I was an 
engineer or a pilot, or perhaps a doctor sent 
along to safeguard the others. Complete 
amnesia would have been terrible enough 
but this half knowledge, part awareness and 
association with the ship was a frightening 
force that seemed ready to break out of me. 

I went back to the cabin where the powerful man lay. I bad to risk failure with one 
of them. I didn't want it to be the girl, I 
fought down the thought that he might be 
the key man, remembering the voice that 
had given the message. It was up to me, and 
soon. The metal in the box would have withstood a bullet. It couldn't be pried apart, 
and I searched again and again for a release 
mechanism. 

I found it. 

I swung the massive cover off and set it 
down. The equipment waited for the touch 
of a button and it went into operation. I 
stepped back as the rubes glowed to life and 
the arm swung down with the gleaming 
needle. The needle went into the corded 
neck of the man. The fluid chamber drained 



PLANET STORIES 



68 

under pressure and the arm moved back. 

I stood by the man for long minutes. 
Finally it came. He stirred restlessly, closing 
his hands into fists. The deep chest rose and 
fell unevenly as he breathed. Finally the 
eyes opened and he looked at me. I watched 
him adjust to the room. It was in his eyes, 
wide at first, moving about the confines of 
the room back to me. 

"It looks like we made it," he said. 

"Yes." 

He unfastened the belt and sat up. I 
pushed him back as he floated up rinding 
little humor in the comic expression on his 
face. 

"No gravity," he grunted and sat back. 

"You get used to it fast," I answered. I 
thought of what to say as he watched me. 
"How do you feel?" 

He shrugged at the question. "Fine, I 
guess. Funny, I can't remember." 

He saw it in my face, making him stop. 
"I can't remember dropping off to sleep," 
he finished. 

I held his bard arm. "What else? How 
much do you remember?" 

"I'm all right," he answered. "There 
aren't supposed to be any effects from this." 

"Who is in charge of this ship?" I asked. 

He tensed suddenly. "You are, sir. Why?" 

I moved away from the cot. "Listen, I 
can't remember. I don't know your name or 
anything about tin's ship." 

"What do you mean? What can't you 
remember?" he asked. He stood up slowly, 
edging around towards the door. I didn't 
want to fight him. I wanted him to understand. "Look, I'm in trouble. Nothing fits, 
except my name." 

"You don't know me?" 

"No." 

"Arc you serious?" 

"Yes, yes. I don't know why but it's happened." 

He let his breath out in a whistle. "For 
God's sake. Any bump on- your head?" 

"I feel all right physically. I just can't 
place enough." 

"The others. What about the others?" he 
blurted. 

"I don't know, You're the first besides 
myself. I don't know how I stumbled on the 
way to revive you." 

He shook his head, watching me like I 



was a freak. "Let's check the rest right 

away." 

"Yes. I've got to know if they are like 
me. I'm afraid to think they might be." 

"Maybe it's temporary. We can figure 
something out," 

II 

THE second man, the dark haired one, 
opened his eyes and recognized us. He 
asked questions in rapid fire excitement. The 
third man, the tail Viking, was all right 
until he moved. The weightless sensation 
made him violently sick. We put him back 
on the cot, securing him again with the 
belt, but the sight of us floating made him 
shake. He was retching without results when 
we drifted out. I followed him to the girl's 
quarters. 

"What about her. Why is she here?" 1 
asked my companion. 

He lifted the cover from the apparatus. 
"She's the chemist in the crew," 

"A girl?" 

"Dr. Thiescn is an expert, trained for 
this," he said. 

I looked at her. She looked anything but 
like a chemist. 

"There must be men who could have been 
sent. I've been wondering why a girl." 

"I don't know why, Captain. You tried to 
stop her before. Age and experience were 
all that mattered to the brass," 

"It's a bad thing to do." 

"I suppose. The mission stated one 
chemist." 

"What is the mission of this ship?" I 
asked. 

He held up his hand. "We'd better wait, 
sir. Everything was supposed to be all right 
on this end, First you, then Carl, sick to ins 
stomach." 

"Okay. I'll hold the questions until we 
see about her." 

We were out of luck with the girl. She 
woke up and she was frightened. We questioned her and she was coherent but she 
couldn't remember, t tried to smile as I sat 
on the cot, wondering what she was thinking. 

"How do you feel?" I asked. 

Her face was a mask of wide-eyed fear 
as she shook her head. 

"Can you remember?" 



CAPTAIS CHAOS 



m 



"I don't know." Blue eyes stared at mc 
in fear. Her voice was low. 

"Do you know my name?" 

The question frightened her. "Should I? 
I feel so strange. Give me a minute to 
think." 

I let her sit up slowly. "Do you know 
your name?" 

She tightened up in my arms. "Yes. 
It's . . ." She looked at us for help, frightened by the lack of clothing we wore, by 
the bleak room. Her eyes circled the room. 
"I'm afraid," she cried. I held her and she 
shook uncontrollably. 

"What's happened to me?" she asked. 

The dark haired man came into the room, 
silent and watchful. My companion motioned 
to him. "Get Carl and meet us in Control." 

The man looked at me and I nodded. 
"We'll be there in a moment. I'm afraid 
we've got trouble." 

He nodded and pushed away from us. 
The girl screamed and covered her fact with 
her hands. I turned to the other man. 
"What's your name?" 
"Croft. John Croft." 

"John, what are your duties if any?" 

"Automatic control. I helped to install 
it" 

"Can you run this ship? How about the 
other two?" 

He hit his hands together. "You fly it, 
sir. Can't you think?" 

"I'm trying. I know the ship is familiar, 
but I've looked it over. Maybe I'm trying 
too hard." 

"You flew her from earth until we went 
into suspension," he said. 

"I can't remember when," I said. I held 
the trembling girl against me, shaking my 
head. 

He glanced at the girl. "If the calculations 
ire right it was more than a hundred years 
*ga" 

We assembled in the control room for a 
council. We were al! a little better for being 
together. John Croft named the others for 
me. I searched each face without recognition. 
The blond man was Carl Herrick, a metallurgist. Hii lean face was white from his 
ipcU but he was better. Paul Sample was a 
biologist, John said. He was lithe and restless, with dark eyes that studied the rest of 
as. I Looked at the girl. She was staring out 



of the ports, her hands pressed agair.tt the 
transparent break in the smooth wall. Karen 
Thicsen was a chemist, now frightened and 
trying to remember. 

I wasn't in much better condition. "Look, 
if it comes too fast for me, for any of us, 
we'll stop. John, you can lead off." 

"You ask the questions," he said. 

I indicated the ship. "Where in creation 
are we going?" 

"We set out from Earth for a single star 
in die direction of the center of our Galaxy." 

"From Earth? How could we?" 

"Let's move slowly, sir," he said. "We're 
moving fast. I don't know if you can picture 
it, but we're going about one hundred thousand miles an hour." 

"Through space?" 

"Yes." 

"What direction?" 

Paul cut in. "It's a G type star, like our 
own sun jn mass and luminosity. We hope 
to find a planetary system capable of supporting life." 

"I can't grasp it. How can we go very 
far in a lifetime?" 

"It can be done in two lifetimes," John 
said quietly. 

"You said I had flown this ship. You 
meant before this suspension." 

"Yes. That's why we can cross space to a 
near star." 

"How long ago was it?" 

"It was set at about a hundred years, sir. 
Doesn't that fit at all?" 

"I can't believe it's possible." 

Carl caught my eye, "Captain, we save 
this time without aging at all. It puts uj 
near a calculated destination." 

"We've lost our lifetime." It was Karen. 
She had been crying silently while we talked. 

"Don't think about it," Paul said. "We 
can still pull this out all right if you don't 
lose your nerve." 

"What are we to do?" she asked. 

John answered for me. "First we've got 
to find but where we are. I know this ship 
but I can't fly it." 

"Can I?" I asked. 

WE SET up a temporary plan of action. 
Paul took Karen to the laboratory in 
in effort to help her remember her job. 
Carl went back to divide the rations. 



7(1 



PLANET STORIES 



I was to study the charts and manuals. It 
was better than doing nothing, and I went 
into the navigation room and sat down, 
Earth was an infinitesimal point somewhere 
behind us on the galactic plane, and no one 
else was trained to navigate. The ship thundered to life as I sat there. The blast roared 
once . . . twice, then settled into a muted 
aescendo of sound that hummed through 
the walls. 1 went into the control room and 
watched John at the panel. 

"I wish I knew what you were doing," 
I said savagely. 

"Give it time." 

"We can't spare any, can we?" I asked. 
"I wish we knew. What about her — Dr. 
Thiesen?" 

"She's in the lab, I don't think that will 
do much good, She's got to be shocked out 
of a mental state like that." 

"I guess you're right," he said slowly. 
"She's trained to administer the suspension 
on the return trip." 

I let my breath out slowly. "I didn't think 
about that." 

"We couldn't even get part way back in 
a lifetime," he said. 

"How old are you, John?" 

"Twenty -eight." 

"What about me?" 

"Thirty." He stared at the panel in 
thought for a minutes. "What about shock 
treatment? It sounds risky." 

"I know. It's the only thing I could think 
of. Why didn't everyone react the same?" 

"That had me wondering for a while. I 
don't know. Anyway how could you go 
about making her remember?" 

"Throw a crisis, some situation at her, I 
guess." 

He shrugged, letting his sure hands rest 
on the panel of dials. I headed back towards 
the iab. If I could help her I might help 
myself. I was past the rooms when the horn 
blasted through the corridor. I turned automatically with the sound, pushing against 
the rail, towards the control room. Deep 
in my mind I could see danger, and without 
questioning why I knew I had to be at Control when the sound knifed through the 
stillness. John was shouting as I thrust my 
way into the room. 

"Turn the ship. There's something dead 
ahead." 



I had a glimpse of his contorted face as 
I dove at the control board. My hands hit 
buttons, thumbed a switch and then a sudden force threw me to the right. I slammed 
into the panel on the right, as the pressure 
of the change dimmed my vision. Reflex 
made me look up at the radar control screen. 

It wasn't operating. 

John let go of the padded chair, grinning 
weakly. I was busy for a few seconds, feeding compensation into the gyros. Relief 
flooded through me like warm liquid. I hung 
on the intercom for support, drawing air 
into .my heaving lungs. 

"What — made you — think of that," 1 
asked weakly. 

"Shock treatment." 

"I must have acted on instinct." 

"You did. Even for a sick man that was 
pretty fast," he laughed. 

"I can think again, John. I know who 
I am," I shouted. I threw my arms around 
his massive shoulders. "You did it." 

"You gave me the idea, Mister, talking 
about Dr. Thiesen." 

"It worked. I'm okay," I said in giddy 
relief. 

"I don't have to tell you I was scared as 
hell. I wish you could have seen your face, 
[he look in your eyes when I woke up." 

"I wouldn't want to wake up like that 
again." 

"You're all right now:* ' he asked. I 
grinned and nodded an answer. I saw John 
as he was at the base, big and competent, 
sweating in the blazing sun. 

I thought about the rest of the crew too. 
"We're heading right for a star . . ." 

"It's been dead ahead for hours," he 
grunted. I leaned over and threw the intercom to open. "This is control. 'Listen . . . 
everyone. I'm over it. Disregard the warning 
siren ... . we were testing the ship." 

The lab light blinked on as Paul cut in. 
"What was it . . . hey, you said you're all 
right." 

"John did it. He hit the alarm figuring 
I would react. Listen, Paul. Is any one hurt?" 

"No. Carl is here too. His stomach 
flopped again but he's okay. What about 
food. We're supposed to be checked before 
we eat." 

"We'll have to go ahead without it. Any 

change?" 



CAPTAIN CHAOS 



71 



"No. I put her to bed. Shall I bring 

I glanced at John. He rubbed his stomach. 
"Yes," I answered. "Bring it when you can. 
I've got to find out where we are." 

We had to get off course before we ran 
into the yellow-white star that had been 
picked for us. Food was set down by me, 
grew cold and was carried away and I was 
still rechecking the figures. We were on a 
line ten degrees above the galactic plane. 
The parallactic baseline from Earth to the 
single star could be in error several degrees, 
or we could be right on the calculated position of the star. The radar confirmed my 
findings . . • and my worst fears. When we 
set it for direction and distance, the screen 
glowed to life and recorded the star dead 
ahead. 

In all the distant star clusters, only 
this G type star was thought to have a 
planetary system like our own. We were out 
on a gamble to find a planet capable of 
supporting life. The idea had intrigued scientists before I had first looked up at the 
night sky. When I was sure the electronically recorded coarse was accurate for time, I 
checked direction and speed from the readings and plotted our position. If I was right 
we were much closer than we wanted to be. 
The bright pips on the screen gave us the 
distance and size of the star while we fed 
the figures Into the calculator for our rate of 
approach. 

Spectroscopic tests were run on the sun 
and checked against the figures that had been 
calculated on Earth. We analyzed temperature, magnetic fields, radial motion, density 
and luminosity, checking against the standards the scientists had constructed. It was 
a G type star like our own. It had more 
density and temperature and suitable planets 
or not, we had to change course in a hurry. 
Carl analyzed the findings while we came 
to a decision. Somewhere along an orbit that 
might be two hundred miles across, our 
hypothetical planet circled this star. That 
distance was selected when the planets in 
Earth's solar system had proved to be barren. 
If the observations on this star were correct, 
we could expect to find a planet in a state 
of fertility ... if it existed . . : if it were 
suitable for colonization ... if we could 
find it. 



"CIO FAR, so good." said Carl as he laid 

O the papers down. 

"What's your guess about planets?" 

Carl shrugged. "I wouldn't care to even 
guess that." 

"Here's something," Paul shouted and we 
looked up at the screen. 

Another mass was recorded. "It's too 
close," he commented. "But it's something 
at least." 

"We'll have to head for a probable orbit 
and follow it," I said. 

"The whole thing looks improbable up 
close," John said. 

"I agree," Paul said. 

"Consider this. We're thirty days past its 
probable orbit. That's quite some figuring, 
roughly a small fraction of one percent. 
Unbelievably small error considering the distance we've come. I'm willing to stake my 
life that there will be such a planet." 

"One [ning," said John, "if this planet 
should exist we can find it in less than a 
year by following its probable orbit." 

"That's half our answer," Carl said, "We 
can still look farther out with the radar." 

John shook his head ponderously. "I 
remember when they first tested this drive. 
To the moon and back in sixty hours, with 
the ship so hot you could fry eggs on the 
wall. Now with the bugs taken out we can 
hit two million miles in an Earth day." 

"Remember Ellington talking about the 
speed of fight within the realm of fuels 
and metals?" 

"Yeah. We could meet some of our children's children coming out to meet us." 

"Except that married men didn't make 
this trip," I reminded them. 

When we turned and set up an arbitrary 
course we were within forty million miles 
of the brilliant sun. Opaque shields went 
over the portholes to keep out the blinding 
glare, and we settled down to the routine 
of resting and watching the instruments. I 
set up two man watches, partly to keep us 
from getting in each other's way in the 
crowded quarters. The ship, with its bulk 
cut in half by the engines had never been 
designed for comfort. There was enough 
room for flight operations, but little privacy. 
Besides the five small cabins on the upper 
level there was a series of equipment lockers 
and the larger navigation and control room. 



73 



PLANET STORIES 



Belo», the gallery and the laboratory 
were set forward of the air lock. Another 
mull room where waste could be jettisoned 
out, broke up the pattern of equipment that 
was braced sideways for landing. Adequate 
space, if not ample, but Karen presented a 
problem. Scientist or not, she was a woman 
who hadn't realized that privacy would be 
'urd to achieve aboard the ship. 

We changed our comfortable attire for 
uniforms from the clothing locker, and tried 
to ignore Karen's brief costume. At the 
start of my third watch I met Paul coming 
out of Karen's room. 

"Paul, you and John better get some rest. 
I'll call you in six hours if nothing comes 
up." 

"Okay sir. I was just looking in on her." 

I met his glance, knowing how he had 
felt about her back at the base. 

"I wasn't checking on you. We all feel 
badly about Dr. Thiesen. Has she made any 
progress?" I asked. 

"No," he said flatly. "Whatever it is, we'll 
have to wait and hope she gets better. I've 
tried talking to her." His face was set in 
hard lines as he spoke. "She doesn't know 
me. Talks a little about the field at El Paso. 
Not much sense to it." 

"Why did she have to come?" 1 asked. 
It had bothered me since I first placed my 
background. I hadn't known her very well 
at the base. There had been conferences we 
attended together, but her clinical attitude 
and the shapeless white uniform she wore 
gave her a neutral quality. I had never seen 
what she was like physically until now. I 
sat with her and Paul at a night club one 
night, staring across a table at a tanned 
goddess in a low cut gown that shimmered in 
the candid ight. She had spoiled the moment 
when she laughed and teased me about taking time out for a drink. Later there had 
been a few dances, brief conversations about 
people and events. Nothing on a personal 
basis. I had been in love with her for months 
but preparations for the trip kept me too 
busy to do anything about it. Now she was 
here. 

"You asked me that several times," Paul 
said. "She's a trained technician. Isn't that 
enough?" 

"You knew her better than anyone at the 
base, didn't you?" 



"Better than most guys. There were always plenty of guys who asked her out. I 
knew she could only see one guy. That's 
all we ever talked about." 

"I'm sorry I mentioned it." 

"Forget it. He didn't give her a tumble. 1 

"Real brainy guy, I'll bet." 

Paul changed the subject. "Anything of 
interest yet. We didn't pick up a thing." 

"Carl is checking again. If we don't hit it 
we'll have to go farther out," I said. 

"It may be out there, but the chances get 
down to infinitesimal percents," he said 
wearily. 

"You said it was possible." 

"Anything is possible. Find a mass that 
has cooled sufficiently to provide the right 
temperature for the accomplishment of 
chemical processes, maybe you'll find a 
system capable of supporting life." 

"We may not find it, but I had to see 
what was this close." 

Paul smiled briefly. "Whither thou gocst 
... I can't get sympathetic about an overcrowded condition on Earth. Hell, birth 
control could have helped the balance of 
nature, but this — this is worth looking 
for.*,' 

Ill 

I DRIFTED in to talk with Karen. 5'ie 
turned her head to look at me. 
"How do you feel?" I asked briskly. 
She had control of her emotions, after 
the first shock had worn off. 

"I feel better . . . thank you," Lines of 
concentration were in her lovely face. 
"Would you like some water?" 
"Paul brought me some." 
"Do you know Paul?" 
She shook her head, "No. I know your 
names. What did you think about when you 
woke up?" 

"Not much of anything. I could remember a little. That's what made it so hard to 
take." 

"I remember a part of it, I think," she 
said hopefully. 

"You just rest. You'll be fine in no time." 

She looked at me until I turned away in 
confusion. "Did we know each other 
before?" 

"Yes." 



CAPTAIN CHAOS 



n 



"What does that mean when you say it 

"I didn't know you very well. You were 
busy most of the time, or just not around, 
It means I would have liked to know you 
better if it had been possible." 

"What do I look like?" she asked. 

I could see her sitting across a small table, 
looking at me over graceful hands that held 
a wine glass. 

"Don't you know?" 

She shook her golden curls. "J never 
thought about it until now." 

I found a thick, stainless metal tray in the 
galley and brought it to her. She looked at 
her reflection. She held it to her breast with 
hinds folded over it and closed her troubled 
eyes. 

WE RECORDED the presence of an unknown mass ten days later. It was on 
the orbit we had intercepted. The electronic 
radar screen gave us the first indication, 
transmitting its speed and size into figures 
that were fed into the calculator. We set the 
ship on automatic control, tracking the body 
by instrument. For the next two weeks we 
were in a constantly shortening trajectory. 

Our course was navigated by the slower 
moving stars beyond the planet as the 
sleek ship earned us closer, day by day. 
The discovery of the planet had snapped 
Karen out of the lethargic condition she 
had come to know as her existence. 

Carl worked with her in the lab while we 
installed the deceleration cots in the navigation room. The padded chair in the control 
room was positioned so I could check our 
rate of fall in the radar when we came in 
tail first. The last two days sleep was forgotten as we spent our time in front of the 
screen, watching the image grow larger and 
larger, processing the constant readings into 
the automatic equipment that gave us specifications on our new world. 

It was slightly larger than Earth, with a 
mass six times heavier than water. On the 
last day we began to perceive the variations in the surface. It was mostly covered 
with water, with a large land mass cutting diagonally from the tipped polar cap 
to the high south latitudes. Other lands 
masses were revealed as the planet revolved in thirty earth hours. 



"Look at this," Carl said. 

He thrust a rough map towards us. 
"Here's the distribution of land and water. 
It's probably in a stage like the Cenozoic 
era. These mountains are rugged, not worn 
down by wind or weather. Here, this looks 
like glacial activity down into the temperate zone." 

We studied the penciled map he had 
drawn. There was no resemblance to Earth, 
but when the spectrograph analysis showed 
vegetation we began to think of it as 
home. 

How shall I describe what we felt when 
the ship thudded on solid ground? My 
ears were still pounding with the echo of 
the roaring jets, as I lay on my back in the 
chair and watched the radar pip off point 
zero. Gravity was a new sensation, pulling me back and making my head ache 
as blood rushed to it. The engines had 
cut out, yet I still felt the vibration going 
through it. It was daylight on the planet 
and golden brightness poured into the 
ship. 

There was an air of dulled emotion in 
the others as if they could absorb only so 
much newness and no more. I felt it too 
as I climbed down to them. We crowded 
around the porthole talking excitedly. 
"What do you make of it," John asked, 
I stood by Karen, looking out in silence. 
We were three hundred and fifty feet in the 
air. Below I could see the fin t>f the tail. 
Out from that a carpet of vegetation sloped 
up to a jungle-like forest of leafy trees. 
Everything was blue in color as far as I 
could see. 

"I'd like to walk around down there," 
Carl said. 

"Anything moving?" Paul asked. 

"Not that I can see. A few clouds, sort 
of low over those peaks." 

I had the eerie sensation that it looked 
familiar. All but the color. 

"It looks like an unexplored jungle," 
Karen said. 

"I wonder what's out there," Paul said. 
Far away to the left of the ship, a series 
of raw mountains thrust up like hackles 
into the thick clouds. "We may as well 
run some tests now. Maybe wc can go 
outside while it's still light," Carl suggested. 



71 



PLANET STORIES 



"Or maybe we won't go out at all," 
1 remarked. The valley where the ship had 
landed looked too peaceful. 

WE climbed down the wall ladder to the 
laboratory. Captive air filled a pressure tank while I watched them set up the 
testing equipment. We had picked a region near water in the temperate belt of 
the planet, and the temperature recorded 
seventy degrees with the sun overhead as 
Carl started to analyze the gas structure of 
the atmosphere. 

"What arc you doing?'' Karen asked. 
She had found a skirt to wear. Her blonde 
hair was lung, tied back with a ribbon. I 
would have felt more at case if she hadn't 
groomed herself while we went ahead to 
the lab. 

"Testing the air, Doctor," Carl grunted. 

She thrust her hands into the pockets 
of the skirt, standing with her feet wide 
spread,* man fashion. 

"Arc we going outside?" she asked. 

"We're not going to a picnic," I blurted 
sharply, thinking about the equipment we 
would have to lower from tlie ship. I 
was sorry I had spoken forgetting for an 
instant the rough time she was having. 
She stepped back at the loudness of my 
voice, crimson spreading to her cheeks. She 
bit her lip, blurting, "I'm sorry." 

"Don't be. We're all getting jumpy I 
guess," I said. 

Paul stepped to her and put his aim 
around her shoulders in assurance. "We 
will know in a few minutes." 

"I just wanted to walk in the sunshine," she said. "It was always so hot 
at El Paso. The heat used to make the 
mountains shimmer." 

Paul straightened up. "Do you remember the base?" 

She nodded, "Yes. I used to work in a 
white building. Wc had a radio in Jab 
but it never played when they tested the 
engines." 

"Do you remember the little bar?" 

"I think so . . . where I danced and a 
funny man made faces when he played 
the piano," she mused. Paul shook his head 
it us. We had stopped watching the colors 
change in the tubes. I could picture the 
squat concrete buildings that sat on a 



checkerboard of dusty roads. 

"Karen, try to think. Do you recall when 
we went to the ship. It rained for the first 
time in months that night. We drove in 
the rain." 

"I was afraid of the ship," she said. 

I remembered the lights of the truck, 
dim in the glare of the flood lights that 
criss-crossed through the driving rain. I 
hadn't known who the new replacement 
would be as they climbed out of the car 
and ran to the shelter. I thought she had 
come to say good-bye to Paul, using her 
father's influence to break regulations. 
Someone had thrust a watch in my face 
and I went out to the ship without talking 
to her. 

Seventeen minutes before blast off I 
had gone to the small cabin where I 
would spend the next century. Karen was 
there checking the master control. 

"You aren't going along," I had shouted 
in fear. The area was being cleared and 1 
knew she was the replacement. 

"You cannot change the orders, Captain Corbin." 

She had been right. We were sealed 
in and the official voice on the radio cut 
me short, repeating the order only once. 
We would leave on schedule. 

"Why?" I had shouted. "You're young 
and beautiful. You're risking your life in 
this." 

"I have my reasons, as I'm sure you do." 

"You cannot come because of Paul." 

"It isn't because of Paul," she answered 
cooly, I was still trying to get the officials 
to change it when the ten minute warning sounded. Then it was too late. I was 
still wondering why when we switched to 
automatic drive, far out io space." Then it 
was time to press the button that operated 
the suspension. The others were all ready 
in a dreamless sleep as I watched my arm 
fall back. The room grew dim. The last 
thing I remembered was counting the dials 
on the panel, saying her name over and 
over. 

"I was afraid of the ships," Karen said 
to Paul. "I don't know why I came." 

John nudged my arm. "We can go out, 
Dave. It's all right." 

This was better to think about. It was 
easier to follow routine, giving orders about 



CAPTAIN CHAOS 



equipment and planning. 

"we go out in twos. John, you and I 
first. We'll stay by the ship and move fast 
if we spot anything. Paul, you and Carl 
exit in ten minutes on signal.'' 

"What about Karen," Paul asked. 

1 Dr. Thiesen stays in the ship," I an•wered. "John, break out the ammunition. 
We'll lower the scout car if everything 
looks all right." 

"I'm going too," Karen cried. She 
loubled her small hands into fists. 

"You stay here. That's an order. I'm 
responsible for the safety of this ship. We 
-lon't know what's out there." 

"Responsible to whom?" she said angrily. 

"Every man on this ship." 

"You just ordered them to go out." 

"!Look, they have work to do." 

"I won't stay here alone." 

"I can lock you in a storeroom if I 
have to." 

Karen turned away blindly and started to 
:ry. The room was suddenly filled with tension. 

"Karen, stop that crying," I said. 

"I'm not," she said, but she couldn't 
stop the flood of hysteria that shook her. 
I turned her around and slapped her face. 

"I'm sorry I had to do that," I said 
humbly. Her wide eyes didn't believe me. 

"Aren't you taking your job rather big," 
Paul said tensely. 

"I didn't enjoy doing that, Paul. I think 
you know that." 

"Karen is part of this crew. Why single 
her out for rough treatment?" 

John rubbed his hands together and 
moved to my side. "Dave knows what he's 
doing," he said gruffly. 

"Forget it, John. Don't make me pull 
rank, Paul. You may be out of military 
jurisdiction but I'm still in charge of this 
mission. If I thought you were responsible 
for bringing her . . 

"Don't threaten me, Captain," he said. 
They were all specialists in their respective fields, enjoying a loose immunity from 
the routine of the base. Here they were 
even more independent and my job was 
to get them here, nothing more. 

"Don't argue because of me," Karen said 
abruptly. "Go out and claim your blue 
world in the name of science," 



"Thank you," I said. "We'll be back for 
you." 

JOHN'S bulk was a comforting presence. 
We stood on the rim of the scorched 
circle of thick vegetation watching the unbroken monotony of the bluish growth. 
Nothing moved except the bushes as the 
wind skipped across the flowery tops of 
the plants. 

"I've never seen anything like this," 
John said. 

"I don't think there is anything like 
this," I breathed. It was hard to believe 
the color and delicate structure of the 
landscape was not a setting, painted with 
bright blues and greens, daubed with light 
and darks of all colors where dusters of 
flowering plants shone in the suntight. 
"It's good, very good," he said. 
"Yes. I think fairy tales were written for 
a view like this. It's a pity we won't get 
back to tell about it." 

John frowned and rested the rifle on 
the ground. "She was better in the ship. 
You heard her talk about the base." 

"But she doesn't remember what we 
need. I'm afraid it's useless," I said 
glumly. 

He scuffed up scorched earth with his 
foot. "Then why are we going ahead with 
all these plans?" 

"To keep from thinking about the other, 
I guess. I know what you've all been thinking. So have I, I even thought we might 
stay here and hope someone else would 
try in our lifetime. That's out. There axe 
four men and one girl." 

"Then what will you do?" 

"I don't know yet, John. I haven't 
thought about it because it isn't good." 

"There's nothing moving yet, sir," John 
said. "You remembered when you had to. 
We can wait until she thinks of how to 
operate the suspension." 

"The longer we wait the more chance 
of another kind of trouble." 

"Karen?" 

"Yes. Or you or me, Paul or Carl. Anyone of us can start trouble." 

"Sure. It's tough having her around all 
right," he said. "I always thought she was 
a cool number, all study and no play., It's 
different when you can't help see that kind 



PLANET STORIES 



of beauty." 

I moved around the area restlessly, not 
watching the landscape as much as I had. 
"You in love with her, John?" 

"I suppose I am. Not in the way you 
are/' he said. He was studying the black 
ground intently, not looking up at me. 

"How do you know?" 

"I knew back at the base. You showed 
it in your eyes every time she was around," 

"Everybody looked when she came into 
a room," I said. 

"That isn't Hie same either." He stood 
up, grinning at me. "This climate is bad 
for us. It's got us talking like school 
child rea." 

I signaled the- others and we went back 
in to get equipment. The power-crane 
swung the tank-like scout car down, and 
we spent busy minutes loading it with the 
testing facilities we would take with us. 
I didn't share Paul's enthusiasm as he 
fidgeted to get started, The sun was clown 
near the top of the mountain range when 
we roared up the valley for our first look 
past the forest. 

We rode for several miles up a winding 
valley, heading for higher ground. We kept 
looking back at the silver ship until it 
slipped out of our view. Carl sang an old 
Viking ballad as the tracks of the car 
dwindled out behind us. The blue was 
changing into deep purple hues in the 
shadow of the mountains, an incredible, 
breathtaking shade of color that made me 
feel like singing too. We stopped on a high 
rise of ground and got out. Paul and Carl 
worked in a circle, setting the portable 
equipment down, taking simples of the 
plants and soil. John and I sat on the 
top of the ajmored car, watching the alien 
landscape for movement. 

IV 

THE high powered rifle in my hands felt 
out of place in the peaceful looking 
land, but we kept watching back to back, 
while the two men worked and talked 
quietly. John spotted our visitors first. We 
turned at his shout, looking in the direction of his outthrust arm. Five or six small 
creatures bounded through the vegetation 
that grew to our knees. They came towards 



us in bouncing leaps, and we were so quiet 
in frozen motion, we could hear the swishing as they approached. John still held his 
rifle in his lap. When he raised it, I 

whispered. 

"Don't kill anything." We were intruders here. I thought about unseen Gods 
watching this scene unfold. The creatures 
were about a hundred feet away when they 
saw us. They stopped, as if by command, 
vanishing into the thick grass. Nothing 
moved for a minute. Carl still held a 
spade in his hand, bent over in the act 
of digging. Paul was kneeling, holding a 
thick plant in gloved hands. Then we saw 
the creatures again, bounding closer. They 
were bigger than rabbits, fat and furry in 
appearance with large round eyes. As they 
came over the tops of the grass, 1 followed 
the first in the sights of the rifle until it 
was close enough to distinguish the brown 
fur and short legs. The others, there were 
six in all, hopped cautiously behind the 
leader and stopped in a comical straight 
line. 

Carl straightened his back and they were 
gone. I stood up on the hood and watched 
them reappear. 

"Here they are," I said quietly, pointing in front of the car. The creatures were 
twenty feet away, watching us with eyes 
that never blinked. 

"Hey," shouted Paul to relieve the tension. They stood their ground. 

"What's the idea of you six fat clowns 
scaring us?" 

"I forgot to breathe," Carl said, sucking 
air into his lungs. 

"They got us outnumbered but they look 
harmless," John chuckled. 

"They're surely not afraid. I expected they 
might blast us with a bolt of lightning 
or something," I laughed. 

Not so much as a twitch of a nose greeted 
us. The creatures were four-footed, with 
large hindlegs. They evidently belonged 
with the flora, where we didn't. 

"Are they young ones?" I asked Paul 
He shrugged. "Show me an old one and 
I'll tell you better. We'll need at least one 
specimen for our report." 

"Not now," 1 said. "We've made a 
good impression, at least." John and I 
kept watch on out visitors as the techni


CAPTAIN CHAOS 



cians kept at their work. The six creatures regarded us for a few minutes, then 
as if their curiosity was satisfied they 
bounded away, emitting piping cries. 

"I wish we would have taken one," Paul 
commented dryly. My hands were wet where 
I held the rifle. 

"I'm glad we didn't just yet," I said 
to the group. 

We raced the deepening shadows back 
to the ship. Paul and Carl put their guesses 
as to the nature of the animals in scientific 
language. I couldn't help thinking of them 
as bundles of fur that had seemed friendly. 
My sense of fitness made me wonder if 
mankind should disturb this blue world. 
I could see the relentless feelers of an 
Earth civilization clearing the land for 
cities, exterminating whatever didn't fit, 
like the caricatures of rabbits that paid us 
a call. 

It was late for such thoughts. Our valley 
had started to change when we came into 
it. I couldn't explain why but it made me 
sadder than I had felt in a long time. We 
got back to the ship as the sunlight faded. 
The tip of the gleaming projectile caught 
the last rays of daylight as we climbed out 
of the scout car. We unloaded the supplies 
and put them in the crane. I was shivering 
in the sudden cool wind as John started 
up the ladder. Blackness settled down like 
a cloak until we could only see each other 
and the ship. Ths ship blazed with light and 
we waited for John to operate the crane. 
He shouted from the hatchway high above 
us, "Karen is gone." 

She wasn't in the ship. We searched 
both sections thoroughly without success. 
We left everything where it was, taking 
flashlights and rifles, spreading out from 
the ship to look for her in the darkness, 
On both sides I could see the lights of 
the others, growing smaller and apart. Our 
shouts echoed across a widening circle, as 
I walked and swung the light of the 
torch. Minutes later I could no longer hear 
the others. I was hemmed in by the darkness, eerie and silent. My flashlight beam 
picked up the thick trucks of the tangled 
forest, and I had to turn and walk along 
the edge, farther and farther from safety. 

It must have been five or six minutes 
later that I heard the sound, I was call


ing her name less and less in fear of at* 
trading some wild beast, but I had to 
chance it in case she was cut off from the 

ii g ht. 

'David. David. Over here." 

I heard something move in the direction 
of the sound. My muscles tightened as the 
rustling stopped, 

"David, please." 

Karen, I thought, but I was afraid to 
move. It sounded like her voice, but there 
was something else in the night. I swore 
in fear, conjuring up some nightmare that 
might be enticing me into the woods, reading my mind and calling in a soft voice. 

"David, help me." 

"Karen," I shouted, straining to hear the 
voice again. Something moved in the carpet 
of thick growth. I swung the light ( in a 
full circle, but the blackness seemed to 
absorb it. 

"Where are you?" I shouted. 

I heard the noise and started to bring 
the light to bear, with the automatic held 
in my other band. I was halfway around 
when the light picked out something big 
and black that sprang with a snarl. A 
tearing pain slammed into my chest, hurling 
me back as the light spun away. Something 
fell on me. I reached out and caught thick 
fur, jamming the gun into it, firing until 
all eight shots were out. I was barely 
conscious from the pain, pushing away 
from the weight across me. I rolled free 
and started to fall through black space, 
head over heels through the ripping hiss 
of the roar in my head. 

Something stopped my headlong plunge 
and I felt my head being lifted. I could 
hear Karen talking from a million miles 
distant, then shots exploded in my ear. 

"David," she screamed. I couldn't 
breath or lift my left arm as I struggled 
to get up. 

"Karen, where were you?"* 

"Here, right here. I kept hearing you 
shout but I was afraid to answer." She 
shined the flashlight on me, "Dear God, 
you're hurt," she cried. 

"What ... was it," I asked. I rolled 
to my knees as she shined the light on 
the creature. 1 stared at it and shuddered 
through the pain in my chest. It was as big 
as a bear with thick bindlcgs and a mas


PLANET STORIES 



sive blunt face that stuck out of hunched 
shoulders. Black blood oozed from the 
gaping holes in its chest, staining the fur 
and dripping on the crumpled grass. 

"What kind of a beast is that?" I said 
in wonder. It had moved with the speed 
of a machine when it struck me. 

"I heard it following me in the dark. 
I ran into the trees and kept still." 

"It went for the light when it hit me. 
Maybe it has no sense of smell." 

"It didn't come any closer when I stopped. I was afraid to shout at you. Oh David, 
look at your arm." 

I felt the blood on my arm, shaking my 
head. "Not that. Something's wrong with 
my chest. I think it busted some ribs when 
it jumped me." 

I tried to case the fire in my body, but 
I couldn't move very far before knives 
jabbed into my flesh, 

"We've got to get out of here," she 
whimpered. 

"Are you hurt?" 

"No. David, I'm so ashamed. I should 
Ii.h l- stayed in the ship." 

"Just so you're not hurt, Karen. There's a 
flip in my pocket. Fire the rest of your 

"It's empty. 

"Then fire just four of these." I was 
too busy worrying about us to ask her why 
she had left the ship. She fired the shots 
in rapid order. 

She tried to help me up, but the needles 
stuck me again. "No use. Let me down 
easy," I grunted. I started to black out 
again, reaching out to grab her to keep 
from doing so." 

The stars <^uit flashing in my head and 
I came to with my head in her lap. Her 
firm legs cushioned me. She was holding 
my bloody arm. 

"Why are you crying?" I asked. 

"You're hurt," she answered. I had to 
hold her hand to keep from blacking 
out. "I'm just scared. Why did you leave 
the ship? It was nearly dark when we left." 

"I was trying to find you." 

"What happened?" 

She tore away my shirt sleeve carefully, 
wiping away the warm stickiness. Her 
voice was choked when she saoke. "I remember. I was trying to find the car to tell 



you. It got dark so fast I got lost coming 
back. Then I heard that . . * 

"Forget about that. Karen, you're memory is back?" 

"Yes. Everything makes sense now." 

"And you wanted to see Paul." I sard. 

"Not Paul, you." 

She was too far ahead of me, I was 
content to lie and hold lier hand tightly, 
feeling the warmth o; her, 

"Oh David. I found your picture. That's 
why I remembered." 

"I don't understand." 

"It isn't very clear, but when I got on 
the ship I put my personal things in a 
small suitcase. I saw it later but I didn't 
know it was mine. After you had gone I 
suddenly thought about putting it somewhere. I had shoved it in the clothing 
locker because I wouldn't need it." 

"Finding it made you remember." 

"Yes. Listen. *I hear them shouting. 
They're coming to find us. Your picture 
was in that suitcase. 1 had taken it from a 
bulletin board." 

"What are you trying to tell me?" I 
asked. I thought I was unable to trust die 
thoughts that came to mind. 

"Stop moving. I don't know why I'm 
telling you this," she said. I tried to get 
up, "Karen ..." I stopped when I heard 
the others. "Fire the clip," I shouted as I 
rolled away from her. It hurt me to move 
and I groaned. The gun roared in die 
quiet air and she dropped down beside 
me. 

"David." 

"S'all right," I maniged to grunt. 

"They're coming. Don't try to move." 

"Karen, Come here before they get here. 
You were telling me about the picture." 

"Yes. I love you. You're hard headed, 
so very busy, so very military, David." 

"I must have addled my brains. I thought 
I heard you say you loved me." 

"I love you." 

I tried to get up but she held me back. 
"Karen, I had to come here to rind you. 
I've loved you ever since — " 

"Don't talk," she urged gently. 

"I've got so much to tell you. I wanted 
to say it so many times." 

She silenced rrle* with a soft hind and 
shouted to the others. I could see the lights 



CAPTAIN CHAOS 



' obtuag closer as she brushed my lips. 
We have a life time to say it, David." 

"But so long to wait — " 

"Sleep is timeless. We will he together 
before we go back," she whispered. 

"Much will have changed before we get 
back," I said doubtfully. "People and ideas 
may be different — " 

"Does it matter?" 

"All -that counts is US." 

I HAVE finished the last entry in the log 
of the Pioneer, Everything that has 
happened is here, from waking to now. 
In the two weeks we stayed after I was 
hurt, the others roamed farther from the 
ship, mapping, testing, collecting the proof 
chat this world would do. It was a wild 
country, young and free, big with space 
and challenge. It would fight man's coming 
like the Earth had fought advance, hurling 
storms and force against civilization. Sitting at this table, I can still picture the 
sun on the dark mountains, the restless life 
that will change when another ship returns. There is no pain to remind me of 
its power, only a naif wistful sense of 
loss. The specimens and records are stored 
away for the trip. They will tell our children the gamble is won. Some day soon, 
in a relative time, new pioneers will thrust 



(heir strength and courage across the 
forests and fields of our new worlds. That 
is as it should be, foe born in man is an 
indomitable urge to teach out and touch 
the stars. On the last day, befote we 
blasted off for home, we drove out and 
left a message on an outcropping of stone. 
Burned into the face of a blue marble cliff 
is our prophesy. Acid ate the letters out of 
stone; faith put them in our minds to set 
down. 

HERE LIES AN UNEXPLORED WORLD. 
CLEAR ITS FIELDS AND MOVE ON. 
THERE IS NO POINT OF RETURN 
FOR DESTINY. 

We drank a toast in silence as Karen 
prepared us for the long journey. Afterwards we shook hands, md I watched the 
men go to sleep as I hid done once before. 

Karen and I delayed a few minutes to 
talk of nothing, watching the stars from 
the control room. Her kiss was brief, but 
hard and full of promise as her eyes 
fluttered closed. She whispered for me to 
sleep well. I went to the navigation room 
to finish the last entry. That is done no*-. 
The log is up to date. 1 leave it open to 
the page where the next new entry will 
be recorded with the others. 



tUe &ut in thrilling adventure and fast-action stories read 
Fiction House Magazines. 




Look for the tall's-eye on 
the covers . , . 

Two Complete 

SCIENCE-ADVENTURE BOOKS 
FRONTIER PLANET 
NORTHWEST FOOTBALL 
JUNGLE BASEBALL 
Two dmpuu DETECTIVE BOOKS 

TWO WESTERN BOOKS 
TWO WESTERN ACTION BOOKS 



/ 




r/ic lizards streamed mid hissed 
above them. "They're coming 
again," the girt managed to gasp. 



SHANNACH-THE LAST 



By LEIGH BRACKETT 

Even in this grip of alien horror a man could not throw away his 
lifetime goal . . . not stand idly by as endless rows of alabaster 
shapes, seated in their chairs of stone, thought-ruled this gargoyle 
planet from the dead blackness of deep Mercurian caverns. 



IT was dark in the caves under Mercury, 
ft was hot, and there was no sound 
in them but the slow plodding of 
Trevor's heavy boots. 

Trevor had been wandering for a long 
time, lost in this labyrinth where no human 
being had ever gone before. And Trevor 
was an angry man. Through no fault or 
6 — PLANET STORIES — November 



will of his own he was about to die, and 
he was not ready to die. Moreover, it 
seemed a wicked thing to come to his 
final moment here in the stifling dark, 
buried under alien mountains high as 
Everest. 

He wished now that he had stayed in 
the valley. Hunger and thirst would have 
SI 



PLANET STORIES 



done for him just the same, but at least 
he would hive died in the open like a 
man, and nor like a rat trapped in a drain. 

Vet there was not really much to choose 
between them as a decent place to die. A 
barren little hell-hole the valley had been, 
even before the <juake, with cothing to 
draw a man there except the hope of finding sun-stones, one or two of which could 
transform a prospector into a plutocrat. 

Trevor had found no sun-stones. The 
quake had brought down a whole mountain waJi on his ship, leaving him with a 
pocket torch, a handful of food tablets, a 
canteen of water, and the scant clothing he 
stood in. 

He had looked at the naked rocks, and 
the little river frothing green with chemical poisons, and he had pone away into 
the tunnels, the ancient blowholes of a 
cooling planet, gambling that he might 
find a way out of the valleys. 

Mercury's Twilight Belt is cut into 
thousands of cliff -locked pockets, as a 
honeycomb is cut into cells. There is no 
way over the mountains, for the atmosphere 
is shallow, and the jagged peaks stand up 
into airless space. Trevor knew that only 
one more such pocket lay between him and 
the open plains. If he could get to and 
through that last pocket, he had thought , , , 

But he knew now that he was not going 
to make it. 

He was stripped to the skin already, in 
the terrible heat. When the weight of his 
miner's boots became too much to drag, 
he shed them, padding on over the tough 
rock with bare feet. He had nothing left 
now but the torch. When the light went, 
his last hope went with it. 

After a while it went. 

The utter blackness of the grave shut 
down, Trevor stood still, listening to the 
pulse of his own blood in the silence, looking at that which no man needs a light to 
see. Then he flung the torch away and 
stumbled on, driven to fight still by the 
terror which was greater than his weakness. 

Twice he struck against the twisting 
walls, and fell, and struggled up again. The 
third time he remained on hands and 
knees, and crawled. 

He crept on, a tiny creature entombed in 
the bowels of a planet. The bore grew 



smaller and smaller, tightening around him. 
From time to time he lost consciousness, 
and it became increasingly painful to 
struggle back to an awareness of the heat 
and the silence and the pressing rock. 

After one of these periods of oblivion 
he begin to hear a dull, steady thunder. 
He could no longer crawl. The bore had 
shrunk to a mere crack, barely large enough 
for him to pass through wormlike on his 
belly. He sensed now a deep, shuddering 
vibration in the rock. It grew stronger, terrifying in that enclosed space. Steam slipped 
wraithlike into the smothering air. 

The roar and the vibration grew to an 
unendurable pitch. Trevor was near to 
strangling in the steam. He was afraid to 
go on, but there was no other way to go. 
Quite suddenly his hands went out into 
nothingness. 

The rock at the lip of the bore must have 
been rotten with erosion. It gave under his 
weight and pitched him headfirst into 1 
thundering rush of water that was blistering hot and going somewhere in a great 
hurry through the dark. 

After that Trevor was not sure of anything. There was the scalding heat and the 
struggle to keep his head up and the teirible speed of the sub-Mercurian river 
racing on to its destiny. He struck rock 
several times, and once he held his breath 
for a whole eternity until the roof of the 
tunnel rose up again. 

He was only dimly aware of a long 
sliding fall downward through a sudden 
brightness. It was much cooler. He splashed 
feebly, because his brain had not told his 
body to stop, and the water did not fight 
him. 

His feet and hands struck solid bottom. He floundered on, and presently the 
water was gone. He made one attempt to 
rise. After that he lay still. 

The great mountains leaned away from 
the Sun. Night came, and with it violent 
storm and rain. Trevor did not know it. 
He slept, and when he woke the savage 
dawn was making tiie high cliffs flame 
with white light. 

Something wis screaming above his 
head. 

Aching and leaden still with exhaustion, he roused up and looked about him. 



SB A NNA CB — TB E LAST 



TTE sat on a beach of pale grey sand. At 
■tl his feet were the shallows of a greygreen lake that filled a stony basin some 
half-mile in breadth. To his left the underground river poured out of the cliff face, 
spreading into a wide, riming fan of foam. 
Off to his right, the water spilled over 
the rim of the basin to become a river 
again somewhere below, and beyond the 
rim, veiled in mist and the shadow of ,1 
mountain wall, was a valley. 

Behind him, crowding to the edge of 
the sand, were trees and ferns and flowers, 
alien in shape and color but triumphantly 
alive. -And from what he could see of it, 
the broad valley was green and riotous 
with growth. The water was pure, the air 
had a good smell, and it came to Trevor 
that he had made it. He was going to live 
a while longer, after all. 

Forgetting his weariness, he sprang up, 
and the thing that had hissed and screamed 
above him swooped down and passed the 
clawed tip of a leathery wing so close to 
his face that it nearly gashed him. He 
stumbled backward, crying out, and the 
creature rose in a soaring spiral and swooped 
again. 

Trevor saw a sort of flying lizard, jet 
black except for a saffron belly. He raised 
his arms to ward it off, but it did not attack him, and as it swept by he saw something that woke in him amazement, greed, 
and a peculiarly unpleasant chill of fear. 

Around its neck the lizard-thing wore a 
golden collar. And set into the scaly flesh 
of its head — into the bone itself, it seemed 
— was a sun-stone. 

There was no mistaking that small vicious flash of radiance, Trevor had dreamed 
of sun-stones too long to be misled. He 
watched the creature rise again into the 
steamy sky and shivered, wondering who, 
or what, had set that priceless thing into 
the skull of a flying lizard — and why. 

It was the why that bothered him the 
most. Sun-stones are not mere adornments 
for wealthy ladies. They are rare, radioactive crystals, having a half-life one third 
greater than radium, and are used exclusively in the construction of delicate electronic devices dealing with frequencies 
aibove the first octave. 

Most of that relatively unexplored super


spectrum was still a mystery. And the 
strangely jewelled and collared creature 
circling above him filled Trevor with a 
vast unease. 

It was not hunting. It did not wish to 
kill him. But it made no move to go away. 

From far down the valley, muted by 
distance to a solemn bell note that rolled 
between the cliffs, Trevor heard the booming of a great song. 

A sudden desire for concealment sent 
him in among the trees. He worked his 
way along the shore of the lake. Looking 
up through the branches he saw the blackwings lift and turn, following him. 

The lizard was watching him with its 
bright, sharp eyes. It noted the path of his 
movements through the ferns and fiowers, 
as a hawk watches a rabbit. 

He reached the lip of the basin where 
the water poured over in a cataract several 
hundred feet high. Climbing around the 
shoulder of a rocky bastion, Trevor bad 
his first clear look at the valley. 

Much of it was still vague with mist. But 
it was broad and deep, with a sweep of level 
plain and clumps of forest, locked tight 
between the barrier mountains. And as he 
made out other details, Trevor's astonishment grew out of all measure. 

The land was under cultivation. There 
were clusters of thatched huts among the 
fields, and in the distance was a 'rock -built 
city, immense and unmistakable in the burning haze of dawn. 

Trevor crouched there, staring, and the 
winged lizard swung in lazy circles, watching, waiting, while be tried to think. 

A fertile valley such as this was rare 
enough in itself. But to find fields and a 
city was beyond belief. He had seen the 
aboriginal tribes that haunt some of the 
cliff-locked worlds of the Twilight Beltsub-human peoples who live precariously 
among the bitter rocks and boiling springs, 
hunting the great lizards for food. None of 
this was ever built by them. 

Unless, in this environment, they 
advanced beyond the Age of Stone . . . 

The gong sounded again its deep challenging note. Trevor saw the tiny figures of 
mounted men, no larger than ants at that 
distance, come down from the city and ride 
out across the plain. 



PLANET STORIES 



Relief sind joy supplanted speculation in 
Trevor's mind. He was battered and starving, lost on an alien world, and anything 
remotely approaching the human and the 
civilized was better luck than he could have 
dreamed or prayed for. 

Besides, there were sun-stones in this 
place. He looked hungrily at the head of the 
circling watcher, aad then began to scramble 
down the broken outer face of the bastion. 

The bhek wings slipped silently after him 
down the sky. 

ABOUT a hundred feet above the valley 
floor he came to an overhang. There 
was no way past it but to jump. He clung 
to a bush ana let himself down as far as he 
could, and then dropped some four or five 
yards to a slope of springy turf. The fall 
knocked the wind out of him, and as he 
lay gasping a chill doubt crept into his mind. 

He ceuld see the land quite clearly now, 
the pattern of the fields, the far-off city. 
Except for the group of riders, nothing 
stirred. The fields, the plain were empty of 
life, the little villages still as death. And he 
iiw, swinging lazily above a belr of trees 
by the river, a second black-wicged shadow, 
watching. 

The trees were not far away. The riders 
were coming toward them and him. It 
seemed to Trevor now that the men were 
perhaps a party of hunters, but there was 
something alarming about the utter disappearance of all other life. It was as though 
the gong had been a warning for all to take 
cover while the hunt was abroad. 

The shirp-cyed lizards were the hounds 
that went before to find and flush the game. 
Glancing up at the ominous sentinel above 
his own head, Trevor had a great desire to 
see what the quarry was tint hid in the belt 
of trees. 

There was no way back to the partial 
security of the lake basin. The overhang cut 
him off from that. The futility of trying to 
hide was apparent, but nevertheless he 
wormed in among some crimson ferns. The 
city was at his left. To the right, the fertile 
plain washed out Into a badland of lava 
and shattered rock, which narrowed and 
vanished around a shoulder of purple basalt. 
This defile was still in deep shadow. 

The riders were still far away. He saw 



them splash across a ford, toy figures making 
little bursts of spriy. 

The watcher above the trees darted suddenly downward. The quarry was breaking 
cover. 

Trevor's suspicions crystallized into an 
ugly certainty. Horror-struck, he watched the 
bronzed, half -naked figure of a girl emerge 
from the brilliant undergrowth and run like 
an antelope toward the badland. 

The flying lizard rose, swooped, and 
struck. 

The girl flung herself aside. She carried 
a length of sapling bound with great thorns, 
and she lashed out with it at the black brute, 
grazed it, and ran on. 

The lizard circled and came at her again 
from behind. 

She turned. There was a moment of 
vicious confusion, in which the leathery 
wings enveloped her in a kind of dreadful 
cloak, and then she was running again, but 
less swiftly, and Trevor could see the redness of blood on her body. 

And again die flying demon came. 

The thing was trying to heid her, turn 
her back toward the huntsmen. But she 
would not be turned. She beat with her 
club at the lizard, and ran, and fell, and 
ran again. And Trevor knew that she was 
beaten. The brute would have the life out 
of her before she readied the rocks. 

Every dictate of prudence told Trevor to 
stay out of this. Whatever was going on was 
obviously the custom of the country, and 
none of his business. All he wanted was to 
get hold of one of these sun-stones and 
then find a way out of this valley. That was 
going to be trouble enough without taking 
on any more. 

But prudence was swept away in the fury 
that rose in him as he saw the hawk swoop 
down again, with its daws outspread and 
hungry for the girl's tormented flesh. He 
sprang up, shouting to her to fight, to hang 
on, and went running full speed down the 
slope toward her. 

She turned upon him a face of such wild, 
fierce beauty as he had never seen, the eyes 
dark and startled and full of a terrible 
determination. Then she screamed at him, 
in his own tongue, "Look out!" 

He had forgotten his own nemesis. Black 
wings, claws, the lash of a scaly tail strikiog 



SB A NNA CB — TBE LAST 



like a whip, and Trevor went down, rolling 
over and staining the turf red as he rolled. 

From far off he heard the voices of the 
huntsmen, shrill and strident, lifted in a 
wild halloo. 

II 

TTIOR some reason the assault steadied 
JT Trevor. He got to his feet and took the 
dub out of the girl's hands, regretting the 
gun that was buried under a ton of rock on 
the other side of the mountains. 

"Keep behind me," he said. "Watch my 
back." 

She stared at him strangely, but there was 
no time for questions. They began to run 
together toward the badland. It seemed a 
long way off. The lizards screamed and 
hissed above them. Trevor hefted the club. 
It was about the size and weight of a baseball bat. He had once been very good at 
baseball. 

"They're coming," said the girl. 

"Lie down fiat," he told her, and went 
on, more slowly. She dropped behind him 
in the grass, her fingers closing over a fragment of stone. The wide wings whistled 
down. 

Trevor braced himself. He could see the 
evil eyes, yellow and bright as the golden 
collars, and the brilliant flash of the sunstones against the jetty scales of the head. 
They were attacking together, but at different angles, so that he could not face them 
both. 

He chose the one that was going to reach 
him tint, and waited. He let it get close, 
very dose, diving swiftly with its scarlet 
tongue forking out of its hissing mouth and 
its sharp claws spread. Then he swung the 
dub with all his might. 

It connected. He felt something break. 
The creature screamed, and then the force 
of its dive carried it on into him and he 
lost his footing in a weiter of thrashing 
wings and floundering body. He fell, and 
the second lizard was on him. 

The girl rose. In three long strides she 
reached him and flung herself upon the bade 
of the scaly thing that ravaged him. He saw 
her trying to pin it to the ground, hammering methodically at its head with the stone. 

He kicked off the wounded one. He had 



S3 

broken its neck, but it was in no hurry to 
die. He caught up the dub and presently 
the second brute was dead. Trevor found it 
quite easy to pick up the sun-stone. 

He held it in his hand, a strange, tawny, 
jewel-like thing, with a scrap of bone still 
clinging to it. It glinted with inner fires, 
deep and subtle, and an answering spark of 
wild excitement was kindled in Trevor from 
the very touch and feel of it, so that he 
forgot where he was or what he was doing, 
forgot everything but the eerie crystal that 
gleamed against his palm. 

It was more than a jewel, more even than 
wealth, that he held there. It was hope and 
success and a new life. 

He had thrown years away prospecting 
the bitter Mercurian wastes. This trip had 
been his last gamble, and it had ended with 
bis ship gone, his quest finished, and nothing to look forward to even if he did get 
back safely, but to become one of the 
penniless, aging planet-drifters he'd always 
pitied. 

Now all that was changed. This single 
stone would let him go back to Earth a 
winner and not a failure. It would pay off 
all the dreary, lonesome, hazardous years. 
It would . . . 

It would do so many things if he could 
get out of this God-forsaken valley with it! 

'>' 

The girl had got her breath again. Now 
she said urgently, "Come! They're getting 

Trevor's senses, bemused by the sunstone, registered only vaguely the external 
stimuli of sight and sound. The riders had 
come closer. The beasts they rode were 
taller and slighter than horses. They were 
not hoofed, but dawed. Tbey had narrow, 
vicious-looking heads with spiny crests that 
stood up erect and arrogant. They came fast, 
carrying their riders lightly. 

The men were still too far away to distinguish features, but even at that distance 
Trevor sensed something peculiar about their 
faces, something unnatural. They wore 
splendid harness, and their half-dad bodies 
were bronzed, but not nearly so deeply as 
the girl's. 

The girl shook him furiously, stirring him 
out of his dream, "Do you want to be taken 
alive? Before, the beasts would have torn ua 



PLANET STORIES 



apart, and that is quickly over. But we 
killed the hawks, don't you understand? 
Now they will take us alive!" 

He did not understand in the least, but 
her obvious preference for a very nasty death 
instead of capture made him find reserves 
of strength he thought he hid lost in the 
underground river, There was also the matter of the sun-stone. If they caught him with 
it they would want it back. 

Gutcbing the precious thing he turned 
with the girl and ran. 

THE lava bed was beginning to catch the 
sun now. The splintered rock showed 
through, bleak and ugly. The badland and 
the defile beyond seemed like an entrance 
into hell, but it did offer shelter of a sort 
if they could make it. 

The drumming f padded feet behind 
was loud in his ears. He glanced over his 
shoulder, once. He could see the faces of 
the huntsmen now. They were not good 
faces, in either feature or expression, and 
he saw the thing about thern that he had 
noticed before, the unnatural thing. 

In the center of each forehead, above die 
eyes, a sun-stone was set into flesh and bone. 
First the hawk-lizards, and now these . . . 
Trevor's heart contracted with an icy 
pang. These men were human, as human as 
himself, and yet they were not. They were 
alien and wicked and altogether terrifying, 
and he began to understand why the girl 
did not wish to come alive into their hands. 

Fleet, implacable, the crested mounts with 
their strange riders were sweeping in upon 
the two who fled. The leader took from 
about his saddle a curved throwing stick 
and held it, poised, The sun-stone set in his 
brow flashed like a third, and evil eye. 

T:ie lava and the fangs of rock shimmered 
in the light. Trevor yearned toward them. 
The brown girl running before him seemed 
to shimmer also. It hurt very much to 
brea:he. He thought he could not go any 
farther. But he did, and when the girl 
faltered he put his arm around her and 
steadied her on. 

He continued to keep an eye out behind 
him. He saw the curved stick come hurtling 
toward him and he managed to let it go by. 
The others were ready now as they came 
within range. It seemed to Trevor that they 



were watching him with a peculiar intensity, 
as though they had recognized him as a 
stranger and had almost forgotten the girl 
in their desire to take him. 

His bare feet trod on lava already growing 
hot under the sun. A spur of basalt reared 
up and made a shield against the throwing 
sticks. In a minute or two Trevor and the 
girl were hidden in a terrain of such broken 
roughness as the man had seldom seen. It 
was as though some demoniac giant had 
whipped the molten lava with a puddingspoon, aacking mountains with his free 
hand and tossing in the pieces. He understood now why the girl had waited for daylight to make her break. To attempt this 
passage in the dark would be suicidal. 

He listened nervously for sounds of pursuit. He could not hear any, but he remained 
uneasy, and when the girl flung herself 
down to rest, he asked, 

"Shouldn't we go farther? They might 
still come." 

She did not answer him at once, beyond 
a shake of the head. He realized that she was 
looking at him almost as intently as the 
riders liad. It was the first chance she had 
had to examine him, and she was making 
the most of it. She noted the cut of his hair, 
the stubble of beard, the color and texture 
of his skin, the rags of his shorts that were 
all he had to cover him. Very carefully she 
noted them, and then she said in an odd 
slow voice, as though she were thinking of 
something else, 

"Mounted, the Korins are afraid of nothing. But afoot, and in here, they are afraid 
of ambush. It has happened before. They 
can die, you know, just the same as we do." 

Her face, for ali its youth, wa's not the 
face of a girl. It was a woman who looked 
at Trevor, a woman who had already learned 
the happy, the passionate, and the bitter 
things, who had lived with pain and fear 
and knew better than to trust anyone but 
herself. 

"You aren't one of us," she said. 

"No. I came from beyond the mountains." 
He could not tell whether she believed him 
or not. "Who, or what, are the Korins?" 

"The lords of Korith," she answered, and 
began to tear strips from the length of white 
linen cloth she wore twisted about her waist. 
"There will be time to talk later. We still 



SB AN N AC U— THIS LAST 



67 



have far to go. Here, this will stop the 
bleeding." 

In silence they bound each other's wounds 
and started off again. If Trevor had not been 
k> unutterably weary, and the way 50 hard, 
he would have been angry with the girl. 
And yet there wis nothing really to be angry 
about except that he sensed she was somehow suspicious of him. 

Many times they had to stop and rest. 
Once he asked her, "Why were they — the 
Korins — hunting you?" 

"I was running away. Why were they 
hunting yon?" 

"Damned if I know. Accident, perhaps. 
I happened to be where their hawks were 
flying." 

The girl wore a chain of iron links around 
her neck, a solid chain with no clasp, too 
small to be pulled over the head. From it 
hung a round tag with a word stamped on 
it. Trevor took the tag in his hand. 

"Gait," he read. "Is tint your name?" 

"My name is Jen, Gait is the Korin I 
belong to. He led the hunt." She gave 
Trevor a look of fierce and challenging pride 
and said, as though she were revealing a 
secret earldom, "I am a slave." 

"How long have you been in the valley, 
Jen? You and I arc the same stock, speaking 
the same language. Earth stock. How dees 
it happen, * colony of this size that no one 
ever heard of?" 

"It's been nearly three hundred years 
since the Landing," she answered. "I have 
been told that for generations my people 
kept alive the hope tiiat a ship would come 
from Earth and release them from the 
Korins. It never came. And, except by ship, 
there is no way in or out of the valley." 

Trevor glanced at her sharply. "1 found 
a way in, all right, and I'm beginning to 
wish I hadn't. And if there's no way out, 
where are we going?" 

"I don't know myself," said Jen, and 
rose. ' Bat my man came this way, and others 
before him." 

She went on, and Trevor went with her. 
There was no place else to go. 

The heat was unbearable, and they crept 
in the shadows of the rocks wherever they 
amid. They suffered from thirst, but there 
was no water. The shoulder of purple basalt 
loomed impossibly tall before them, and 



seemed never to grow nearer. 

For most of the day they toiled across (he 
lava bed, and at last, when they had almost 
forgotten that they had ever dreamed of 
doing it, they rounded the shoulder and 
came staggering out of die bidland into 1 
narrow canyon that seemed like the scar of 
some cataclysmic wound in the mountain. 

Rock walls, raw and riven, rose out of 
sight on either side, the twisted strata showing streaks of crimson and white and sullen 
ochre. A little stream crawled in a stony bed, 
and not much grew besHs it. 

Jen and Trevor fell by the stream. And 
while they were still sprawled on the moist 
gravel, Japping like dogs at the bitter water, 
men came quietly from among the rocks 
and stood above tl'Ti, holding weapons 
made of stone. 

TREVOR got slowly ,|o his feet. There 
were six of these armed men. Like the 
girl, they wore loin cloths of white cotton, 
much frayed, and like her they were burned 
almost black by a lifetime of exposure to a 
brutal sun. They were all young, knotted 
and sinewy from hard labor, their faces 
grim beyond their years. All bore upon their 
bodies the scars of talons. And they looked 
at Trevor with a cold, strange look. 

They knew Jen, or most of them did. She 
called them gladly by name, and demanded, 
"Hugh. Where is Hugh?" 

One of them nodded toward the farther 
wall. "Up there in the caves. He's all right. 
Who is this man, Jen?" 
She turned to study Trevor. 
"1 don't know. They were hunting him, 
too. He came to help me. I couldn't have 
escaped without him. He killed the hawks. 
But . . ." She hesitated, choosing her words 
carefully. "He says he came from beyond 
the mountains. He knows of Earth and 
speaks out tongue. And when he killed Ilic 
hawks he smashed the skull of one and took 
the sun-stone." 

All six started at that. And the tallest of 
them, a young man with a face as bleak and 
craggy as the rocks around them, came toward Trevor. 

"Why aid you take the sun-stone?" b* 
asked. HU voice held an ugly edge. 

Trevor stared at him. "Why the devil do 
you suppose? Because it's valuable." 



PLANET STORIES 



1 1 . .■ man held out his band. "Give it to 

"The bell I will!" cried Trevor furiously. 
He backed away, just a little, getting set. 

The young man came on, and bis fate was 
dark end dangerous. 

"Saul, wait!" cried Jen. 

Saul didn't wait. He kept nghc on coming. 
Trevor let him get close before he swung, 
and lie put every ounce of his strength behind the blow. 

The smashing fist took Saul squarely in 
the belly and sent him backward, doubled 
up. Trevor stood with hunched shoulders, 
breathing hard, watching the others with 
feral eyes. 

"What are you?" he snarled. "A bunch 
of thieves? All right, come on! I got that 
stone the hard way and I'm going to keep 
it!" 

Big words. A big anger. And a big fear 
behind them. The men were around him 
in a ring now. There was no chance of 
breaking away. Even if he did he was so 
winded they could pull bim down in minutes. The stone weighed heavy in his pocket, 
heavy as half i lifetime of sweat and hunger 
and hard work, on the rockpiles of Mercury. 

Saul straightened up. His face was still 
gray, but he bent again and picked up a 
sharp-pointed implement of rock that he had 
dropped. Then he moved forward. And the 
others closed in, at the same time, quite 
silently. 

There was a bitter taste in Trevor's mouth 
as he waited for them. To get his hands on 
a sun-stooe at last, and then to lose it and 
probably his life too, to this crowd of 
savages! It was more than anybody ought 
to be asked to bear. 

"Saul, wait!" cried Jen again, pushing in 
front uf him, "He saved my life! You can't 
jurt . . i 

"He's a Korin. A spy." 

"He can't be! There's no stone In his 
forehead. Not even a scar." 

Saul's voice was flat and relentless. "He 
took a sun-stone. Only a Korin would touch 
one of the cursed things." 

"But he says he's from outside the valley! 
From Earth, Saul. From Earth! Things 
would be different there." 

Jen's insistence on that point had at least 
baited the men temporarily. And Trevor, 



looking at Saul's face, had suddenly begun 
to understand something. 

"You think the sun-stones are evil," he 

said. 

Saul gave him a sombre glance. "They are. 
And the one you have is going to be destroyed. Now." 

Trevor swallowed the bitter anguish that 
choked him, and did some fast thinking. If 
the sun-stones had a superstitious significance 
in this benighted pocket of Mercury — and 
he could imagine why they might, with those 
damned unnatural hawks flying around with 
the equally unnatural Korins — that put a 
different light on their attitude. 

He knew just by looking at their faces 
that it was "give them the sun-stone or die," 
Dying at the hands of a bunch of wild fanatics didn't make sense. Better let them 
have the stone and gamble on getting it back 
again later. Or on getting another one. They 
seemed plentiful enough in the valley! 

Sure, let's be sensible about it. Let's hand 
over a lifetime of hoping to a savage with 
horny palms, and not worry about it. Let's 
... Oh, hell. 

"Here," he said. "All right. Take it." 

It hurt. It hurt like giving up his own 
heart. 

Saul took it without thanks. He turned 
and laid it on a flat surface of rock, and 
began to pound the glinting crystal with the 
heavy stone he had meant to use on Trevor's 
head. There was a look on his lined, young, 
craggy face as though he was killing a living 
thing — a thing that he feared and hated. 

Trevor shivered. He knew that sun-stones 
were impervious to anything but atomic 
bombardment. But it made him a little sick, 
none the less, to see that priceless object 
being battered by a crude stone club. 

"It won't break," he said. "You might as 
well stop." 

SAUL flung down his weapon so close to 
Trevor's bare feet that he leaped back. 
Then he picked up the sun-stone and bulled 
it as far as he could across the ravine. 
Trevor heard it clicking faintly as it fell, In 
among the rocks and rubble it the foot of 
the opposite cliff. He strained to mark the 
spot. 

"You idiot!" he said to Saui. "You've 
thrown away a fortune. The fortune I've 



SUA lV.V.4 CI1 — THE LAST 



spent my life trying to find. What's the 
matter with you? Don't you have any idea at 
all what those things are worth?" 

Saul ignored him, speaking bleakly to the 
others. "No man with a sun-stone is to be 
trusted. I say kill him." 

Jen said stubbornly, "No, Saul. I owe 
bita my life." 

"But he could be a slave, a traitor, working 
for the Korins." 

"Look .it his clothes," said Jen. "Look at 
his skin. This morning it was white, now 
it's red. Did you ever see a slave that color? 
Or a Korin, either. Besides, did you ever 
see him in the valley before? There aren't 
as many of us as that." 

"We can't take any chances," Saul said. 
"Not us." 

"You can always kill him later. But if 
he is from beyond the mountains, perhaps 
even from Earth — " She said the word hesitantly, as though she did not quite believe 
there was such a place. "He might knowsome of the things we've been made to forget. He might help us. Anyway, the others 
have a right to their say before you kill him. " 

Saul shook his head. "I don't like it. 
But — " He hesitated, scowling thoughtfully. 
"All right. We'll settle it up in the cave. 
Let's move." He said to Trevor, "You go 
in the middle of us. And if you try to signal 
anyone ..." 

"Who the devil would I signal to?" retorted Trevor angrily. "Listen, I'm sorry I 
ever got into your bloody valley." 

But he was not sorry. Not quite. 

His senses were on the alert to mark 
every twist and turn of the way they went, 
the way that would bring him back to the 
sun-stone. The ravine narrowed and widened 
and twisted, but there was only one negotiable path, and that was beside the stream 
bed. This went on for some distance, and 
then the ravine split on a tremendous cliff 
of bare rock that tilted up and back as 
though arrested in the act of falling over. 
The stream flowed from the left-hand fork. 
Saul took the other one. 

They kept close watch on Trevor as he 
slipped and clambered and sprawled along 
with them. The detritus of the primeval 
cataclysm that had shaped this crack in the 
mountains lay where it had fallen, growing 
rougher and more dangerous with every 



eroding storm and cracking frost. 

Above him, on both sides, the mouriftin 
tops went up and still up, beyond the shallow 
atmosphere. Their half -seen summits leaned 
and quivered like things glimpsed from 
under water, lit like torches by the naked 
blaze of the sun. There were ledges, lower 
down. Trevor saw men crouched upon them, 
among heaps of piled stones. They sliouted. 
and Saul answered them. In this narrow 
throat no man could get through alive if 
they chose to stop him. 

After a while they left the floor of the 
ravine and climbed a path, partly natural 
and partly so roughly hewn that it seemed 
natural. It angled steeply up the cliff face, 
and at its end was a narrow hole. Saul led 
the way through it. In single file the others 
followed, and Trevor heard Jen's voice 
echoing in some great hollow space beyond, 
calling Hugh. 

There was a cave inside, a very large cave 
with dim nooks and crannies around its 
edges. Shafts of sunlight pierced it here and 
there from cracks in the cliff face high above, 
and far at the back of it, where the floor 
tipped sharply down, a flame burned. Trevor 
had seen flames like that before on Mercury, 
where volcanic gases blowing up through a 
fissure had ignited from some chance spark. 
It was impressive, a small bluish column 
twisting upward into rock-curtained distance 
and roaring evilly. He could feel the air rush 
past him as the burning pillar sucked it in. 

There were people in the cave. Less than 
a hundred, Trevor thought, not counting 
a handful of children and striplings, Less 
than a third of those were women. They all 
bore the same unmistakable stamp. Hard as 
life must be for them in the cave, it had 
been harder before. 

He felt his legs buckling under him with 
sheer weariness. He stood groggily w ith his 
back against the rough cave wall. 

A stocky young man with knotted shoulder-muscles and sun-bleached hair was holding Jen in his arms. That would be Hugh. 
He, and the others, were shouting excitedly, 
asking and answering questions. 

Then, one by one, they caught sight of 
Trevor. And gradually a silence grew and 
spread. 

"All right," said Saul harshly, looking at 
Trevor. "Let's get this settled." 



90 



PLANET STORIES 



"You settle it," said Trevor. "I'm tired." 
He glared at Saul and the unfriendly staring 
crowd, and they seemed to rock in his vision. 
"I'm an Earthman. I didn't want to come 
into your damned valley, and I've been here 
a night and a day and haven't slept. I'm 
going to sleep." 

Saul started to speak again but Jen's man, 
Hugh, came up and stood in front of him. 

"He saved Jens life," Hugh said. "Let 
him sleep." 

He led Trevor away to a place at the side 
where there were heaps of dried vines and 
mountain creepers, prickly and full of dust 
but softer thin the cave floor. Trevor managed a few vague words of thanks and was 
asleep before they were out of his mouth. 

Hours, weeks, or perhaps it was only minutes later, a rough persistent shaking brought 
him to again. Faces bent over him. He saw 
them through a haze, and the questions they 
asked penetrated to him slowly, and without 
much meaning. 

"Why did you want the sun-stone?" 

"Why wouldn't I want it? I could tike it 
back to Earth and sell it for a fortune." 

"What do they do with sun-stones on 
Earth?" 

"Build gadgets, super-electronic, to study 
things. Wave-lengths too short for anything 
else to pick up. Thought-waves, even. What 
do you care?" 

"Do they wear sun-stones in their foreheads, on Earth?" 

"No . . ." His voice trailed off, and the 
voices, or the dream of voices, left him. 

It was still daylight when he woke, this 
time normally. He sat up, feeling stiff and 
sore but otherwise rested. Jen came to him, 
smiling, and thrust a chunk of what he 
recognized as some species of rock-lizard 
into his hands. He gnawed at it wolfishly 
while she talked, having discovered that this 
was not the same day, but the next one, and 
quite late. 

"They have decided," she. said, "to let 
you live." 

"I imagine you had a lot to do with that. 
Thanks." 

She shrugged her bare shoulders, with the 
raw wounds on them where the hawk -lizards 
had clawed her. She had that exhausted, 
let-down look that comes after tremendous 
stress, and her eyes, even whale she spoke 



to Trevor, followed Hugh as he worked at 
some task around the eave. 

"I couldn't have done anything if they 
hadn't believed your story," she told him. 
"They questioned you when you were too 
far gone to lie." He had a very dim memory 
of that. "They didn't understand your answers but they knew they were true ones. 
Also they examined your clothes. No cloth 
like that is woven in the valley. And the 
things that hold them together — " he knew 
she meant the zippers " — are unknown to 
us. So you must have come from beyond the 
mountains. They want to know exactly how, 
and if you could get back the same way." 

"No," said Trevor, and explained. "Am 
I free to move around, then — go where I 
want to?" 

She studied him a moment before she 
spoke. "You're a stranger. You don't belong 
with us. You could betray us to the Korins 
just as easily as not." 

"Why would I do that? They hunted me, 
too." 

"For sun-stones, perhaps. You're a stranger. They would take you alive. Anyway, 
be careful. Be very careful what yon do." 

From outside came a cry. "Hawks! Take 
cover, hawks!" 

Ill 

INSTANTLY everyone in the cave fell 
silent. They watched the phces in the 
cave will where the sunlight came in, the 
little cracks in the cliff face. Trevor thought 
of the hawk-creatures, and how they would 
be wheeling and slipping along the ravine, 
searching. 

Outside, the rough rock looked all alike. 
He thought that in that immensity of erosions and crevices they would have a hard 
time finding the few tiny chinks that led 
into the cave. But he watched, too, tense 
with a feeling of danger. 

No sound at all came now from the 
ravine. In that utter stillness, the frightened 
whimper of a child came with the sudden 
loudness of a scream. It was instantly 
hushed. The shafts of sunlight crept slowly 
up the walls. Jen seemed not to breathe. 
Her eyes shone, like an animal's. 

A black shadow flickered across one of 
the sunlight bars — flickered, and then was 



SBANNACB—THE LAST 



91 



gone. Trevor's heart turned over. He waited 
for it to come back, to occlude that shaft of 
light, to slip in along it and become a widewinged demon with a sun-stone in its brow. 
For a whole eternity he waited, but it didn't 
come back, and then a man crept in through 
(he entry hole and said, "They're gone." 

Jen put her head down on her knees. She 
had begun to tremble all over, very quietly, 
but with spasmodic violence. Before Trevor 
could reach her, Hugh had her in his arms, 
talking to her, soothing her. She began to 
sob then, and Hugh glanced at Trevor across 
her shoulders. 

"She's had a little too much." 

"Yes." Trevor looked at the shafts of 
sunlight. "Do the hawks come very often?" 

"They send them every once in a while 
hoping to catch us off guard. If they could 
find the cave they could hunt us out of it, 
drive us back into the valley. So far they 
haven't found it," 

Jen was quiet now. Hugh stroked her 
with big awkward hands. "She told you, I 
guess. About yourself, I mean. You've got 
to be careful." 

"Yes," said Trevor. "She told me." He 
leaned forward. "Listen, I still don't knowhow you people got here or what it's all 
about. After we got away from the Korins, 
Jen said something about a landing, three 
hundred years ago. Three hundred Earth 
years?" 

"About that, Some of us have remembered 
enough to keep track." 

"The first Earth colonies were being 
started on Mercury about then, in two or 
three of the bigger valleys. Mining colonies. 
Was this one of them?" 

Hugh shook his head. "No. The story is 
that there was a big ship loaded with people 
from Earth. That's true, of course, because 
the ship is still here, what's left of it. And 
so are we. Some of the people on the ship 
were settlers and some were convicts." 

He pronounced the word with the same 
hatred and scorn that always accompanied 
the name "Korin." Trevor said eagerly, 

"They used to do that in the early days, 
Use convict labor in the mines. It made so 
much trouble they had to stop it. Were the 
Korins . . . ?" 

"They were the convicts. The big ship 
crashed in the valley but most of the people 



weren't killed. After the crash the convicts 
killed the men who were in charge of the 
ship, and made the settlers obey them. That's 
how it all started. And that's why we're 
proud we're slaves — because we're descended from tine settlers." 

Trevor could see the picture quite clearly 
now. the more so because it had happened 
before in one way or another. The emigrant 
ship bound for one of the colonies, driven 
off its course by the tremendous magnetic 
disturbances that still made Mercury a spaceman's nightmare. 

They couldn't even have called for help 
or given their position. The terrible nearness 
of the Sun made any form of radio communication impossible. And then the convicts had broken free and killed the officers, 
finding themselves unexpectedly in command of a sort of paradise, with the settlers 
to serve them. 

A fairly safe paradise, too. Mercury has 
an infinite number of these Twilight valleys, 
all looking more or less alike from space, 
half hidden under their shallow blankets of 
air, and only the few that are both accessible 
and unmistakable because of their size have 
permanent colonies. Straight up and down, 
by spaceship, is the only way in or out of 
most of them, and unless a ship should land 
directly on them by sheer chance, the erstwhile prisoners would be safe from discovery. 

"But the sun-stones?" asked Trevor, 
touching his forehead. "What about the 
sun-stones and the hawks? They didn't have 
the use of them when they landed." 

"No, they came later." Hugh looked 
around uneasily. "Look, Trevor, it's a thing 
we don't talk about much. You can see why, 
when you think what it's done to us. And 
it's a thing you shouldn't talk about at all." 

"But how did they get them in their 
heads? And why? Especially, why do they 
waste them on the hawks?" 

JEN glanced at him somberly from the 
circle of Hugh's arm. "We don't know, 
exactly. But the hawks are the eyes and ears 
of the Korins. And from the time they used 
the first sun-stone we've had no hope of 
getting free from them." 

The thing that had been buried in 
Trevor's subconscious since last night's dues


92 



PLANET STORIES 



tioning came wddenly to the surface. 

"Thought-waves, that's it! Sure!" He 
leaned forward excitedly, and Jen told him 
frantically to lower his voice. "I'll be 
damned. They've been experimenting with 
sun-stones for years on Earth— ever since 
they were discovered, but the scientists never 
thought of . . ." 

"Do they have the stones on Earthj too?" 
asked Jen, with loathing. 

"No, no, only the ones that are brought 
from Mercury. Something about Mercury 
being so close to the Sun, overdose of solar 
radiation and the extremes of heat, cold, 
and pressure while the planet was being 
made, that formed that particular kind of 
crystal here. 1 guess that's why they're called 
sun-stones." 

He shook his head. "So that's how they 
work it — direct mental communication between the Korins and the hawks, by means 
of the stones. Simple, too. Set them right in 
the skufl, almost in contact with the brain, 
and you don't need all the complicated 
machines and senders and receivers they've 
been monkeying with in the labs for so 
long." He shivered. "I'll admit I don't like 
the idea, though. There's something repulsive about it." 

Hugh said bitterly, "When they were only 
men, and convicts, we might have beaten 
them some day, even though they had all the 
weapons. But when they became the 
Korins — " He indicated the darkling alcoves 
of the cave. "This is the only freedom we 
can ever have now." 

Looking at Hugh and Jen, Trevor felt a 
great welling-up of pity, for them, and for 
all these far-removed children of Earth who 
■were now only hunted slaves to whom this 
burrow in the rock meant freedom. He 
thought with pure hatred of the Korins who 
hunted them, with the uncanny hawks that 
were their far-ranging eyes and ears and 
weapons. He wished he could hit them 
with . . . 

He caught himself up sharply. Letting his 
sympathies run away with him wasn't going 
to do anybody any good. The only thing 
that concerned him was to get hold of that 
sun-stone again and get out of this devil's 
pocket. He'd spent half a life hunting for a 
stone, and he wasn't going to let concern 
over perfect strangers sidetrack him now. 



The first step would be getting away from 

tlie cave. 

It would have to be at night. No watch 
was kept then on the ledges, for ti.e hawks 
did not fly in darkness, and the Korins never 
moved without the hawks. Most of the 
people were busy in those brief hours of 
safety. The women searched for edible moss 
and lichens. Some of the men brought water 
from the stream at the canyon fork, and 
others, with stone clubs and crude spears, 
hunted the great rock-lizards that slept in 
the crevices, made sluggish by the cold. 

Trevor waited until the fourth night, and 
then when Saul's water party left, he started 
casually out of the cave after them. 

"I think I'll go down with them," he told 
Jen and Hugh. "I haven't been down that 
far since I got here." 

There seemed to be no suspicion in them 
of bis purpose. Jen said, "Stay close to the 
others. It's easy to get lost in the rocks." 

He turned and went into the darkness 
after the water party. He followed them 
down to the fork, and it was quite easy then 
to slip aside among the tumbled rock and 
leave than, working his way slowly and 
silently downstream. 

After several days in the dimness of the 
cave, he found that the star-shine gave him 
light enough to move by. It was hard going, 
even so, and by the time he reached the approximate place where Saul had tried to kill 
him he was bruised and cut and considerably 
shaken. But he picked his spot carefully, 
crossed the stream, and began to search. 

The chill deepened. The rocks that bad 
been hot under his hands turned cold, and 
the frost-rime settled lightly on them, and 
Trevor shivered and swore and scrambled, 
righting the numbness out of his body, praying that none of the loose rubble would fall 
on him and crush him. He had prospected 
on Mercury for a long time. Otherwise he 
would not have lived. 

HE FOUND it more easily than he could 
have done by day, without a detector. 
He saw the cold pale light of it gleaming, 
down among the dark broken rock where 
Saul had thrown it 
He picked it up. 

He dandled the thing in his palm, 
touching it with loving finger tips. Jt 



SHANNACB—THE LAST 



is 



had a certain cold repellent beauty, glimmering in the darkness— a freakish by-product 
of Mercury's birth-pangs, unique in the Solar 
System. Its radioactivity was a type and 
potency harmless to living tissue, and its 
wonderful sensitivity had made it possible 
for physicists to explore at least a little into 
those unknown regions above the first octave. 

In a gesture motivated by pure curiosity 
he lifted the stone and pressed it tight 
against the flesh between his brows. Probably 
it wouldn't work this way. Probably it had 
to be set deep into the bone . . . 

It worked, oh God, it worked, and something had htm, something caught him by 
the naked brain and would not let b'm go. 

Trevor screamed. The thin small sound 
was lost in the empty dark, and he tried 
again, but no sound would come. Something 
had forbidden him to scream. Something was 
in there, opening out the leaves of his brain 
like the pages of a child's book, and it 
wasn't a hawk, or a Korin. It wasn't anything human or animal that he had ever 
known before. It was something still and 
lonely and remote, as alien as the mountain 
peaks that towered upward to the stars, and 
as strong, and as utterly without mercy. 

Trevor's body became convulsed. Every 
physical instinct was driving him to run, to 
escape, and he could not. In his throat now 
there was a queer wailing whimper. He 
tried to drop the sun-stone. He was forbidden. Rage began to come on the heels of 
horror, a blind protest against the indecent 
invasion of his most private mind. The 
whimpering rose to a sort of catlike squall, 
an eerie and quite insane sound in the 
narrow gorge, and he clawed with his free 
hand at the one that held the sun-stone, tight 
against lib brows. 

He tore it loose. 

A wrench that almost cracked his brain 
in two. A flicker of surprise, just before the 
contact broke, and then a fading flash of 
anger, and then nothing. 

Trevor fell down. He did not quite lose 
consciousness, but there was an ugly sickness 
in him and all his bones had turned to water. 
It seemed a long time before he could get 
to his feet again. Then he stood there 
shaking. 

There was something in this accursed valley. There was something or someone who 



could reach out through the sun •stones and 
take hold of a man's mind. It did that to the 
Korins and the hawks, and it had done it 
for a moment to him, and the horror of that 
alien grasp upon his brain was still screaming inside him. 

"But who — ?" he whispered hoarsely. 
And then he knew that the word was wrong. 
"What—?" 

For it was not human, it couldn't be 
human, whatever had held him there wasn't 
man or woman, brute or human. It was 
something else, but what it was he didn't 
want to know, he only wanted to get out — 
out — 

Trevor found that he had begun to run, 
bruising his shins against rocks. He got a 
grip on himself, forcing himself to stand 
still. His breath was coming in great gasps. 

He still had the sun-stone clenched in his 
sweating palm, and he had an almost irresistible desire to fling the thing away with all 
his strength. But even in the grip of alien 
horror a man could not throw away the goal 
of half a lifetime, and he held it, and luted 
it. 

He told himself that whatever it was that 
reached through the sun-stones could not 
use them unless they were against the forehead, close to the brain. The thing couldn't 
harm him if he kept it away from his head. 

A terrible thought renewed Trevor's 
horror. He thought of the Korins, the men 
who wore sun-stones set forever in their 
brows. Were they, always and always, in d\e 
icy, alien grip of that which had held him? 
And these were the masters of Jen's people? 

He forced that thought away. He had to 
forget everything except how to get free of 
this place. 

He started at once, still shaken. He 
couldn't go far before daylight, and he 
would have to lie up in the rocks through 
the day and try to make it to the valley wall 
the next night. 

He was glad when daylight came, th"e 
first fires of sunrise kindling the peaks that 
went above the sky. 

IT WAS at that moment that a shadow 
flickered, and Trevor looked up and saw 
the hawks. 

Many hawks. They had not seen him, 
fchey were not heeding the rocks in which 



PLANET STORIES 



he crouched. They were flying straight up 
the ravine, not circling or searching now but 
going with a sure purposefulness, back the 
way he had come. 

He watched them uneasily. There were 
more than he had ever seen together before. 
But they flew on up the ravine without 
turning, and were gone. 

"They weren't looking for me," he 
thought. "But . . ." 

Trevor should have felt relieved, but he 
didn't. His uneasiness grew and grew, stemming from an inescapable conclusion. 

The hawks were going to the cave. They 
were heading toward it in an exact line, turning neither to right nor left, and this time 
they were not in any doubt. They, or whoever or whatever dominated them, knew this 
time exactly where to find the fugitives. 

"But that's impossible," Trevor tried to 
tell himself. "There's no way they could 
suddenly learn exact!) 1 where the cave is 
after" ail this time." 

No way? 

A thing was forcing its way up into 
Trevor's anxious thoughts, a realization that 
he did not want to look at squarely, not at 
all. But it would not be put down, it would 
not stop tormenting him, and suddenly he 
cried out to it, a cry of pain and guilt, 

"No, it couldn't be! It couldn't be through 
me they learned!" 

It fronted him relentlessly, the memory 
of that awful moment in the canyon when 
whatever had gripped him through the sunitone had seemed to be turning over the 
leaves of his brain like the pages of a book. 

The vast and alien mind that had gripped 
his in that dreadful contaa had read his 
own brain clearly, he knew. And in Trevor's 
brain and memories it had found :he secret 
of the cave. 

Trevor groaned in an agony of guilt. 

He crawled out of his rock-heap . and 
began to run back up the ravine, following 
the path the hawks had taken. There might 
still be time to warn them. 

Stumbling, running, he passed the canyon 
fork. And now from above him in the 
canyon he heard the sounds he dreaded — 
the sounds of women screaming and men 
shouting hoarsely in fury and despair. 
Farther on, over the rocks, scrambling, slipping, gasping for breath, he came to the 



cave-mouth and the sight he had dreaded. 

The hawks had gone into the cave and 
driven out the slaves. They had thern in the 
canyon now, and they were trying to herd 
them together and drive them down toward 
the lava beds. But the slaves were fighting 
back. 

Dark wings beat and thundered in the 
narrow gorge between the walls of rock. 
Claws struck and lishing tails cut like whips. 
Men struggled and floundered and trampled 
each other. Some died. Some of the hawks 
died too. But the people were being forced 
farther down the canyon under the relentless 
swooping of the hawks. 

Then Trevor saw Jen. She was a little way 
from the others. Hugh was with her. He 
had shoved her into a protecting hollow 
and was standing over her with a piece of 
rock in his hands, trying to beat off a hawk. 
Hugh was hurt badly. He was not doing 
well. 

Trevor uttered a wild cry that voiced all 
the futile rage in him, and bounded over 
a slope toward them. 

"Hugh, look out!" he yelled. The hawk 
had risen, and then had checked and turned, 
to swoop down straight at Hugh's back. 

Hugh swung partly around, but not soon 
enough. The hawk's claws were in his body, 
deep. Hugh fell down. 

Jen was screaming when Trevor reached 
them. He didn't stop to snatch up a rock. 
He threw himself onto the hawk that had 
welded itself to Hugh's back, There was 2 
horrid slippery thrashing of wings under 
him, and the scaly neck of the thing was 
terribly strong between Trevor's hands. But 
not strong enough, He broke it. 

It was too late. When his sight cleared, 
Jen was staring in a strange wild way at the 
man and hawk lying tangled together in the 
dust. When Trevor touched her she fought 
him a little, not as though she saw him 
really, not as though she saw anything but 
Hugh's white ribs sticking out. 

"Jen, for God's sake, he's dead." Trevor 
tried to pull her away. "We've got to get 
away from here." 

There might be a chance. The black hawks 
were driving the humans down the canyon 
a little below them now, and if they could 
make the tumbled rocks below the cliff, 
there was a chance. 



SFJAS\ACR—THE LAST 



95 



'i IV 

TTE HAD to drag Jen. Her face had gone 
JCl utterly blank. 

In the next minute he realized that they 
would never reach the rocks, and that there 
was no chance, none at all. Back from the 
winged whirl that was driving the humans, 
two of the hawks came darting at them. 

Trevor swung Jen behind him and hoped 
fiercely that he could get another neck between his hands before they pulled him 
down. 

The dark shadows flashed down. He could 
see the sun-stones glittering in their heads. 
They struck straight at him ■ . . 

But at the last split second they swerved 
away. 

Trevor waited. They came back again, 
very fast, but this time it was at Jen they 
struck, and not at him. 

He got her behind him again in time. And 
once more the hawks checked their strike. 

The truth dawned on Trevor. The hawks 
were deliberately refraining from hurting 
him. 

"Whoever gives them their orders, the 
Korins or that Other, doesn't want me hurt!" 

He caught up Jen in his arms and started 
to run again toward the rocks. 

Instantly tlie hawks struck at Jen. He 
could not swing her clear in time. Blood 
ran from the long claw-marks they left in 
her smooth, tanned shoulders. 

Jen cried out. Trevor hesitated. He tried 
again for the rocks, and Jen moaned as a 
swift scaly head snapped at her neck. 

So that's it, Trevor thought furiously. I'm 
not to be hurt, but they can drive me through 

Jen. 

And they could, too. He would never get 
Jen to the concealment of the rocks alive, 
with those two wide-winged shadows tearing at her. He had to go the way they 
wanted or they would leave her as they had 
left Hugh. 

"All right!" Trevor yelled savagely at the 
circling demons. "Let her alone! I'll go 
where you want." 

He turned, still carrying Jen, plodding 
ifter the other slaves who were being herded 
down the canyon. 

All that day the black hawks drove the 
humans down the watercourse, around the 



shoulder of basalt and out oito the naked 
sun-seared lava bed. Some of them dropped 
and lay where they were, and no effort of 
the hawks could move them on again. Much 
of the time Trevor carried Jen. Part of the 
time he dragged her. For long vague periods 
lie had no idea what he did. 

He was in a daze in which only his hatred 
still was vivid, when he felt Jen pulled away 
from him. He struggled, and was held — 
and he looked up to see a ring of mounted 
men around him. Korins on their crested 
beasts, the sun-stones glittering in their 
brows. 

They looked down at Trevor, curious, 
speculative, hostile, their otherwise undistinguished human faces made strangely evil 
and other-worldly by the winking stones. 

"You come with us to the city," one of 
them said curtly to Trevor. "That woman 
goes with the other slaves." 

Trevor glared up at him. "Why me, to tlie 
City?" 

The Korin raised his riding whip threateningly. "Do as you're ordered! Mount!" 

Trevor saw that a slave had brought a 
saddled beast to him and was holding it, 
not looking either at him or the Korins. 

"All right," he said. "I'll go with you." 

He mounted and sat waiting, his eyes 
bright with the hatred that burned in him, 
bright as blown coals. They formed a circle around him and the leader gave a word. 
They galloped off toward the distant city. 

Trevor must have dozed as he rode, for 
suddenly it was sunset, and they were approaching the city. 

Seeing it as he had before, far off and 
with nothing to measure it against but tlie 
overtopping titan peaks, it had seemed no 
more than a city built of rock. Now he was 
close to it. Black shadows lay on it, and on 
the valley, but half way up the opposite 
mountain wall the light still blazed, reflected downward on the shallow sky, so that 
everything seemed to float in some curious 
dimension between night and day, Trevor 
stared, shut his eyes, and stared again. 

Tlie size was wrong. 

He looked quickly at the Korins, with 
the eerie feeling that he might have shrunk 
to child-size as he slept, But they had not 
changed — at least, relative to himself. He 
turned back to the city, trying to force it 



PLANET STORIES 



into perspective. 

It rose up starkly from die level plain. 
There was no gradual guttering out into 
suburbs, no softening down to garden villas or rows of cottages. It leaped up like 
a cliff and began, solemn, massive, squat, 
and ugly. The buildings were square, set 
stiffiy along a square front. They were not 
tall. Most of them were only one story 
high. And yet Trevor felt dwarfed by 
them, as he had never felt dwarfed by the 
mightiest of Earth's skyscrapers. It wis an 
unnatural feeling, and one that made him 
curiously afraid. 

There were no walls or gateways, no 
roads leading in. One minute the beasts 
padded on tie grass of the open plain. The 
next, their daws were clicking on a stone 
paic and the buildings closed them in, hulking, graceless, looking sullen and forlorn 
in the shadowed light. There was no sound 
in them anywhere, no gleaming of lamps in 
the black embrasures of cavernous doors, 
The last furious glare of the hidden sun 
seeped down from the high peaks and 
stained their upper walls, and they were 
old — half as old, Trevor thought, as the 
peaks themselves. 

It was the window embrasures, the doors, 
and the steps that led up to them that made 
Trevor understand suddenly what was 
wrong, And the latent fear that had been 
in him sprang to full growth. The city, and 
the buildings in it, the steps and the doors 
and the height of the windows, were perfectly in proportion, perfectly normal- — if 
the people who lived there were twenty 
feet high, 

He turned to the Korins. "You never 

built this place. Who built it?" 

The one called Gait, who was nearest 
him, snarled, "Quiet, slave!" 

Trevor looked at him, and at the other 
Korins. Something about their faces and the 
way they rode along the darkening empty 
street told bim they too were afraid. 

He said, "You, the Korins, the lordly 
demi-gods who ride about and send your 
hawks to hunt and slay — you're more afraid 
of your master than the slaves are of 
you!" 

They turned toward him pallid faces that 
burned with hatred. 
He remembered how that other had 



gripped his brain back in the canyon. He 

remembered how it had felt. He understood 
many things now. 

He asked, "How does it feel to be enslaved, Korins? Not just enslaved in body, 
but in mind and soul?" 

Gait turned like a striking snake. But 
the blow never fell. The upraised hand with 
the heavy whip suddenly checked, and then 
sank down again. Only the eyes of the 
Korin glowed with a baleful helplessness 
under the winking sun -stone. 

TTREVOR laughed without humor. "It 
J- wants me alive. I guess I'm safe, then. 
I guess I could tell you what I think of 
you. You're still convicts, aren't you? After 
three hundred years. No wonder you bate 
the slaves. '' 

Not the same convicts, of course. The sunstones didn't give longevity. 'Trevor knew 
how die Korins propagated, stealing women 
from among the slaves, keeping the male 
children and killing the female. He laughed 
again, 

"It isn't such a good life after all, is it, 
being a Korin? Even hunting and killing 
can't take the taste out of your mouths. No 
wonder you hate the others! They're enslaved, all right, but they're not owned." 

They would have liked to kill him but 
they could not. They were forbidden. 
Trevor looked at them, in the last pale 
flicker of the afterglow. The jewels and the 
splendid harness, the bridles of the beasts 
heavy with gold, the weapons— they looked 
foolish now, like the paper crowns and glass 
beads that children deck themselves with 
when they pretend to be kings. These were 
not lords and masters. These were only little men, and slaves. And the sun-stones were 
a badge of shame. 

Hie cavalcade passed on. Empty streets, 
empty houses with windows too high for 
human eyes to look through 1 and steps too 
tall for human legs to climb. Full dark, and 
the first stunning crash of thunder, the first 
blaze of lightning between the cliffs. The 
mounts were hurrying now, almost galloping to beat the lightning and the scalding 
rain. 

They were in a great square. Around it 
was a stiff rectangle of houses, and these 
were lighted with torchlight, and in the 



SBAXXACH—THE LAST 



97 



. monstrous doorways bens and there a little 
figure stood, a Kofin, watching. 

In the exact center of the square was a 
flat low structure of stone, having no windows and but a single door. 

They reined the beasts before that lightless entrance. "Get down," said Gait to 
Trevor. A livid reddish flaring in the sky 
showed Trevor the Korin's face, and it was 
smiling, as a woif smiles before the kill. 
Then the thunder came, the downpour of 
rain, and he was thrust bodily into the 
doorway. 

He stumbled over worn flagging in the 
utter _ dark, but the Korins moved surefootedly as cats. He knew they had been here 
many times before, and he knew that they 
hated it. He could feel the hate and the 
fear bristling out from the bodies that were 
close to his, smell them in the close hot air. 
They didn't want to be here but they had 
to. They were bidden. 

He would have fallen headforemost down 
the sudden flight of steps if someone had 
not caught his arm. They were huge steps. 
They were forced to go down diem as small 
children do, lowering themselves bodily 
from tread to tread. A furnace blast of air 
came up the well, but in spite of the heat 
Trevor felt cold. He could feel how the 
hard stone of the stairs had been worn into 
deep hollows by the passing of feet. Whose 
feet? And going where? 

A sulphurous glow began to creep up 
through the darkness. They went down 
what seemed a very long way. The glow 
brightened, so that Trevor could once more 
make out the facet of the Korins. The heat 
was overpowering, but still there was a coldness around Trevor's heart. 

The steps ended in a long low hall, so 
long that the farther end of it was lost in 
vaporous shadow. Trevor thought that it 
must have been squared out of a' natural 
cavern, for here and there in the rocky 
floor small fumaroles burned and bubbled, 
giving off the murky light and a reek of 
brimstone. 

Along both sides of the hall were rows of 
statues seated in stone chairs. 

Trevor stared at them, with the skin 
crawling up and down his bade. Statues of 
men and women — or rather, of creatures 
7— PLANET STORIES— November 



manlike and womanlike — sitting solemn and 
naked, their hands folded in their laps, their 
eyes, fashioned of dull, reddish stone, looking straight ahead, their features even and 
composed, with a strange sad patience clinging to the stony furrows around mouth and 
cheek. Statues that would be perhaps twenty 
feet tall if they were standing, carved by a 
master's chisel out of a pale substance that 
looked like alabaster. 

Gait caught his arm. "Oh, no, you won't 
run away. You were laughing, remember? 
Come on, I want to see you laugh some 
more." 

They forced him along between the rows 
of statues. Quiet statues, with a curiously 
ghostly look of thoughtfulness — of thoughts 
and feelings long vanished but once there, 
different from those of humans, perhaps, 
but quite as strong. No two of them were 
alike, in face or body. Trevor noted among 
them things seldom seen in statues, a 
nuimed limb, a deformity, or a completely 
nondescript face that would offer neither 
beauty nor ugliness for an artist to enlarge 
upon. Also, they seemed all to be old, 
though he could not have said why he 
thought so. 

There were other halls opening off this 
main one. How far they went he had no 
means of guessing, but he could see that in 
them were other shadowy rows of seated 
figures. 

Statues. Endless numbers of statues, down 
here in the darkness underneath die city . . . 

He stopped, bracing himself against his 
captors, gripping the hot rock with his 
bare feet 

"This is a catacomb," he said. "Those 
aren't statues, they're bodies, dead things 
sitting up.™ 

"Come on," said Gait. "Come on, and 
laugh!" 

They took him, and there were too many 
to fight. And Trevor knew that it was not 
them he had to fight. Something was waiting for him down in that catacomb. It had 
had his mind once. It would — 

THEY were approaching the end of the 
long hall. The sickly light from the 
fumaroles showed the last of the lines of 
seated figures— had they died there like that, 
sitting up, or had thov been brought here 



98 



PLANET STORIES 



afterwaid? The rows on each side ended 
evenly, the last chairs exactly opposite each 
other. 

But against the blank end wall was a 
solitary seat of stone, facing down the full 
gloomy length of the hall, and an it sat 
a manlike shape of alabaster, very still, the 
stony hands folded rigidly upon the stony 
thighs. A figure no different from the 
others, except .... 

Except that the eyes were still alive. 

The Korins dropped back a little. All 
but Gait. He stayed beside Trevor, his head 
bent, his mouth sullen and nervous, not looking up at all. And Trevor stared into the 
remote and sombre eyes that were like two 
pieces of carnelian in that pale alabaster 
face, and yet were living, sentient, full of a 
deep and alien sorrow. 

It was very silent in the catacomb. The 
dreadful eyes studied Trevor, and for just 
a moment his hatred was tempered by a 
strange "pity as he thought what it must 
be like for the brain, the intelligence behind those eyes, already entombed, and 
knowing it. 

"A long living and a long dying. The 
blessing and the curse of rr.j people." 

The words were soundless, spoken inside 
his brain. Trevor started violently. Almost 
he turned lo flee, remembering the torture 
of that moment in the canyon, and then he 
found that while he had been staring, a force 
is gentle and stealthy as the gliding of a 
shadow had already invaded him. And he 
was forbidden. 

"At this range I do not need the sunstones," murmured the silent voice within 
him. "Once I did not need them at all. But 
lam old." 

Trevor stared at the stony thing that 
watched him, and then he thought of Jen, 
of Hugh lying dead with a dead hawk in the 
dust, and the strangeness left him, and his 
bitter passion flared again. 

"So you hate me as well as fear me, little 
human? You would destroy me?" There was 
a gentle laughter inside Trevor's mind. "I 
have watched generations of humans die so 
swiftly. And yet I am here, as I was before 
they came, waiting." 

"You won't be here forever," snarled 
Trevor. "These others like you died. You 
will!" 



"Yes. But it is a slow dying, little human. 
Your body chemistry is like that of the 
plants, the beasts, based upon carbon. Quick 
to grow. Quick to wither away. Ours was of 
another sort. We were like the mountains, 
cousin lo them, our body cells built of silicon, even as theirs. And so our flesh endures 
until it grows slow and stiff with age. But 
even then we must wait long, very long, for 
death." 

Something of the truth of that long 
waiting came to Trevor, and he felt a shuddering thankfulness for the frailty of human 
flesh. 

"I am the last," whispered the silent 
voice. "For a while I had companionship of 
minds, but the others are all gone before 
me, long ago." 

Trevor had a nightmare vision of Mercury, in some incalculable future eon, a 
frozen world taking its last plunge into the 
burned-out sun, bearing with it these endless rows of alabaster shapes, sitting in their 
chairs of stone, upright in the dead blackness underneath the ice. 

He fought back to reality, clutching his 
hatred as a swimmer clings to a plank, his 
voice raw with passion and bitterness as he 
cried out. 

"Yes, I'll destroy you jf I can! What 
else could you expect after what you've 
done?" 

"Oh, no, little human, you will not destroy me. You will help me," 

Trevor glared. "Help you? Not if you 
kill me!" 

"There will be no killing. You would be 
of no use to me dead. But alive you can 
serve me. That is why you were spared." 

"Serve you — like them}" He swung to 
point to the waiting Korins, but the Korins 
were not waiting now, they were closing in 
on him, their hands reaching for him. 

Trevor struck out at them. He had a 
fleeting though of how weird this battle of 
his with the Korins must look, as they 
struck and staggered on the stone paving 
beneath the looming, watching thing of 
stone. 

But even as he had that thought, the 
moment of struggle ended. An imperious 
command hit his brain, and black oblivion 
closed down upon him like the sudden 
clenching of a fist. 



slIAWACH—THE LAST 



99 



V 

DARKNESS. He was lost in it, and he 
was not himself my more. He fled 
through the dirlcncss. groping, crying out 
for something that wis gone. And a voice 
answered him, a voice that he did not want 
to hear. . , , 
Darkness. Dreams. 

Dawn, high on the blazing mountains. 
He stood in the city, watching the light 
grow bright and pitiless, watching it burn 
on the upper walls and then slip downward 
into the streets, casting heavy shadows in 
the openings of door and window, so that 
the houses looked like skulls with empty eyeholes and gaping mouths. The buildings no 
longer seemed too big. He walked between 
them, and when he came to steps he climbed 
them easily, and the window ledges were 
no higher than his head. He knew these 
buildings. He looked at each one as he 
passed, naming it, remembering with a long, 
long memory. 

The hawks came down to him, the faithful servants with the sun-stones in their 
brows. He stroked their pliant necks, and 
they hissed softly with pleasure, but their 
shallow minds were empty of everything 
but that vague sensation. He passed on 
through the familiar streets, and in them 
nothing stirred. All through the day from 
dawn to sunset, and in the darkness that 
came afterward, nothing stirred, and there 
was a silence among the stones. 

He could not endure the city. His time 
was not yet, though the first subtle signs of 
age had touched him. But he went down 
into the catacombs and took his place with 
those others who were waiting and could 
still speak to him with their minds, so that 
he should not be quite alone with the 
silence. 

The years went by, leaving no traces of 
themselves in the unchanging gloom of the 
mortuary halts. 

One by one those last few minds were 
stilled until all were gone. And by that time 
age had chained him where he was. unable 
to rise and go again into the city where 
he had been young, the youngest of all ■ . . 
Shannadi. they had named him — The Last. 

So he waited, alone. And only one who 
was kin to the mountains could have borne 



that waiting in the place of the dead. 

Then, in a burst of flame and thunder, 
new life came into the valley. Human life. 
Soft, frail, receptive life, intelligent, unprotected, possessed of violent and bewildering passions. Very carefully, taking its time, 
the mind of Shannadi readied out and 
gathered them in. 

Some of the men were more violent than 
the others. Shannadi saw their emotions in 
patterns of scarlet against the dark of his 
inner mind. They had already made themselves masters, and a number of these frail 
sensitive brains had snapped out swiftly 
because of them. "These I will take for my 
own," thought Shannadi. "Their mind-patterns are crude, but strong, and I am interested in death." 

There had been a surgeon aboard the 
ship but he was dead. However, there was 
no need of a surgeon for what was about to 
be done. When Shannach had finished talking to the men he had chosen, telling them 
of the sun-stones, telling them the truth, but 
not all of it — when those men had eagerly 
agreed to the promise of power— Shannach 
took complete control. And the clumsy convict hands that moved now with such exquisite skill were as much his instruments 
as the scalpels of the dead surgeon that they 
wielded, making the round incision and the 
delicate cutting of the bone. 

Who was the man that lay there, quiet 
under the knife? Who were the ones that 
bent above htm, with the strange stones 
hi their brows? Names. There are names and 
I know them. Closer, closer. I know that 
man who lies there with blood between 
his eyes ... 

Trevor screamed. Someone slapped him 
across the face, viciously and with intent. 
He screamed again, fighting, clawing, still 
blinded by the visions and the dark mists, 
and that voice that he dreaded so much 
spoke gently in his mind, "It's all over, 
Trevor. It is done." 

The hard hand slapped him again, and 
a rough human voice said harshly. "Wake 
up. Wake up, damn it!" 

He woke. He was in the middle of a vast 
room, crouched down in the attitude of a 
fighter, shivering, sweating, his hands outstretched and grasping nothing. He must 
have sprung there, half unconscious, from 



PLANET STORIES 



the tumbled pallet of skins against the wall. 
Gait was watching him. 

"Welcome, Earthman. How does it feel 
to be one of the masters?" 

Trevor stared at him. A burning flood of 
light fell in through the tall windows so 
high above his head, setting the sun-stone 
ablaze between the Korin's sullen brows. 
Trevor's gaze fixed on that single point of 
brilliance. 

"Oh, yes," said Gait. "It's true." 

It struck Trevor with an ugly shock that 
Gait's lips had not moved, and that he had 
made no audible sound. 

"The stones give us a limited ability," 
Gait went on, still without speaking aloud. 
"Not like His, of course. But we can control the hawks, and exchange ideas between 
us when we want to if the range isn't too 
far. Naturally, our minds are open to Him 
any time he wants to pry." 

"There's no pain," Trevor whispered, 
desperately frying to make the thing not be 
so. "My head doesn't ache." 

"Of course not. He takes care of that." 

Shannach? If it isn't so, how do 1 know 
that name? And that dream, that endless 
nightmare hi the catacombs. 

GaJt winced. "We don't use that name. 
He doesn't like it." He looked at Trevor. 
'"What's the matter, Earthman? Why so 
green? You were laughing once, remember? 
Where's your sense of humor now?" 

He caught Trevor abruptly by the shoulders and turned him around so that he 
faced a great sheet of polished glassy substance set into the wall. A mirror for giants, 
reflecting the whole huge room, reflecting 
the small dwarfed figures of the men. 

"Go on," said Gait, pushing Trevor 
ahead of him. "Take a look." 

Trevor shook off the Korin's grasp. He 
moved forward by himself, close to the mirror. He set his hands against the chill surface and stared at what he saw there. And 
it was true. 

Between his brows a sun-stone winked 
and glittered. And his face, the familiar, 
normal, not-too-bad face he had been used 
to all his life, was transformed into something monstrous and unnatural, a goblin 
mask with a third, and evil eye. 

A coldness crept into his heart and 
bones. He backed away a little from the mir


ror, his hands moving blindly upward, slowly toward the stone that glistened between 
his brows. His mouth was twisted like a 
child's, and two tears rolled down his 
cheeks. 

His fingers touched the stone. And then 
the anger came. He sank his nails into his 
forehead, clawing at the hard stones, not 
caring if he died after he had torn it out. 

Gait watched him. His lips smiled but 
his eyes were hateful. 

BLOOD ran down the sides of Trevor's 
nose. The sun-stone was still there. He 
moaned and thrust his nails in deeper, and 
Shannach let him go until he had produced 
one stab of agony that cut his head in two 
and nearly dropped him. Then Shannach 
sent in the full force of his mind. Not in 
anger, for he felt none, and not in cruelty, 
for he was no more cruel than the mountain 
he was kin to, but simply because it was 
necessary. 

Trevor felt that cold and lonely power 
roll down on him like an avalanche. He 
braced himself to meet it, but it broke his 
defenses, crushed them, made them nothing, 
and moved onward against the inmost citadel of his mind. 

In that reeling, darkened fortress all that 
was wholly Trevor crouched and clung to 
its armament of rage, remembering dimly 
that once, in a narrow canyon, it had driven 
back this enemy and broken free. And then 
some crude animal instinct far below the 
level of conscious thought warned him not 
to press the battle now, to bury his small 
weapon and wait, letting this last redoubt 
of which he was yet master go untouched 
and perhaps unnoticed by his captor. 
Trevor let his hands drop limply and his 
mind go slack. The cold black tide of power 
paused, and then he felt it slide away, withdrawing from those threatened walls. Out 
of the edges of it, Shannach spoke. 

"Your mind is tougher than these valleybred Korins. They're well conditioned, but 
you — you remember that you defied me 
once. The contact was imperfect then. It is 
not imperfect now. Remember that, too, 
Trevor. ' 

Trevor drew in a long, unsteady breath. 
He whispered, "What do you want of me?* 
"Go and see the ship. Your mind tell* 



,11 \.\.\ACH—THE LAST 



Mil 



me that it understands these things. Sec if 
it can be nude to fly again." 

That order took Trevor completely by 
surprise. "The ship! But why . . . ? 

Shannach wm not used to having his 
wishes <jucstioacJ. but he answered patiently, 
"I have still a while to live. Several of your 
short generation*. I have had too much of 
this valley, too much of these catacombs. I 
want to leave them." 

Trevor could understand that. Having had 
that nightmare glimpse into Shannachs 
mind, he could perfectly understand. For 
one brief moment he was torn with pity for 
this trapped creature who was alone in the 
universe. And then he wondered, "What 
would you do if you could leave the valley? What would you do to another settlement of men?" 

"Who knows? I have one thing left to me 
— curiosity." 

"You'd take the Korins with you, and 
the hawks?" 

"Some. They are my eyes and ears, my 
hands and feet. But you object, Trevor." 

"What difference does that make?" said 
Trevor bitterly. "I'll go look at the ship." 

"Come on," said Gait, taking up an armful of torches. "I'll show you the way." 

They went out through the tall door into 
the streets between the huge square empty 
houses. The streets and houses that Trevor 
had known in his dream, remembering when 
there were lights and voices in them. Trevor 
noticed only that Gait was leading him out 
on the opposite side of the city, toward the 
part of the valley he had never visited. 
And then his mind reverted to something 
that not even the shock of his awakening 
could drive out of his consciousness. 

Jen. 

A sudden panic sprang up in him. How 
long had it been since the darkness fell on 
him there in the catacomb? Long enough for 
almost anything to happen. He envisioned 
Jea being torn by hawks, of her body lying 
dead as Hugh's had lain, and he started to 
reach out for Gait, who had owned them 
both. But abruptly Shannach spoke co him, 
in that eerie silent way he was getting used 
to. 

"The woman is safe. Here, look for youf•elf.
Ha mind was taken firmly and directed 



into a channel completely new to him. He 
felt a curious small shock of contact, and 
suddenly he was looking down from a point 
somewhere in the sky at a walled paddock 
with a number of tiny figures in it. His own 
eyes would have seen them as just that, 
but the eyes he was using now were keen 
as an eagle's, though they saw no color but 
only black and white and the shadings in 
between. So he recognized one of the 
distant figures as Jen. 

He wanted to get closer to her, much 
closer, and rather sulkily his point of vision 
began to circle down dropping lower and 
lower. Jen looked up. He saw the shadow of 
wide wings sweep across her and realized 
that of course he was using one of the 
hawks. He pulled it back so as not to 
frighten her, but not before he had seen 
her face. The frozen stoniness was gone, and 
in its place had come the look of a wounded 
tigress. 

"I want her," Trevor said to Shannach. 
"She belongs to Gait. 1 do not interfere." 

Gait shrugged. "You're welcome. But 
keep her chained. She's too dangerous now 
for anything but hawk-meat." 

THE ship was not far beyond the city. 
It lay canted over on its side, just clear 
of a low spur jutting out from the barrier 
cliff. It had hit hard, and some of the 
main plates were buckled, but from the 
outside the damage did not seem irreparable, if you had the knowledge and the tools 
to work with. Three hundred years ago it 
might have been made to fly again, only 
those who had the knowledge and the will 
were dead. And the convicts wanted to stay 
where they were. 

The tough metal of the outer skin, alloyed to resist friction that could burn up a 
meteor, had stood up pretty well under three 
centuries of Mercurian climate. It was corroded, and where the breaks were the inner shells were eaten through with rust, but 
the hulk still retained the semblance of a 
ship. 

"Will it fly?" asked Shannach eagerly. 
"I don't know yet," Trevor answered 
Gait lighted a torch and gave it to him. 
"I'll stay put here." 
Trevor laughed. "How are you ever goi.ig 



m 



PLANET STORIES 



to fly over the mountains?" 

"He'll see to that when the time comes," 
Gait muttered. "Take the rest of these 
torches. It's dark in there." 

Trevor climbed in through the gaping 
lock, moving with great caution on the 
tilted, rust-red decks. Inside, the ship was 
a shambles. Everything had been stripped 
out of it that could be used, leaving only 
bare cubicles with the enamel peeling off the 
walls and a moldering litter of junk. 

In a locker forward of the air lock he 
found a number of spacesuits. The fabric 
was rotted away, but a few of the helmets 
were still good and some half score of the 
oxygen bottles hid survived, the gas still 
in them. 

Shannach urged him on impatiently. "Get 
to the essentials, Trevor!" 

The bridge room was still intact, though 
the multiple thickness of glassite in the big 
ports showed patterns of spidery cracks. 
Trevor examined the controls. He was strictly a planetary spacer, used to flying his small 
craft within spitting distance of the world he 
was prospecting, and there were t few gadgels here he didn't understand, but he could 
figure the board well enough. 

"Not far, Trevor. Only over the mountains. I know from your mind — and I remember from the minds of those who died 
afler the landing — that beyond the mountain wall there is a plain of dead rock, more 
than a hundred of your reckoning in miles, 
and then another ridge that seems solid but 
is not, and beyond that pass there is a fertile 
valley twenty times bigger than Korith, 
where Earthmen live." 

"Only partly fertile, and the mines that 
brought the Earthmen are pretty well 
worked out. But a few ships still land there, 
and a few Earthmen still hang on." 

"That is best. A small place, to begin • - ■" . , , 

"To begin what?" 

"Who can tell? You don't understand, 
Trevor. For centuries I have known exactly 
what I would do. There is a kind of rebirth 
in not knowing." 

Trevor shivered and went back to studying the controls. The wiring, protected by 
layers of imperviplast insulation and conduit, seemed to be in fair shape. The generator room below had been knocked about, 



but not too badly. There were spare batteries. Corroded, yes, But if they were 
charged, they could hold For a while. 
"Will it fly?" 

"I told you I don't know yet. It would 
take a lot of work." 

"There are many slaves to do this work . ' 1 

"Yes. But without fuel it's all useless. " 

"See if there is fuel." 

The outlines of that hidden thing in 
Trevor's secret mind were coming clearer 
now. He didn't want to see them out in the 
full light where Shannach could see them 
too. He thought hard about generators, batteries, and the hooking up of leads. 

He crept among the dark bowels of the 
dead ship, working toward the stern. The 
torch made a red and smoky glare that lit 
up deserted wardrooms and plundered 
holds. One large compartment had a heavy 
barred and bolted door that had bent like 
tin in the crash. "That's where they came 
from," Trevor thought, "like wolves out of 
a trap." 

In the lower holds that had taken the 
worst of the impact were quantities of mining equipment and farm machinery, all 
smashed beyond use but formidable-looking 
none the less, with rusty blades and teeth 
and queer hulking shapes. They made him 
think of weapons, and he let the thought 
grow, adorning it with pictures of men 
going down under whirring reapers. Shannach caught it. 

"Weapons?" 

"They could be used as such. But the 
metal in them would repair the hull." 

He found the fuel bunkers. The main 
supply was used to the last grain of fissionable dust, but the emergency bunkers 
still showed some content on the mechanical 
gauges. Not much, but enough. 

VI 

A HARD excitement began to stir in 
Trevor, too big to be hidden in that 
secret corner of his mind. He didn't try. 
He let it loose, and Sliannach murmured. 

"You are pleased. The ship will fly, and 
you are thinking that when you reach that 
other valley and are among your own people again, you will find means to destroy 
roe. Perhaps, but we shall see." 



SHANNACH— THE LAST 



I la the smoky torchlight, looking down 
from a sagging catwalk ibmc the fifing 
chamber* and the rusty sealed-in tubes, 
Trevor smiled. A lie tould be thought as 
well as spoken. And Shannach, in a manner 
of speaking. was only human. 

"I'll need hdp. All the help there is." 

"You'll have it." 

"It'll take time. Don't hurry me and don't 
distract me. Remember, I want to get over 
the mountains as bad you do." 

Shannach laughed. 

Trevor got more torches and went to 
work in the generator room. He felt that 
Shaqnach had withdrawn from him, occupied now with rounding up the Korins 
and the slaves. But he did not relax his caution. The open areas of his mind were filled 
with thoughts of vengeance to come when 
he reached that other valley. 

Gradually the exigencies of wrestling with 
antiquated and partly ruined machinery 
drove everydiing else away. That day passed, 
and a night, a half another day before all 
the leads were hooked the way he wanted 
them, before one creaky generator was operating on one-quarter normal output, and 
the best of die spare batteries were charging. 

He emerged from the torchlit obscurity 
into the bridge, blinking mole-like in the 
light, and found Gait sitting there. 

"He trusts you," the Korin said, "but not 
too fax." 

Trevor scowled at him. Exhaustion, excitement, and a feeling of fate had combined 
to put him into an unreal state where his 
mind operated more or less independently. 
A hard protective shdl had formed around 
that last little inner fortress so that it was 
bidden even from himself, and he had 
come almost to believe that he was going 
to fly this ship to another valley and battle 
Shannach there. So he was not surprised to 
hear Shannach say softly in his mind, 

"You might try to go away alone. I 
wouldn't want that, Trevor." 

Trevor grunted. "I thought you controlled 
me vj well 1 couldn't spit if you forbade it." 

"I am deihng with much here that I don't 
comprehend- We were never a mechanical 
people. There/ore some of your thoughts, 
wuiie I read them clearly, have no real meanin* for sac I out handle you, Trevor, but 



I'm taking no chances with the ship." 

"Don't worry," Trevor told him. "I can't 
possibly take the ship up before the hull's 
repaired. It would fall apart on me." That 
was true, and he spoke it honestly. 

"Nevertheless," said Shannach, "Gait will 
be there, as my hands and feet, an extra 
guard over that object which you call a 
control-bank, and which your mind tell* 
me is the key to the ship. You are forbidden 
to touch it until it is time to go." 

Trevor heard Shannach's silent laughter. 

"Treachery is implicit in your mind, 
Trevor. But I'll have time. Impulses come 
swiftly and cannot be read beforehand. But 
there u an interval between the impulse and 
the realization of it. Only a fraction of a 
second, perhaps, but 1 11 have time to stop 
you. " 

Trevor did not argue. He was shaking * 
little with the effort of not giving up nrs 
last pitiful individuality, of fixing his 
thoughts firmly on the next step toward 
what Shannach wanted and looking neither 
to the right nor to the left of it. He ran a 
grimy hand over his face, shrinking from 
the touch of the alien disfigurement in his 
forehead, and said sullenly, 

"The liolds have to be cleared. The ship 
won't lift that weight any more, and we 
need the metal for repairs." He thought 
again strongly of weapons. "Send the 
slaves." 

"No," said Shannach firmly. "TheKorins 
will do that. We won't put* any potential 
weapons in the hands of the slaves." 

Trevor allowed a wave of disappointment 
to cross his mind, and then he shrugged. 
"All right. But get them at it." 

He went and stood by the wide ports looking out over the plain toward the city. The 
slaves were gathered at a safe distance from 
the ship, waiting like a herd of cattle until 
they should be needed. Some mounted 
Korins guarded them while the hawks 
wheeled overhead. 

Coming toward the ship, moving with a 
resentful slowness, was a little army of 
Korins. Trevor could sense the group 
thought quite clearly. In all their lives they 
had never soiled their lands with labor, and 
they were angry that they had now io do 
the work of slaves. 

Digging his nails into his pa'tnis, Trevor 



1(1! 



PLANET STOIilES 



wen! aft to show them what to do. He 
couldn't keep it hidden much longer, this 
thing that -ie had so painfully concealed 
under layers of half-truths and deceptions. 
It had to come out soon, and Shannach 
would know. 

In the smoky glare of many torches the 
Korins began to struggle with the rusting 
masses of machinery in the after holds, 

"Send more down here,'' Trevor said to 
Shannach. "These things are heavy." 

"They're all there now except those that 
guard the slaves. They cannot leave." 

"All right," said Trevor. "Make them 
work." 

He went back up along the canting decks, 
along the tilted passages, moving slowly at 
first, then swifter, swifter, his bare feet 
scraping on the flakes of rust, his face, with 
tile third uncanny eye, gone white and 
strangely set. His mind was throwing off 
muddy streams of thought, confused and 
meaningless, desperate camouflage to hide 
until the last second what was underneath. 

"Trevor!" 

That was Shannach, alert, alarmed. 

It was coming now, the purpose, out into 
the light. It had to come, it could not be 
hidden any longer. It burst up from its 
secret place, one strong red flare against the 
darkness, and Shannach saw it, and sent 
the full cold power of his mind to drown it 
out. 

Trevor came into the bridge room, running. 

THE first black wave of power hit him, 
crushed him. The bridge room lengthened out into some weird dimension of delirium, with Gait waiting at the far end. 
Behind Gait the one small, little key that 
needed io be touched just once. 

The towering might of Shannach beat him 
back, forbidding him to think, to move, to 
be. But down in that beleaguered part of 
Trevor's mind the walls still held, with the 
bright brand of determination burning in 
mem, 

This was the moment, the time to fight. 
And he dug up that armament of fury he 
had buried there. He let it free, shouting at 
the alien force, "I beat you once! I beat you!" 

The deck swam under his feet. The peeling bulkheads wavered past like veils of 



mist. He didn't know whether he was moving or not, but he kept on while the enormous weight bore down on his quivering 
brain, a mountain tilting, falling, seeking to 
smother out the fury that was all he had to 
fight with. 

Fury for himself, defiled and outraged. 
Fury for Jen, with the red scars on her 
shoulders. Fury for Hugh lying dead under 
an obscene killer, fury for all the generations ol decent people who had lived and 
died in slavery so that Shannaclis time of 
waiting might be lightened. 

He saw Gait's face, curiously huge, close 
to his own. It wis stricken and amazed. 
Trevor's bared teeth glistened. 

"I beat him once," he said to the Korin. 

Gait's hands were raised. There was a 
knife in his girdle, but he had been bidden 
not to use it, not to kill. Only Trevor could 
make the ship to fly. Gait reached out and 
took him bat there was an uosureness in his 
grip, and his mind was crying out to Shannach, "You could not make him stop! You 
could not!" 

Trevor, who was partly merged with 
Shannach now, heard that cry and laughed. 
Something in him had burst wide open at 
Gait's physical touch. He had no control 
now, no sane thought left, but only a wild 
intense desire to do two things, one of which 
was to destroy this monster that had hold of 
him, 

"Kill him," said Shannach suddenly. 
"He's mad, and no one can control an insane 
human." 

Gait did his best to obey. But Trevor's 
hands were already around the Korin's 
throat, the fingers sinking deep into the 
flesh. There was a sharp snapping of bone. 

He dropped the body. He could see nothing now except one tiny point of light in 
a reeling darkness. That single point of 
light had a red key in the center of it. Trevor 
reached our and pushed it down. That was 
the other thing. 

For a short second nothing happened. 
Trevor sagged down across Gait's body. 
Shannach was somewhere else, crying warnings that came too late. Trevor had time to 
draw one harsh triumphant breath and brace 
himself. 

The ship leaped under him. There wg* 
a dull roar, and then another, as the last 



SHANNACH— THE LAST 



fuel huakm let go. The whole bridge room 
foiled and ant to rest with a jarring shock 
that split Ac ports wide open, and the 
world was full of the shriek and crash of 
mewl being torn and twisted and rent apart. 
Then it quieted. The ground stopped shaking and the deck settled under Trevor. There 
was silence. 

Trevor crawled up the new slope of the 
bridge room floor, to the shattered lock and 
through it, into the pitiless sunlight. He 
could sec now exactly what he "had done. 
And it was good. It had worked. That last 
small measure of fuel hid been enough. 

"The whole after part of the hulk was 
gone, and with it had gone all but a few of 
Shannarh's Korins, trapped in the lower 
holds. 

And then, in pure surprise, Shannach 
spoke inside Trevor's mind. "I grow old 
indeed! I misjudged the toughness and the 
secrecy of a fresh, strong mind. I was too 
used to my obedient Korins. 1 ' 

"Do you see what's happening to the last 
of them'" Trevor asked savagely. "Can you 
see?" 

The last of the Korins who had been 
outside with the slaves seemed to have been 
stunned and bewildered by the collapse of 
their world. And with the spontaneity of a 
whirlwind, the slaves had risen against this 
last remnant of their hated masters. They 
had wailed for a long, long time, and now 
the Korins and the hawks were being done 
to death 

"Can you see it, Shannach?" 

"I can see, Trevor. And — they're coming 
now for you!" 

They were. They were coming, blood-mad 
against All who wore the sun-stone, and Jen 
was in the forefront of them, and Saul, 
whose hands were red. 

Trevor knew that he had less than a halfminute to speak for his life. And he waj 
aware that Shannach, still withdrawn, 
watched now with an edged amusement. 

Trevor said harshly to Saul and all of 
them, "So I give you your freedom, and 
you want to kill me for it?" 

Saul snarled, "You betrayed us in the 
cave, and mow . . 

"I bemwd yon, but without intent. 
There * u umtaot stronger than the Korins, 
that even ym daia t know about. So how 



should 1 have known?" 

Trevor talked fast, then, talking foe his 
life, telling them about Shannach and how 
the Korins themselves were enslaved. 

"A lie," spat Saul. 

"Look for yourselves io the crypts underneath the city! But be careful." 

He looked at Jen, not at Saul. After a 
moment Jen said slowly, "Perhaps there is 
a — Shannach. Perhaps that's why we were 
never ailowed in the city, so the Korins 
could go on pretending that they were gods." 

"It s another of his lies, I tell you!" 

Jen turned to him. "Go and look, Saul. 
We'll watch him." 

Saul hesitated. Finally, he and a halfdozen others went off toward the city. 

Trevor sat down on the hot, scorched 
grass. He was very tired, and he didn't like 
at all the way the withdrawn shadow of 
Shannach hovered just outside his mind. 

The mountains leaned away from the Sun, 
and the shadows crawled up the lower 
slopes. Then Saul and the others returned. 

Trevor looked up at their faces and 
laughed without mirth. "It's true, isn't it?" 

"Yes," said Saul, and shivered. "Yes . . 

"Did he speak to you?" 

"He started to. But — we ran," 

And Saul suddenly cried, out of the depths 
of fear this time and not of hate, "We can 
never kill him. It's his valley. And oh God, 
we're trapped in here with him, we can't 
get out." 

"We can get out," said Trevor. 

VII 

QAUL stared at him sickly. "There's no 
O way over the mountains. There isn't 
even air up there." 

"There's a way. I found it in the ship." 

Trevor stood up, speaking with a sudden 
harshness. "Not a way for us all, not now, 
but if three or four of us go, one may live 
to make it. And he could bring back men 
with ships for the others." 

He looked at Saul. "Will jou try it with 
me?" 

The gaunt man said hoarsely, "1 still don't 
trust you, Trevor! But anything— anything, 
to get away from that . . ." 

I'll go too," Jen said suddenly. "I'm ai 
strong as Saul." 



106 



PLANET STORIES 



Tint was true, and Trevor knew it. He 
stared at her for a long minute, but he could 
not read her face. 

Saul shrugged, "All right." 

"But it's all craziness!" murmured a voice. 
"You can't breathe up there on the ridges. 
There's no air!" 

Trevor climbed painfully into what was 
left of the twisted wreck, and brought out 
the helmets and oxygen bottles that had 
survived for just this purpose. 

"We'll breathe, 1 ' he said. "These—" He 
tried for a word that would explain to them. 
" — these containers hold an essence of air. 
We cm take them with us and breathe." 

"But the cold?" 

"You have tanned skins, haven't you? 
And gums? I can show you how to make us 
protective garments. Unless you'd rather stay 
here with Shannach." 

Saul shivered a little. "No, we'll try it." 

In all the hours that followed — while the 
women of the slaves worked with soft 
tanned skins and resinous gums, while 
Trevor labored over the clumsy helmets they 
must have — in all that time, Shannach was 
silent. 

Silent, but not gone. Trevor felt that 
shadow on his mind, he knew that Shannach 
was watching. Yet the Last One made no 
attempt upon him. 

The slaves watched him, too. He saw the 
fear and hatred still in their eyes S3 they 
looked at the sun-stone between his brows. 

And Jen watched him, and said nothing, 
and he could read nothing at all in her face. 
Was she thinking of Hugh and how the 
hawks had come? 

By mid-afternoon they were ready. They 
started climbing slowly, toward the passes 
s,that went up beyond the sky. He and Saul 
anc Jen were three grotesque and shapeless 
figures, in the three-layered garments of skin 
that were crudely sealed with gum, and the 
clumsy helmets that were padded out with 
cloth because there was no collar-rest to hold 
them. Their faces were wrapped close, and 
Ihev held the ends of the oxygen tubes in 
their mouths because no amount of ingenuity 
could make the helmets space-tight. 

The evening shadow flowed upward from 
the valley floor as they climbed, and the men 
who had come to help them dropped back. 
These three went on, with Saul leading the 



way and Trevor last, 

And still Shannach had not spoken. 

The atmosphere slipped behind them. 
They were climbing into space now, tiny 
creatures clambering up an infinity of virgin 
rock, in the utter black between the blazing 
peaks above and the flaring lightnings of" 
the evening storm below. 

Up and up toward the pass, toiling forward painfully with each other's help where 
no man could have made it alone, through a 
numbing and awful cold and silence. Three 
clumsy, dragging figures, up here above the 
sky itself, walking in the awfulness of infinity, where the rocks their feet dislodged 
rushed away as noiseless as a dream, where 
there was no sound, no light, no time. 

Trevor knew they must have reached the 
pass, for on both sides now there rose up 
slopes that had never been touched by wind 
or rain or living loot. He staggered on, and 
presently the ground began to drop and the 
way was easier. They had passed the crest. 
And the oxygen was almost gone. 

Downward now, stumbling, slipping, sliding, yearning toward the air below. And 
they were on the other side of the mountain, 
above the plain of rock that led to . , . 

And then, at last, Shannach— laughed. 

"Clever," he said, "Oh, very clever, to 
escape without a ship! But you will come 
back, with a ship, and you will take me to 
the outside world. And I will reward you 
greatly." 

"No," said Trevor, in his mind. "No, 
Shannach. If we make it, the sun-stone comes 
out, and we'll come back for the slaves, not 
for you!'' 

"No, Trevor." The gentle finality of that 
denial was coldly frightening. "You $k 
mine now. You surprised and tricked me 
once, but I know the trick now. Your whole 
mind is open to me. You cannot withstand 
me ever again.'' 

It wat cold, cold in the darkness below 
the pass, and the chill went deep into 
Trevor's soul and froze it. 

Saul and Jen were below him now, stumbling down along the rock-strewn lip of A 
chasm, into the thin high reaches of the lir, 
into sound and life again, He saw them tear 
away their helmets. He followed them, pulling off his own, gasping the frigid breath 
into his starved lungs. Shannach said softly. 



SHANNACH— THE LAST 



107 



"We do not need them any longer. They 
would be a danger when you reach other 
men. Dispose of them, Trevor." 

Trevor started a raging refusal, and then 

AfS raiad was gripped as by a gtvjl hand, 

shaken and turned and changed. And his 
fury flowed away into bf ankness. 

"Bnt of cottfse," he thought. "There ore 
many boulders, and I can topple them into 
the chasm so easily . . ." 

He started toward a jagged stone mass, 
one that would quite neatly brash the two 
clumsy figures below him into the abyss. 

"That is the way, Trevor! But quickly — !" 
.Trevor knew that Shannach had spoken 
truth, and that this time he was conquered. 

"No, I won't!" he cried to himself, but it 
was only a weak echo from a fading willpower, a dying self. 

"You will, Trevor! And now! They suspect." 

Saul and Jen had turned. Trevor's face, 
open now to the numbing cold which he 
could scarcely feel, must have told them 
everything. They started scrambling back up 
toward him. Only a short distance, but they 
would be too late. 

Trevor shrieked thinly, "Look out — Shannach . . . !" 

He had his hands on it now, on the 
boulder he must roll to crush them. 

But there was another way! He was Shannach's while he lived, but there was a way 
to avoid again betraying Jen's people, and 
that way was to live no longer. 

He used the last of his dying will to pitch 
himself toward the brink of the chasmHundreds of feet below a man could lie 
quiet on the rocks through all eternity. 

"Trevor, no! No!" 

Shannach 's powerful command halted htm 
as he swayed on the very edge. And then 
Jen's arms caught him from behind. 

He heard Saul's voice crying, thin and 
harsh in that upper air, "Push him over! 
He's a Korin. You saw his face!" 

Jen answered, "No! He tried to kill himself for us!" 

"But Shannach has him!" Saul cried out. 

Shannach had him, indeed, stamping 
down that final flicker of Trevor's revolt, 
fiercely commanding him. 

"Slay die woman and the man!" 

Trevor tried to. He was all Shannach's 



now. He tried earnestly and with all his 
strength to kill them, but both the woman 
and the man had hold of him now. They 
were too strong for him, and he could not 

ohcy the On* *< he wanted to. 

"Tie his arms!" Jen was shouting. "We 
can take him, and he can't do us any harm!" 

The anger of Shannach flooded through 
Trevor, and he raged and struggled, and it 
was useless. Strips of hide secured his arms 
and the>' were dragging him on down out 
of the mountains, and he could not obey. 
He could not! 

And then he felt the anger of Shannach 
ebb away into a terrible hopelessness, Trevor 
felr his own consciousness going, and he 
went into the darkness bearing in his mind 
the echo of that last bitter cry, 

"I am old — too old , , ," 

VIII 

TREVOR awakened slowly, rising above 
the dark sea of oblivion only to sink 
again, conscious in those brief intervals that 
he lay in a bed and that his head ached. 

There came a time when he rose, not to 
sink again. After a while his eyes opened, 
and he saw a metal ceiling. 
"We made it," he said. 
"Yes, you made it," said a friendly voice. 
"This is Solar City. You've been here quite 
a while." ( 

Trevor turned his head to the voice, to 
the white-jacketed doctor beside his bed, 
Bnt he didn't see the man or the room. Not 
at first. He saw only, upon the bedside table 
in a tray, a tawny eye that winked and glittered at him. 
A sun-stone. 

His hand started to rise weakly to his 
face. The doctor forestalled him. 

"Don't bother. It's out. And a delicate 
job getting it out, it wis. You'll have a 
headache for a while, but anyone would take 
a headache for a sun-stone!" 

Trevor didn't answer that. He said suddenly, "Jen — and Saul . . . i" 

"They're here. Pretty odd folk they are, 
too. Won't talk to any of us. You're all a 
blazing mystery, you know," 

He went away. When he came back, Jen 
and Saul were with him. They wore modern 
synthecloth garments now. Jen looked u 



108 



PLANET STORIES 



incongruous in hers as a leopardess in a 
silk dress. 

She saw the smile in his eyes and cried, 
"Don't laugh at me — ever!" 

It occurred to Trevor that civilizing her 
would take a long time. He doubted if it 
would ever be done. And he was glad of 
that. 

She stood looking gravely down at him 
and then said, "They say you can get up 
tomorrow." 

"That's good," said Trevor. 

"You'll have to be careful for a while." 

"Yes. I'll be careful." 

They said no more than tint, but in her 
steady, grave gaze Trevor read that Hugh 
and the hawks were forgiven, not forgotten 
but forgiven, that they two had touched 
each other and would not let go again. 

Saul cried anxiously, "Days we've waited! 
Whim tan we go back to the valley with a 
ship for the others?" 

Trevor turned to the curiously-watching 
doctor. "Can I charter a ship here?" 

"A man with a sun-stone can get almost 
anything he wants, Trevor! I'll see about it." 

The chartered ship that took them back 
to the valley had a minimum crew, and two 
mining technicians Trevor had hired. They 
set down outside the ancient city, and the 
slaves came surging toward them, ha!f in 
eagerness, half in awe of this embodiment 
of misty legend. 

Trevor had told Saul what to dD. Out up 
the valley, in the skulls of slain Korins, 
were sun-stones worth many fortunes. They 
were going out with the slaves. 

"But they're evil — evil!" Saul had cried. 

"Not in the outside worlds," Trevor told 
him. "You people ire going to need a start 
somewhere. 

When that was done, when they were all 
in the ship, Trevor nodded to the two 
mining technicians. 

"Now," he said. "The entrance to the 
catacomb Is right over there." 



The two went away, carrying their bulky 
burden slung between them. Presently they 
came back again without it. 

Trevor took his sun-stone from his pocket. 
Jen clutched his arm and cried, "No!" 

"There's no danger now," lie said. "He 
hasn't time enough left to do anything with 
me. And— I feel somehow that I should tell 
him — " 

He put the sun-stone to his brow, and 
in his mind he cried, 
"Shannacb! " 

And into his mind came the cold, tremendous presence of the Last One. In an instant 
it had read Trevor's thoughts. 

"So this is the end, Trevor?" 

"Yes," Trevor said steadily. "The end." 

He was braced for the wild reaction of 
alarm and passion, the attempt to seize his 
mind, to avert doom. 

It didn't come. Instead, from the Last 
One, came a stunning pulse of gladness, of 
mounting joy. 

"Why — why, you want me to do this?" 
Trevor cried. 

"Yes, Trevor! Yes! I had thought that the 
centuries of waiting for death would be long 
yet, and lonely. But this, this will free me 
now!" 

Dazed by surprise, Trevor slowly made a 
gesture, and their ship throbbed upward 
into the sky. Another gesture, and the 
technician beside him reached toward the 
key of the radio-detonator, 

In that moment he felt the mind of Shannach crying out as in a vast, mingled music, 
a glad chorus of release against chords of 
cosmic sorrow for all that had been and 
would never be again, for the greatest and 
oldest of races that was ending. 

The receding city below erupted flame and 
rock around the catacomb mouth as the key 
was pressed. 

And the song of Shannach ebbed into 
silence, as the last of the children of mountains went forever into night. 



THE YIZIGRAPH 



THE VIZIGRAPH 

but iIkv are usually nothing but ■ nothing hiding 
behind a stupid name, a lot of doublclalk, and a sickening lii of cureness. Not so, the Wub. The Wub 
lives, li is so real it flopi right off the page and lies, 
slobbering and discussing philosophy, in your lap. 

THE MAN WHO STAKED THE STARS wu 
well above average, too. A sound STF idea in the 
background, and still it moves. As other mags turn to 
detective STF, Love STF, Woman's Home Companion 
STF, and anything else calculated to kill the Golden 
Goose of Science- Fiction ay disguising it as something 
else, it becomes increasingly clear that PLANET, for 
all iti faults, is one of the only mags still running the 
sort of stuff that made Science- Fiction great. 

STF can stand some improvement, but improvement in.the way of purification, not dilution. For instance, I'd like to tec that old clinker, the ipacebum, 
either given a new slant or dumped out the nearest 
spaceport. That's my purple hope, and I won't change 
it for ill the Wealth of Echindut. 

I haven't yet been able to bting myself to read 
BRIDE OF THE DARK ONE. Those Inevitable 
Rider Haggard priests scared me off. 

FROZEN HELL I did read, and while the BEM 
seemed more than somewhat similar to the movie 
THING, it at least was a newel stereotype than those 
old princesses, priests, and spacebums. Likewise 
ACID BATH was readable, but little more. Haven't 
read MOONDOG yet, despite the covet. I've gradually been building an aversion to Mullen based on 
small inconsistencies and slipups in his plots that 
■ever fail to annoy me out of enjoying his otherwise 
excellent wilting. 

I've seen Mayan's work in the POST, and, tho 
it certainly was wonderful, particularly as it was in 
color, I fear it means no more Mayan for PLANET. 
I hope I'm wrong, because I still believe him to be 
the finest artist in science-fiction. (Yes, I've seen 
Finlsy.) Could ynu possibly get him back ? Offer him 
i cover. Offer him, if you'll pardon the expression, 
money, but get him back. After seeing what he can do 
in color, I rather think giving him a cover would be 
a good idea in more ways than one. That man cannot 
only draw pictures: he can, I'll bet, draw customers. 

As to La Vizi, give first to Ned Reece, a fellow 
Paul lover (ho I fear that Paul is either dead or 
retired and that those few things of hit lhat have 
appeared hare been ho:dr>vers ftom the dim but 
glorious past Second to Mr. U: I bare always come 
out flatly in Favor of babes on the cover, not because 
they help sell the rnag, but because I am one of chose 
strange beasts that likes to look at females I tally 
wish they were btttt-r drawn. Nobody objects io a 
really well drawn fern Hardly anyone, anyway. 
Would these cover cleaner-uppen blue pencil Tiiun • 
If Mayan did the babe on the cover, nobody would 
kick if she was stark nekkid, and nun, would yo« 
evet sell magazines I 

Philip Brantingham disqualifies himself with thai 
track about "a dark age of surrealism and modernness," so give third to Arthur Stone, tho I don't 
agree with him, either. On the whole, this Viat 
suffers from an overdose of amateur theology and 
philosophy. What happened to the old guard humurisls that used to send pretentious towers of "logic" 
crashing with a single well-aimed wisecrack? 
Yen, 

RADELL FiSKATMY NELSON, BcM. 



Ed', 



te; Yeah, what hoppened? 



FOR ANDY'S SAKE 

2729 N, Magnolia 
Chicago, 14, III. 

Dear Editor: 

As I am very familiar with Murphy Anderson's 
magaaine and newspaper work, I wriuld l;ke to state 
my opinion, which is, lhat he is the best illustrator 
and cartoonist living today. I only wish I had the 
oppoituflity to tell him so personally. 

These past few years I've been reading nut lung hut 
cracks and criticisms in the VIZIGRAPH about the 
covert. It seems as if no one has the guts to praise or 
stick up for Anderson. 

All I want to say before I end this letter is "keep 
Anderson on all your timers, and how about a couple 
more of his interior illos?". 

Sincerely, 

Ww. DlCHTL 

Eif* note; Thia is as good a time at any to 
clear up the case of THE GREAT ANDERSON 
CONTUSION. Murphy Anderson, God Mat* him 

contributed any art work to PLANET in several 
yean. When I tee him again, William, I'll gladly 
inform him of your stout allegiance IO hia cause. 
Our much maligned and much praised cover artist 
ia Allen Anderson, master of the brush and purveyor of the feminine form. Claims h* enjoys the 
tirades launched agin him. The writer sometimes 
mixed up in this case is Paul Anderson. If Poul 
is as good an artist as he is a writer then he'i 
been keeping it a dark secret 

HELL AND HOT WATER 

3817 12th Avenue 
Brooklyn 17, N. Y, 

Dear Ed: 

Not having written a VIZI- letter in the age of several dogs, I enter diffidently, yanking at my forelock. 
But 1 would have words with friend Famsworth who 
writes in the July ish. He expresses what I feel it a 
stupid and dangerous idea, quite curfent among 
people who don't realize its danger as far as human 
progress is concerned. This is "that the belief that 
there is no Hell doesn't help morals . . ." If, in other 
words, there isn't any Hell, we should still terrify 
the young with a belief in a false conception in order 
to keep them straight, 

1 say this idea is a dangerous one, because most of 
our present planet- wide mess did not arise from any 
general dispensing with myths and unscientific beliefs 
— just the opposi:c. Stalinism is a myth, obviously 
false, unless you have been brought up to believe in 
it. The same, 1 rtgtet to say, is true of many other 
system* of thought that some people will defend with 
much vim. They're myths, harmful, obviously untrue, 
and completely useless as a means of guidir.g anybody 
in a Itcstthy way of life. 

White we're 'talking about Health, since Mr. Reynold* mentions ' a healthy people" who "must have 
something to strive for'' — is it healthy, Mr. Rtynolds, 
n> live in squalor and ignorance because you think 
you're going somewhere nice after you're dtad? 
What's wrung with cushioned ease? I notice that 
many an advocate of the strenuous and moral life 
condemns himself to martyrdom in wealth so that lots 
of other people can have the advantages of being 
poor and good. 

The easy way out which Mr. Reynolds criticizes is 
not what he thinks it is. It is realty the acceptance of 
what you have been told i* right and proper, the way 



lit PLANET 

ef living tint everybody eUe follow*, without any 
estamioation into it to set if "what everybody does" 
really makes much sense after «U. 

Doing thing! in the accepted way, being careful not 
to be different, can Involve acceptance of murder and 
slavery far other people if you happen 10 live in a 
society where that's normal. And there have been 
wine. It means, in the U. S-. never criticizing lot fear 
somebody might call you a Communist. Never protest 
anything you think is wrong, even if you think that 
what "everybody is doing' is in direct violation of 
principle! that everybody (die same everybody) loyally and loudly defend. In the long run, :he philosophy of the easy way, which Mr. Reynolds is advocating in the same breath that he attacks it, is the trouble 
with humanity. 

No, I don't like heavy tales. Yes, I want more 
benefits. And positively yes, I'm in favor of a 
future where people loaf a. lot. There's nothing thai 
I tin see that's wrong with plenty of miterial 
goods, as easy morality, and a lick of belief in 
Hell The societies that practised those things got 
along fine until noble souls who believed in the 
double standard, in gunpowder, in slavery, and naturally in Hell, came to impose the!.* notions an the 
peaceful and innocent (moralists. The Stalinist is a 
moral man, incidentally; his seaual life is chillier thin 
Cotton Mather's, except for those rare occasions when 
be must coldbloodedly use biology for the Party's 

To return to the front end of Mr. Reynold's letter 
—"'(he stricter they believe God to be, the stricter 
their morals will be." Nope. A little study of comparative societies would quickly show you that morals 
are almost directly dependent on the food supplv. 
The Greeks could, at one and the same time, worship 
Aphrodite and criticize Pericles for his goin's on 
with Aspuia. And if you don t think Greek morals 
were dependent on the fund supply, I'd like to know 
what they were dependent on. 

Enough. Past the mead, fellow pagans. We drink 
noii! ihc skull of the unhappy Reynolds. Guipglug. 
Frenetically. 

D. V. Staniby 



HANDS UP. SAPfHO! 

i*S Ellis 

Wichita 9. Kansas 

To the Editor: 

Well, well, well! So Mr. Sapiro is after my scalp, 
eh? Have to give him credit for his masterful flow 
of language. In fact, I haven't heard a tirade of 
ecjual refinement and culture since tlic nevspapermao 
spoke about Maggie's voice. 

But, dcrn it. why doesn't he give the details? 1 
am sure that the whole world must be eagerly awaiting the story of how I snuck the rat poison into Mao 
Tung's chop suey. Or maybe they want to hear bow 
I killed the Deid Sea. Come on, we are all ears. 

However, while be is trying to tell all about me, 
I have a little aursery rhyme of my own to recite. A 
few montlis back I had managed to save up a few 
dollars to put in my savings account. I bid (he money 
on my bedroom table to await a chance to deposit it 
and went to bed. Just about daybreak a burglar 
sneaked into the room. I grabbed for my equalizer 
and he grabbed for the Wild Blue Yonder. 

To put it crudely, be took bis foot in band and 
akcediddlcd. 1 don't know when he stopped running 
but it roust have been some distance away for the 
pubic couldn't find him. Afterward, I picked up off 
the :'■•■•< some personal paper* the burglar bad 



STORIES 

dropped. They bore the identity of a Mr. SapifD of 
Berkeley, California. 

I Icivc it to the other readers to draw i CMMc
tion between this nocturnal visit and Mr. Sapito's 
rage as expressed in the September Planet. I can't 
blame my visitor for scramming, though, for the 
mouth of my .4j is almost as big as Leland's. 

Edwin Sigi i ■■ 

EVERYBODY' GETS IN THE ACT 

c/o F, Pohl. 
220 Jth Ave, 
New York 1, N. Y 

Deer J. O.: 

So you did it. You gave me an original. At 
o'igiiull ME ! May the sun of Connecticut shine ever 
warmly but not hotly 'round thy noble brow. 

I will happily relieve you of the Vestal fot BE 
YOND LIES THE WUB. 

Speaking of Connecticut, what's with the address 
The agency notification said "Mayflower Gardens.' 
and here you are on "Summer Street." J. O., you gel 
back where you belong this instant! 

Let's get into the hatchet job on the September 
PLANET. 

About tlie cover — what's your price? For the 
original, I mean. Who do 1 knock off to get itr 
Boy, PLANET just ain't hid a cover like this before. By gum, it's a pleasure to lee seme work that 
combines good color technique with draft sm.insliip, 
for a change. Unless Fiction House has changed, 
all the credit for its being in existence belongs in 
you, too. Consider your back patted and your hand 
shook. I also hope the layoff lias given Anderson 
time to do a mnre careful than usual job on his 
next, and I pray to T. T. Scott that t!>ere'll be more 
Vestals. 

Contents: Oooh, M ....... lookit all the pseudo
In order of meiitt 

THE STAR PLUNDERER »nd EVIL OUT OF 
ONZAR, deadlocked. Ganes was slick, but Anderson 
Pit in a lot more thought. Ganes sort of outslicked 
himself, but then, Anderson didn't build enough. It 
aJl adds up to a point where one story's shora-umings 
balance off the other's, I think Andy should have 
written his longer, though, and Ganes' should bjwe 
been chopped. 

Not, ZERO DATA, closely followed by THE 
SLAVES OF VLNUS Something didn't come off 
with ZERO cutting?— and SLAVES never had ft. 

It used to he there was one decent short to an 
issue, anywiy. What happened here? The Dick 
story had no plot, the Williams deal would have been 
better off without one, ind THE KIG PILL — ah, yes, 
THE BIG PILL. Apt title, that. You must have 
chuckled over it for hours. 

I'll say this for your longer stories — tbey move, ind 
rapidly I guess they have to. 

Which brings us to the Get Andcrsonr movement. 1 don't get it. He hasn't written a dud yet. even 
if A. A. Craig did slap my wrist a while back. He 
turns out a nice, dcrxndable |oh, even if he doe* 
insist on poinding the drum of Cyclic history, (Always interlaid your bouquets with a brickbat, I always say. What do yuu always say?) Ah, well, I 
guess we're all hacks in tlie artistic shade of such 
Eft* jiints as used to grace the mags in the good 
old day's. 

Which, for no good reason, brings me to Gregg 
Calkins, of whom 1 am now going to mike a lifekiug 

Grigori, thou knowot it not, but thou i ..... tea* 



THE VIZlGRAPn 



111 



through thy kepi. For my dough, you are • revolving 

Poiat for point on the Calkins letter, thudy: 
t\) The :. : . . ; ■ sing value of (inline* to promags 
•( negligible, for (he simple ■niun that anyone in 
■ufTuiciit ■ i. ■ with STF to read I knowi all 

about the prolines, and cither buys til or mm; of 
them lutrwiititally, or else haj long since picked hit 
favorites and eouldn t be budgeJ into buyinj anything 
else mih ni'jo. 

(2) Newspaper publicity for worldcons is ludicrous. They generally draw half a column in one edition, .in J that on page twenty. If the mat for die 
liver pill ad comes in, rut goes the stfeon publicity. 
Don't kid yourself, Calkins. Maybe if a Sirian delegation arrived, then. (Sirius, that is, and in a 
multicolored (lying saucer with suitable pyrotechnics 
and cacophony. ) Even then, we'd probably be 
■queued out by the International Chess Tournament 

(3) Look, pal, why is it everybody thinks you just 
tit down behind a dictaphone and witch the cylinder 
till up? You got k rigi.t to like ot dislike stories, 
and to say so, and, on occasion, fan criticism may 
be of some technical uie, but fiction writing is a 
craft, with involved techniques, arid just saying a 
story stinks, or is a "classic," is of absolutely no 
value i" the poor slaves trying to build ot buy bet
rbe artistic lines of a bridge to oe of value to an 
engineer trying to compute sheer strength, would 

Sam Merwin came right out, took his life in his 
hands, end told you why promags run fan columns. 
Thev amuse the general rent-paying readers no end. 
Being i fringe phenomenon bears no Stigma. The 
laugh's on the nor.-fen far supporting space devoted 
■o activities completely unconnected with their interests. Sit back. Enjoy yourself. But remember that all 
iif organized fandom is a little grain of sand on the 
shore nf a more o; less mighty ocean of grecnbarJcs. 
The only obligation the promags have lo my of us 
is no more than the moral obligation of any publication to any group of steady readers. So quit trying 
to say that fandom could bring more than moral 
pressure on an editor. Financial, Greg, we're not 
even worth directing special ads to, in this particular 

And now, Calkins, the blow. I speak as ■ fan 
— as one fan, with no mysterious "we" behind me. 

Just when was it, lad, that God reached down and 
touched his indes finger to your forehead? Where 
do you get the nerve to build a picket fence around 
fandom? And having built it, where did you dredge 
up the further gall to stand within the pale and 
smugly make nasty faces at Mrs. Corby? Who gave 
you Saint Peter's old jt>b? 

Just who do you speak for when you smugly 
declare who gualiiVs to be a Ian and who doesn't? 
Chum, I was in this racket before you were. Who let 
»» in? Well, you're in, the same way I got in, 
by inviting myself, and you stay the tame way I 
stay— by liking it well enough to stick at it The nilei 
didn't suddenly change after Mrs. Calkins' little 
boy plunked his round bottom on the bomb. There 
was a fandom before you tore off your first sexy 
cover, and there'll be one alter you re loo old lo 
appreciate them. 

Personally, I'm proud and happy to know, even 
through the tenuous link of the VfZIGBAPH, a 
reader like Mrs, Corby, who had enough common sense 
lo com* out and speak her mind instead of following 
meekly along behind uould-be arbiters like you. 



Pia that up over soar framed picture of Captain 
Video, pal. 

Write me a letter sometime, lad. 1 like your fanmag, and I still can't figure out how you managed to 
work your way that far out into left field. 

Which brings us to Leland Sapiro, who would also 
be o( the Chosen Ones. Siller is — well, he's Siglcr. 
I've gotten some weird mail from the boy, some of 
it mentioning ' Lelaod Sapiro," and I imagine 
Leland has, too. Nevertheless, the fallacy in thia 
not quite-complete lifting of an old JWC Jr. editorial lies in the fact that the setious/nonscrious consequences criterion for the validity of personal opinion 
requires an omniscient, apassionate xing to establish 
the dichotomy. I'm pretty sure O'Suliivan isn't ■ 
Slafl, Leland. so suppose we let him take his magizine 
down the road to hell anyway he chooses to, and 
when another Sigler letter rums up in the Viiigraph, 
you can just cover your eyes and escape the contaminating influence that way. Or, are you a Slan? 

Sounds like I hate everybody, doesn't it V As a matlet of fact, I'm a lovable guy at heart, but whenever 
somebody tomes around advocating the abrog.inon 
of the right to hold and declare personal opinion, [ 
remember that 1 got out of Europe one jump ahead 
of people who were doing the same thing. 

Gotta run. I'm gonna go right out and be a 
radio-television technician I'll stop long enough to 
vote for Mavis Hartman Female, Helen Haber, 
PLANETS Own Clipping Bureau, and Boh Flint, 
even if he does lose his head over Bradbury. In that 
order, and doesn't it hurt to know nobody gets tlx 
cover originals? 

Ain't Fandom Wonderful? 

A. J. Burwvsj 

DREAMERS ALL 



906 Notth D Street 
Poplar Bluff, Missouri 

Iff Dear Editor: 

While I am writing this letter 1 think of many 
things, including what 1 am writing aJjout. 

First off, I wish to pay special recognition to 
Martin Gross for a thoroughly dislikablc letter. 
Though I most assuredly agree with many of his 
Opinions I fnd him on the whole ridiculously radical. 

Set»nd. I would like to comment on Philip Bran, 
tingham's third argument. In my opinion there is no 
such scale as basic intelligence and no such 
animal as the average American. We like lo think of 
thing" like the latter existing for convenience sake 
and for one's own personal desires. As for his charge 
that the American morals have sunk to an all time 
low in thcii reading nf lewd trash, I will not try to 
argue for or reconcile the publication of what he 
defines the latter as but I would like to point out 
that it is read by those listed in the social register 
and the police rejister. 

Third, what is all this talk about PS not keeping 
up with its standards. It has never laid claim nor 
shown any irtcmpt toward being arty. Though many 
a lime I have sighed with pleasure after finishing 
some of the storiesPS would please me by dunging its covets; cot 
the artists but the composition and theme. 

The covers usually consist of a half-naked gill, a 
righting man, and a bem or celestial object Ot both; 
tries to depict the girl as* a hell cat or damsel in 
distress in loud colors. Now, I personally have nothing against the continuation of ihc female part s' 



t 



112 PLASET 

ti« f»«fx? Also, could not the theme be pictorial ot 
■t leaii reasonably surrealistic? 

Fourth and last, I would like to give my idea of 
what a SF reader is. He is * dreamer of i sort, one 
who lias grown tited of looking a! Lin presto: earth, 
a person who cud look at tk- sky on a dark clear 
night J.iJ see rnr-re than a myriad of twinkling lights; 
millions ot rythmic sensory vibrations telling iuin of 
matters beyond mortal knowledge, subjects that appertain to creations, to utiipias. to life Magazines such 
as PLANET have provided one in ccrp relation of these 
waves that ire without diameter or circumference to 
the reader. 

If I have offended anyone 1 thank you for bearing 
with me this fax. 

Yours, 

J. Dean Clarh 

GAHGWAT. THRILL-SEEKERS! 

Lincoln Avenue 
Calumet City, Illinois 

Dear .lick: 

Tins unworthy person is going to tiptoe by (he 
Bradbury feud which runs on unabated. Apparency it 
is endless. 

So. students, today's lecture is going to deal with 
SPACE OPERA . . . 

First I'm going to o!fer a definition, or rather a 
rjogtmtic statement: writing really comes under two 
separate lieadirfgs — Good Literature and Trivia. Good 
Literature is the type of writing that everyone enjoys 
reading. It is the author's best work, and the publisher and editor are proud to be associated with the 
work. Trivia has subheading) such is dcte:tive, love, 
spaceooera, gimmick, elc. Trivia is eotertiining (occasionally) hut, li<e die money you spent for it, here 
today— gone tomorrow. Usually the author has tried 
to prove himself a tough, smart superman rather than 
Liking itiitorv as in art form and miking it rea-Jable 
toalf 

Unfortunately Good Literature is scarce today. Not 
only in the pulp Geld but in the slicks and the hard 
cover world of publishing. Modern classics like 
BLOOD KSOI liril, CKAIT-S OF WRATH, THEATRF.. FOR WHOM THE BELL TOLLS and MOON 
AND SIXPENCE, are rare occurrences- The public is 
no longer looking tor guod books . . . only for the 
ones which will give them the molt thrills. 

Why is this modem day world set on thrill-seeking ? 
They turn fiorn bo*iog to wrestling to auto racing. 
From vaudeville to motion pictures to television. One 
■ sks why ACROSS THE RIVER AND INTO THE 
TREES is not acclaimed a literary sensation. Perhaps 
it is hrvause the public prefers to read Mike Hammer. 

Science liction has had a widespread influence in the 
literary world, but it has failed in every respect to 
raise my standards. It shies from reality. The attempts 
oil a few to put emotion in their work were cheered 
with t good deal of noise, then forgotten. Human 
beings do not eaist in science- fi £t ion, merely a few 
Katues to act as dupes in order to fill the trick ending. 



STORIES 

The fault basically does not lie with the »ri»n 

but with Ihe industry itself- After ail, trash is only 
printed because the editor accepts it, and usually the 

cditur is intelligent enough to know it is poor material. Low word rates also make a difference. Then, 
of course, there are publishers' taboos. 

Your magazine, jack, is not perfect. Besides Good 
Literature you sometimes print space-opera, It seems, 
also, that in makeup the mag needs work done. But 
I'll always be a purchaser. One thing about the 
editors, in the past and present of PSi they have never 
been obnoxious ... a hard thing to come by in 
Itfdom. 

Yours respectfully, 

Phiup Br anting tl a m 

CALLING ALL AIRWAVES 

6128 Gentiy Ave. 
No. Hollywood, Calif. 

Dear Editor: 

I'd like to begin my letter with a reply to the letter 
published in September PLANET STORIES from 
Wm. Mullarkey, Jr. To summarize, he stated that 
stf'( greatest medium, radio, had dropped its two best 
shows, DIMENSION "X" and 200 PLLS. That, of 
course, is to. He also said that stfJom should write 
in about it. Well for one, I did. The night that 
DIMENSION "X." went off the air. I wrote to NBC 
to find out whohoppen The reply said rli.it DIMENSION "X" had been tried many limes before, without success. I'm mad! What do they mean, without 

I agree with Mr. Mullarkey that radio is a good 
means to spread itf. Croon fen, let's sit down and 
write to the iaJin sMtiuns .ir- hi tl it s. Also, whatever 
happened to CBS's OUT THERE television series? 
This show was equal to, if not hitter than TALES 
OF TOMORROW. They had many big stories; Heiniein'j THE GB.EIN HILLS 01 lAKTH.aid MISFIT, 
phis Bradbury's THE MAN, and many more. 

Science fiction is a tender subject with me. I'm 
for it, in every form. I'm a comp Iciest (foolish boy!), 
a semi-active fan, an avid reader and an amateur 
dealer. 

I managed to jet some old issues of PLANET the 
other day and was surprised it the number of people 
who wrote letters that sounded so like those of present 
days, only transformed to modern subjects. Like the 
one letter from a guy who complahed about author* 
using "fantastic and impossible" weapons, capable of 
killing many thousands of people at a time . . . this 
letter was written in 1942. Wasn't there a thing in 
'45, the "A-Bomh" ot something like that? 

Why is PLANET so good? Because in this Mciv 
nical age, people want to read something where they 
don't have to concentrate on lime-nLaclnncs, paradoxes, 
neutro-ravs. galactic warfare, and complicated workshop gadgets. Let's get back to the three "AV of 
stf. Action, Adventure, and Artistry. 

Adventure! y yvurj, 

Paul Novel*. 



You Practice COMMUNICATIONS 

I send you parts to build .,„ , 
this transmitter JR*flB[ ssfeSsi 



You Practice Radio SERVICING 

on this modem radio you 
build with parts I send 




WlELEViSfON 



Learn Servicing or Communications 
Practice at Home in Spare Time 



A Television is TODAY S Good Job Maker 
Many Make S10 Eilra a Week it Spare Time 

Send How for 1 Books FREE- -Mail Coupon 



lave Your Own Business 

& *t Eirln**r -iWf^ 1 *™'P i I I'HIJMii f,.r H.Vt. I-. ,1- rn^ ' ■ 



Ml? ft** ■nSvWalyt' & ' lMm ° B 




RUPTURE -EASER 

for Men! For Women f Wr '&iidren! / 




NO FITTING 
REQUIRED! 




NOW YOU CAN . . . 
THROW AWAY THOSE 
GOUGING, TORTURING 
TRUSSES - GET NEW 
WONDERFUL RELIEF 

wm 

RUPTURE-EASER 



hock lacirm ind fldfutHobhr Itq Urapv W At* grain pad — no iixl of IwtW 
b a-Ji U..=«tH«j fa. tomlu". ir.-i.hlt ^-c*°- dotKiwg WmhaU, AJu 

MHd at altrr oprrnl>nn luppotl Sii*i <0' m*n. *nmtn onj chlldraa. tot J to 
n«»ar— MAIL COUPON NOWI Mot «. i. r- *» <-• «* ~^-> ' 

■iiifiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 

JprPEH BRACE CO. in W r ***sn.. d^fkf .mj.u,&n s. *** 



■ S-=. 

■ >-■■ it*. 



