
Lena was free to love, free to hate, free 
to be burned to the core by the raw violence of life. But did she have the right 
to make a prisoner of her soul— and to 
ruin other people's lives? 



ANY BEST- SELLING REPRINT ON THIS PAGE ONLY 25c EACH 

THE FIFTH CRAVE 




THE WINOiOF 
FEAR 
by Hodding Carter 

A negro- hating 
Sou (hern (own 
gets mixed -up 



SMOKE UPTHEVAUEY 
by Monti Barrett 

Grady's hunted as 
an outlaw— and falls 
in love! A real slice 
of life in the 70 swhen the Texas 
frontier was really 
st its toughest! 





Jonathan Latimer 
A weird religious cult names 
Penelope as the 



dead leade 
Does she live 
tell the tale? 




- — SO ORDER YOUR BOOK! TODAY) mhmmmM^ 
- Popular Library, Inc., Dept. TFG-3 
10 East 40th St., New York 16, N.Y. 

Please send me postpaid the Popular Library Books I have checked. 
I enclose 25c ( in coin or in U. S. stamps of small denominations) 
per copy. ( We pay postage for orders of ■! books or more. If ordering less than 4 books, enclose Sc per book extra for postage. 



BOUND GIRL 
by Everett and 
Olga Webber 
A loveless mar. 
riage was her 



cape. 



her heart 
yearned for romance during 
, those Civil Wax 
J years! 



□ IT'S A FREE COUNTRY 

by Ben Ames Williams 

□ THE FIFTH GRAVE 
by Jonathan Latimer 



^ CITY & ZONE_ 



O THE WINDS OF FEAR 

by Hodding Carter 
□ BOUND GIRL 

by Everett and Olga Webber 



-J 



DEFENSE 



iiasstgsesa 

eSer «9j £hat mean a 
y 0U wisn. 



and what 
it means 
to you! 



« getting Wad chance 
training. And vo,',' " you ha ve 
training^rho^"^" ff t^t 
time from I. c. s. y m s P ar e 



Any way you look at it, I.C.S. training 
will fit you for the demands of today, 
will help put you in a position of importance. So mail the coupon... today! 



INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOLS 



Without cut or obligation, piuit » 

Air Condltionlnn and 
Plumbing Court*) 

O Aii Conditioning 
OHwtini DPIun 

□ Rolri notation D Str — 
Chemical CouriM 

O Chemical Enid n sarins 
D Chemistry, Analytical 

□ Chemistry, Industrial 

□ Chemistry, Mfg. Hon S Steel 

□ Petroleum Refining rj Plaitics 

□ Pulp and paper Making 

Civil Engineering, Arehflec 
tural and Mining ~ 

□ Architecture 

□ Architectural Drafting 

□ Bridge and Building Foreman, 

□ Building Estimating 

n Civil Engineerine 

-r..?l Mining 

□ Contracting and Building 
fj Highway Engineering 

□ Lumber Dealer 

□ Reading Structural Bluiprltta 

□ Sanitary Engineering 

□ Structural Drafting 



Ungth of Service 



□ Structural Engineering 

□ Surveying and Mapping 
Communication! Couraai 

□ Efectronies 
LI Practical Telephony 

O Radio, General □ Radio Operating □ Reading Shop Blueprint; 
D Radio Servicing □ Television □ Sheet-Metal Drafting 

O Telegraph Engineering □ Sheet-Metal Wotke.i 

■Metrical Couraea □ Ship Drafting O Ship Fitting 



□ Industrial Metallurgy 

□ Machine Shop □ Mecti. Drafting 
O Mechanical Engineering 

□ Moid-Loft Work 

□ Pattern making-Wood, Metal 



□ Tool Designing 

□ Tootmaking 
O Welding-Gas and Electric 



□ Electrical Draftii.„ 

□ Electrical Engir t -r-np 
P Elc-clric tight and Power 
[ 1 Lif;!:!,.^ I cthmcian 
Li Pnett £ Electrician D Air Brake Q Car Inspector 

Intorna! Combustion □ Diesel LocomaHva 

Engines Couraea □ Locomotive Engineer 

D Auto Technician O Aviation □ Locomotive Fireman 

□ Diesel- Electric □ Locomotive Machinist 

□ Diesel Engines □ Gas Engines □ Railroad Section Foreman 
Mechanical Couraaa LI Steam-Diesel Loco. Eng. 

□ Aeronautical Engineer's. Jr. Stationary Eng'r'rj Couraas 

□ Aircrall Drafting O Flight Engineer □ Boiler-making 

□ Forgine a Foundry Work □ Combustion Engineering 

□ Heat Treatment of Metals □ Engine Running 

□ Industrial Engineering □ Marin* Engineering 

□ Industrial lustruraeotab'oa □ Power Plant EngVg □ Steam Engr. 



Tout i la Couraaa 

□ Cotton Manufacturing 

□ Loom Firing □ Rayon Waiving 

□ Textile Designing 

□ Woolen Manufacturing 
Businataand 
AcadamicCouraaa 

O Accounting □ Advartfslm 

□ Bookkeeping 

□ Business Administration 

□ Bus. Correspondence □ Bus. Law 

□ Certified Public Accounting 

□ Commercial □ Commercial Arl 

□ Cast Accounting 

□ Federal Tai □ First Year College 

□ Foremanshio O French 
EJ Good English □ High School 

□ Higher Mathematics; □ Illustration 

□ industrial Supervision 

D Motor Traffic □ Postal Civil Service 
O Retailing □ Retail Bus. Management 
Salesmanship □ Secretarial 

O Sign Lettering 

O Spanish! O Steoo?raphy 

O Traffic fV 




Vol. 23, No. 1 



A THRILLING PUBLICATION 



March, 1951 



Vv I /A A Complete Novel 

^^feW THE STARMEW OF LLYRDIS 

JS^O*^^ BY ^J 1 *" 11 BKACKETT 

■ . |^f~ ' Michael Trekeame sensed his difference from 

^^^Jf~~^- other men, but didn't know he was a cliangcling 

%,/s^!®iw&!$<^.Jf of the only race able to conquer the stars! 9 

Two Complete Novelets 

EARTHMEN NO MORE Edmond Hamilton 76 

When Curt Newton and the Futuremen revived John Carey from his deep freeze, 
he wanted to go home — but ivhere in space was home? 

THE TWO SHADOWS William F. Temple 106 

A poet s a pragmatist and a girl — they were all that teas left of humanity after 
Earth became a second Sun! 

Short Stories 

THEN FLY OUR GREETINGS Margaret St. Clair 95 

Science discovers the secret of mutual repulsion 

MEN OF THE TEN BOOKS Jack Vance 122 

The folk on the strange planet spoke the language of Earth 

SHORT ORDER Sam Merwin, Jr. 135 

Enoch Joties had been everywhere — but was always in the same spot 

Features 

THE ETHER VIBRATES The Editor 6 

A science fiction department featuring "Ether grams'* from our readers 

CURRENT FAN PUBLICATIONS A Review 153 

SCIENCE FICTION BOOKSHELF A Department 157 

LOOKING AHEAD Coming Features 161 



STAIUFLJNG STORVES. Published every oUuv month by Belter Publications, Inc., H. T-. T'inoB, Presidunt. at 28 Wm-ihinfrton 

St., SimuimHil 3. Mas?. Juiilm ial and cu-out i vc oiJievs. 10 tii.si -Ultli St., New York 1> : . N. V. Kutc;v,l ;,s l-Has.-i ii'.at.ler 

June 13, liHO. ut tiic post effiee :it HpriiiL'tii-ld. Miins., ur-der the act of iUrrii 3. !s;<t. C.pjNKht, Xfl'il. by letter Puolirationi, 
Inc. Subscript!"!"' 112 issues), S3 on : ainEle copies, 1.35; foreign uici Canndlau put- u bis extra, in rwtBijtoiitiinft wilh t»ls 
macaKine please include postal zone number, lr any, ManuEcriyU will be returned unless uetuiunaisiMl 1j.v stU' -.bil.ht^^cl. 
Binmpcd envelopes and are subinitiv! at Ihn author's risk. "Names of all eha.ai'!-i- '..•■:! in sif.ries sen* ! - lie: i i»i arnrirs arc 

fictitious. It Uib name of any living perscn or enisling institution Is used, it ia s cotWdOWW* PKIN'f ED IN TUB U.S.A. 



I WILL TRAIN YOU AT HOME FOR 

GOOD PAY- SUCCESS 
f*S A BRIGHT FUTURE 

•* *M| in America's FastGroiv/ng Industry 




Do you want a good pay iob, a bright PRACTICAL EXPERIENCE cxperi-i 

future and security? Or your own menting with circuits common to Radiol 

profitable shop? Get into the fast and Television. Many students make 

growing:, prosperous RADIO-TELE- 15, ?10 a week extra fixing Radios iri 

"ndusttyl Radio alone is big- spare time Spatial Booklets start 

. _ jier! 81 million radios, 2,700 teaching you the day you enroll. 
Broadcasting Stations, expanding A vi- _, .„ , mm mm m 
-->h. Police Radio,' Micro-wave Relay, Send NOW for Z BOOKS 
id toatltift. * wo-way Radio are making opportune FREE — Mail Coupon 

I TRAINED THESE MEN WOffS^SSSSSSR M> r .™FMm">m 

, tors. Then add Television, TODAY'S J*J JJfSJ] 
1 good job maker. 
K^MiMli 3.0DO.OOO TV sets sold . . . 

5"tRn I «.r™" Stations now operating 
'■■ —'curt?! "stath P™ " ted by authorities. 



Read, 




Many Soon Make $10 Extra 
a Week in Spare lime 

Keep your job while training at home. 

ff'Eidia'rlu Hu'"' 1 - ''■■'<■ trained are successful 
HSSW HA DIO- TELE VISION TECHNICIANS. , Learn Kadla-Tete vision principles from, illustrated lessons. Get 



VETERANS 

TO GET THIS- VALUABLE TRAINING UHOER 5. I. BILL, 
TIKE IS FUJHKiKfl JUT. M6IL 'JOUFON HOW! 





Good/brBoth-TRtt 



MR. J. E. SMITH, President, Dept. ICQ 

National Radio Institute, Washington 9, D. C. 

Mail me Sample Lesson and 6J-pagc 




WE think it high time that we teed off 
on the almost omnipresent theory 
of "survival of the fittest." Ever since the 
publication, approximately a century ago, 
of the late Charles Darwin's Origin of 
Species this phrase, and the supposedly 
pragmatic idea behind it, have persistently 
infiltrated Western thought and writing. 

By the very nature of subjects frequently dealt with — alien invasion, conquest, 
colonization and social intercourse among 
denizens of other star systems and dimensions — it occurs in science fiction probably 
more often than in other fields of what is 
sometimes laughingly termed literature. Increasingly, of recent months and years, the 
goal of survival for its own sake is being 
employed as justifiable motivation for the 
behavior of heroes and villains alike. 

Darwin Gets the Blame 

And Darwin gets the blame — although 
actually neither the phrase nor the thought 
were his. You will no more find either in 
any of his writings than you will find 
"Heaven helps those that help themselves" 
in the Bible — another wide-spread misconception. 

Who uttered the latter phrase we do not 
know — but guilt for the "survival of the 
fittest" can be laid squarely upon the headstone of Herbert Spencer, the man who 
sought to tailor through rationalization 
Darwin's theories to fit the ruthless individualism of the nineteenth century industrial revolution. Unfortunately Spencer 
succeeded so well that we now associate the 
words with Darwin. 

Actually Darwin was a scientist, a man 
who assembled enormous amounts of data 
and from such facts made certain inferences 
logically unassailable. He did not attempt 
to fit the ages-long evolutionary process 
he recorded into the day-to-day existence 
of his contemporaries. In fact his latterday conclusion was quite the reverse of 



Spencer's — that survival seems more likely 
to go to those species that practised cooperation than those who make competition 
the keynote of their culture. 

It does not take any vast intellectual 
insight to discover that the thought behind "survival of the fittest" has virtually 
no relation to fact. Biology and paleontology are awash with examples that disprove it. 

Take the Dodo 

For one there is the saber-tooth tiger, 
largest and most efficient of all cats, a 
species whose powers of adjustment and 
survival are provable in living room and 
alley as well as in the jungle. The sabertooth, for reasons still relatively obscure, 
disappeared save for museum reconstructions millions of years ago. 

On the other hand there is the dodo — 
probably the most helpless and useless 
creature, except when browned nicely on 
a spit, ever to turn up on the biological 
records. It couldn't run, it couldn't fight, 
it couldn't fly. It couldn't even sing for Hs 
supper. Yet it managed to survive in its 
antipodean habitat until it fell prey to the 
eniftty dinner pails of numerous hungry 
mariners — within the memory of living 
man. 

For further example take the bald eagle 
— our symbolic national bird. Certainly this 
super-hawk, tireless in the air, keen of 
vision and magnificently equipped with 
beak and talons, ought to be a survival 
standout. Yet it is in great and immediate 
danger of vanishing from the scene forever. On the other hand the chihuahua, and 
the pekinese survive and thrive. 

No, the factors that govern survival of 
species and therefore of the individual are 
not only complex but have a way of eradicating the strong with the weak. In fact at 
times these factors seem to delight in 
(Continued on Page 139) 




KNOWLEDGE 
THAT HAS 

ENDURED WITH THE 
PYRAMIDS 



A SECRET METHOD FOR 
THE MASTERY OF LIFE 



AMENHOTEP IV 
Founder of Egypt'* 
Mystery School) 



WHENCE came the knowledge that built the Pyramids and the mighty Temples of the Pharaohs? Civi' 
ligation began in the Nile Valley centuries ago. 
Where did its first builders acquire their astounding wisdom 
that started man on his upward climb? Beginning with 
naught they overcame nature's forces and gave the world its 
first sciences and arts. Did their knowledge come from a race 
now submerged beneath the sea, or were they touched with 
Infinite inspiration? From what concealed source came the 
wisdom that produced such characters as Amenhotep IV, 
Leonardo da Vinci, Isaac Newton, and a host of others? 
Today it is \noiun that they discovered and learned to interpret certain Secret Methods for the development of their 
inner power of mind. They learned to command the inner 
forces within their own beings, and to master life. This secret 
art of living has been preserved and handed down throughout 
the ages. Today it is extended to those who dare to use its 
profound principles to meet and solve the problems of life inl 
these complex times. 

This Sealed Book — FREE 

Has life brought you that personal satisfaction, the sense of achieve- ment and happiness that you desire? If not, it is your duty to yourself to learn about this rational method of applying natural laws for 
the mastery of life. To the thoughtful person it is obvious that everyone cannot be entrusted with an intimate knowledge of the mysteries 
of life, for everyone is not capable of properly using it. But if you 
are one of those possessed of a true desire to forge ahead and wish 
to make use of the subtle influences of life, the Rbsicrucians (not a 
religious organization) will send you A Sealed Book of explanation 
without obligation. This Sealed Book tells how you, in the privacy of 
your own home, without interference with your personal affairs or 
manner of living, may receive these secret teachings. Not weird or 
strange practices, but a rational application of the basic laws of life. 
Use the coupon, ard obtain your complimentary copy. 

The ROSICRUCIANS address 

SAN JOSE (amorc) CALIFORNIA city 




Use this 
coupon for 
FREE 
copy of boo\ 



SCRIBE X.T.D. 

The Roilcrueians (AMORC) 
San Jose, California 



NAME 



CHAPTER I 
Shairn 

MICHAEL TEEHEARNE was to 
remember that evening as the 
end of the world, for him. The end of 
his familiar life in a familiar Earth, 
the first glimmering vision of the in
Michael Trehearne sensed his difference from other men. but he little 



A Novel 

by LEIGH BRACKETT 



knew he wax a changeling ot the only race able fo conquer the starsi 

» 



credible. It began with the man who 
spoke to him on the heights behind St. 
Malo by the light of the Midsummer 
Fires. 

There was a great crowd of tourists 
there, come to watch the old Breton festival of the sacred bonfire. Trehearne 
was among them but not of them. He 
stood alone— he was always alone. He 
was thinking that the ritual being performed in the wide space of stony turf 
was just too quaint to be endured and 
wondering why he had bothered with it, 
when someone spoke to him with casual 
intimacy. 

"In four days we shall be free of all 
this, going home. A good thought, isn't 
it? Two years is a long time." 

Trehearne turned his head and looked 
into a face so like his own that he was 
startled. 

The resemblance was that of a strong 
racial stamp rather than any blood kinship. If two Mohawks had met in the 
hills of Afghanistan they would have 
recognized each other and it was the 
! with Trehearne and the stranger. 



There was the same arrogant bonestructure, the odd and striking beauty 
of form and color that seemed to have 
no root in any race of Earth, the long 
yellow eyes, slightly tilted, flecked with 
sparks of greenish fire. And there was 
the same pride. In Trehearne it was a 
lonely bitter thing. The stranger bore 
his like a banner. 

During the moment in which Trehearne stared amazed the stranger remarked, "I don ! t remember seeing you 
on the last ship. How long have you 
been here?" 

"Since yesterday," answered Trehearne and knew as he formed the 
words that they were not the ones expected of him. A wild throb of excite



Tr*h«ama safd tofHy, "Shairn 
and she came to him, radiant 




ment ran through him. He said impulsively, "Look here, you've mistaken me 
for someone else but I'm glad you did!" 
In his eagerness he all but clutched the 
man's arm. "I must talk to ycu*." 

Something in the stranger's expression had altered. His eyes were now both 
wary and startled. "Upon what subject?" 



"Your family — my family. Forgive 
me if I seem impertinent but it's important to me. I've come a long way, from 
America to Cornwall and now to Brittany, trying to trace down my own line." 
He paused, looking again into that remarkable face that watched him, darkly 
handsome, darkly mocking in the firelight. "Will you tell me your name?" 

"Kerref," said the man slowly. "I beg 
your pardon, Monsieur. The resemblance 
is indeed striking. I mistook you for one 
of my kin." 

Trehearne was frowning. "Kerrel?" 
he repeated and shook his head. "My 
people were called Cahusac before they 
went into Cornwall." 

"There was doubtless a connection," 
said Herrel easily. He pointed abruptly 
to the open space beyond. "Look — they 
begin the final ritual." 
The great bonfire had burned low. The 



Monopoly ofi Speed 

f\NE of the major problems that currently face the writer of science fiction 
stories and may some day confront our scientists is the matter of exceeding 
the speed Of light. Many theories have been suggested — perhaps all of them as 
absurd as that early nineteenthycentury prognosiicator who foresaw human inability to survive in a railway carriage moving faster than thirty- mites per hour. 

Mis,s Bracliett, in her very fine nftvel, has a new suggestion as to how man 
may travel faster than 186JX10 miles per second. Suck a monopoly as she conceives is hardly an attractive idea—but iff view of human history it is all too 
manlike. And certainly the thought of «t«*tr»t>«i 1 in theatre am&now, is one of 
the most exciting within the range of hrman imagination. — THE EDITOR. 



11 



12 STARTLII 

peasants and the fisherfolk, some hundreds of them, were gathered in a circle 
around the windy glow of the flames. A 
white-bearded old man began to pray 
in the craggy Breton Gaelic. 

TREHEARNE barely turned his 
head. His mind was full of the 
stranger and of all the things that had 
oppressed and worried and driven him 
since childhood, the nagging little mysteries about himself to which now, perhaps, he would find the key. 

He glanced away only a second, following the gesture of Kerrel's arm. But 
when he looked back, Kerrel was gone. 

Trehearne took half a dozen aimless 
steps, searching for the man, but he had 
melted away into the darkness and the 
crowd. Trehearne stopped, feeling cold 
and furious. 

His temper, long the bane of a rather 
luckless existence, reared up and bared 
its claws. He had always been childishly 
sensitive to insults. If he could have got 
his hands on the contemptuous Kerrel 
he would have thrashed him. He turned 
again to the festival, controlling himself as he had learned painfully to do, 
realizing that he was being ridiculous. 
But his face, so like that of the vanished 
stranger, had the look of an angry 
Apollyon. 

The Bretons had begun the procession around the waning fire. Short burly men in bright jackets and broadbrimmed hats, sturdy women in aprons 
and long skirts, their improbable 
starched coifs fluttering with ribbons 
and lace. Sabots clumped heavily on the 
stony ground. 

They would march three times sunward, circling the embers, and then 
solemnly, each pick up a pebble and as 
solemnly cast it into the coals. Then they 
would scramble for the charred brands 
and bear them home to be charms 
against fever and lightning and the 
murrain until the next Midsummer Eve. 

It struck Trehearne that most of 
them, except the very old, looked painfully self-conscious about it all. In a 
thoroughly bad humor, Trehearne was 
on the point of leaving. And then he 



; STORIES 

saw the girl. 

She was standing some ten feet away 
from him in the forefront of the crowd, 
which had shaped itself into a semicircle. She had wanted him to see her. 
She was swinging a white handbag like 
a lazy pendulum on a long strap and her 
gaze was fixed on him. She was smiling. 
Her smile was a challenge. 

In the reflection of the great bed of 
glowing embers, Trehearne saw that she 
was another of Kerrel's breed — and his 
own, whatever it might be. But it was 
not that recognition that made his heart 
leap up. It was herself. 

The red-gold Tight danced over her, 
and perhaps it was only that faery glow 
that made her seem more than a handsome girl in a white dress. Only a trick 
of wind and starlight, perhaps, that 
made Trehearne see in her a changeling, bright, beautiful, wicked and wise 
— and no more human than Lilith. 

She had attracted not only his attention but that of the Bretons also. The 
ritual circle was broken and they were 
staring at her and muttering. Then the 
old man who had prayed went toward 
her. In his seamed weathered face, in 
his eyes, was the spark of an ancient 
hatred, the shadow of an ancient fear. 

The girl flung up her dark head and 
laughed but Trehearne did not feel like 
laughing. 

The old man cursed her. 

Trehearne knew not one word of Gaelic but he did not need a knowledge of 
the tongue. Nor did he need to have explained the gesture of angry dismissal. 
The Bretons, the old ones, had already 
picked up their stones for the fire. In 
another minute they would use them on 
the girl. 

Trehearne strode across the front of 
the crowd and caught her roughly by 
the arm, pulling her away. She was still 
laughing, still mocking as she shouted 
something at the old man. The words 
she spoke might have been Gaelic but 
they had a different sound and they had 
no kindness in them. 

The sightseers parted readily as Trehearne thrust through them with the 
girl. The voice of the old man followed 



THE STABMEN 

them down the slope of the hill and the 
curious tourists stared after them until 
they were out of sight. 

Trehearne dropped her arm then and 
demanded, "What was the matter with 
them?" 

'"Ehe peasant folk have long memories. They don't understand what it is 
they remember, only that evil things 
once happened to them because of us." 

"What sort of evil things?" 

"Have there been any new ones since 
the beginning?" Her voice held a dry 
humor. 

They were far from the crowd now, 
near the beach. A late moon was rising 
but the walled island city bulked huge 
and dark, a medieval shadow. The girl 
was a white wraith, all astir with the 
salt wind that tumbled her dark hair 
and set her skirts to rippling. He 
thought her eyes were sea-green but in 
the moonlight he could not be sure. 

"Are you going to vanish like Kerrel?" he asked. 

She laughed. "Kerrel is a rude man. 
I offered myself to make amends*" 

"What do they call yon?" 

"Shairn." 

"That doesn't sound Breton." 

"Doesn't it? My other name is unpronounceable and means of the Silver 
Tower." 

HER eyes were very bright in the 
moonlight. He thought that in 
some secret way she was mocking him 
but he did not care. He said, "FU stick 
to Shairn." 

They went on down the path to the 
beach and sat on the soft warm sand. 
He told her his own name and she asked, 
"You are American?" 
"Fourth generation," 
"From Brittany to Cornwall to America," she murmured musingly. "Oh, yes, 
I heard all that you told Kerrel. The 
years, the generations, the mingling 
of other strains — and still the VardoTa 
blood breeds t^rue!" 

He fepeateti the word Vardda wonderfngljr. 

"An*~old tribal name. You've never 
heard it," She laughed with pure de


OF IXYRDIS 13 

light. "You're incredible, Michael. No 
wonder Kerrel made a mistake!" 

After a moment of silence, she asked, 
"What sort of a man are you, Michael ? 
What do you do? How do you live?" 

He looked at her keenly. "Do you 
really want to know? All right, I'll tell 
you. I'm a man who has never been satisfied. I've never had a woman or a job I 
could stay with very long. I'm a flier by 
trade but even that seems a dull and 
rather childish business. And why? Because I'm too good for any of it." 

He laughed, not without a certain cruel humor. "Don't ask me in what way 
I'm too good. I seem to be unusually 
healthy but that's important only to me. 
My brain-power has never set the world 
on fire. I have no tendency to genius. 
Yet somehow IVe always felt there's 
something lacking either in me or the 
world." 

Shairn nodded, absently smoothing a 
patch of sand with her palm. Again he 
was conscious of a queer wisdom in her 
that did not fit her youth. She smiled, a 
small thing full of secrets. 

"And you thought that if you learned 
the origin of your blood you would understand yourself?" 

"Perhaps. My father was a weedy 
little man with red hair. He swore I 
was none of his. I didn't look like my 
mother's side either. Pve never looked 
Kke anybody until I met you and Kerrel. 
Oddness becomes very wearing, especially when you don't know why you 
should be odd." 

He added, "The villagers in Cornwall 
called me changeKng. I had the same 
thought when I saw you." 

"So we are of one race, Michael, could 
you stay with me ?" 

"You're not a wom^n, you've a witch. 
I've never met a witen before." 

She laughed outright at that. "Nonsense. Witoh, chasigelkig — these are 
wojijs for fools and peasants." 

"Who ase the Vardda, Shairn?" 

She shook her head. "I told you — it is 
a tribal, name. One that I want you to 
forget." 

She went on, "You said to Kerrel that 
you had come to Brittany to trace down. 



14 



STARTLING STORIES 



your family?" 

"Yes. I learned in Cornwall that they 
came from a place called Keregnac." 

He thought she started a little at that 
name but she said nothing and he asked, 
"Do you know the town?" 

"It is not a town," she answered slowly. "Only a tiny village, lying on the 
edge of a great moor. Yes, I know 
Keregnac." She picked up a bit of driftwood and began to draw idle patterns 
in the sand. "I don't think you will learn 
much there. The village is very old and 
now almost dead." 

He started to speak but she went on, 
almost hurriedly, "Don't go any farther 
in your search, Michael. It will bring 
you nothing but regret. I know the blood 
you spring from. I am telling you the 
truth." 

She turned to him. "Go home. Go back 
to America. Be content that you are 
young and strong and, yes — very handsome, even if you do not resemble anyone else! I have done an ill thing. I 
(should not have spoken to you tonight. 
Kerrel was wise and his act was kind. 
Now I ask you to forget me and all I 
have said. I am leaving St. Malo in the 
morning." 

"No!" He caught her wrist and held 
it. "Oh, no! You've started this. You 
can't run away from it now." 

"But," she said reasonably, "there's 
no way you can stop me." 

"Then I'll follow." His grip softened, 
shifted to the place where her strong 
white neck curved so smoothly into a 
perfect shoulder. "Please, Shairn. Let 
me see you again. Let me come with you, 
to your home." 

She would not meet his eyes. She 
smiled a little and said, "That would be 
a very long journey indeed." 

"Brittany is not so large." 

"Have I said that I live in Brittany?" 
She stood up suddenly. "I must go, 4 
Michael. Be angry with me if you will 
but believe in what I say — forget .me, 
forget Brittany, forget your family. Go 
home and be content!" Her eyes were 
full of tears. 

She left him then, going swiftly 
across the moonlit beach, and he would 



not run after her. He stood where he 
was, upset and angered by her sudden 
going. 

After a while he thought of the things 
she had said and the thing that Kerrel 
had said. "Have I said that I live in 
Brittany?" 

Where was home to the Vardda? 

Bent on the moonlit sand his moody 
gaze was drawn to the patterns Shairn 
had traced there. Amidst the aimless 
rambling lines a word stood out in clear, 
sharp letters — 

KEREGNAC. 



CHAPTER II 
The Vardda 



A HIRED car and driver took him 
for an exorbitant price to Keregnac. On the first day they had roads and 
made excellent time. On the second the 
tiny Fiat labored in agony along rutted 
cart tracks. The sea was far behind 
them and the driver complained incessantly of the mad desires of Americans. 
Why should anyone wish to go to Keregnac, a place that even the Bretons had 
forgotten? 

Trehearne was in a savage mood. 
Shairn's cryptic warnings and her very 
clear advice had only served to whip his 
curiosity to fever pitch. The Devil himself could not have made him stop now 
and he knew that the girl was a large 
part of that determination. 

She had done something to him. She 
had hit him where no one and nothing 
had ever touched him before. And she 
had done it deliberately. He was sure 
of that. She might be a lot of things, 
among them deceitful, heartless and 
dangerous, but she was not feckless nor 
lacking in intelligence. 

Then he remembered her tears and 
began to wonder all over again. 

The driver lost his way among the 
ruts and the stony hamlets. When he 
begged directions the peasants regarded 
Trehearne in dour silence and could not 



smoke and age. A meager fire burned 
on the hearth and two home-made candles furnished all the light. 

It was enough to show Trehearne's 
face. 

Oddly enough the squat hard-handed 
peasant who was master of the house 
showed neither fear nor hatred. Nor 
was he surprised. 

A certain slyness crept into his sullen 




be compelled to answer. It was impossible even to learn whether others had 
gone this way before them. 

Trehearne had forseen this possibility. He had had enough such difficulties 
in Cornwall. He had got a map and directions in St. Malo and he forced the 
unhappy driver on by dead reckoning. 
It was night before they came wallowing into a muddy square half paved with 
ancient stones and saw the lights of half 
a dozen dwellings clustered around it. 

"Go there to the largest house," said 
Trehearne. "Ask if this is Keregnac and 
tell the master we'll pay well for lodging." 

The driver, himself in a thoroughly 
foul humor by now, did as he was bid 
and in a few moments Trehearne found 
himself in a three-room house of crumbling stone, the walls blackened with 




"Do you h*v« to go voyaging, 
Michael?" asked Shairn 



1« STARTLIN 

expression but that was all. 

"You shall have the best bed, Monsieur," he said in vile French and pointed to a gigantic carved lit-clos. "I have 
also one good horse. The others have 
gone ahead into the landes. You will 
wish to overtake them." 

Trehearne tried to conceal his sudden excitement. "Monsieur Kerrel and 
Mademoiselle Shairn?" 

The peasant shrugged. "You know 
better than I what their names might be. 
I am not a curious man. I enjoy good 
health, and am content." 

He called sharply in the Breton tongue 
and a woman came to prepare food. She 
had a heavy stupid face. She glanced 
once, sidelong, at Trehearne and after 
that was careful neither to look at nor 
speak to him. As soon as the simple meal 
was on the table she hid herself in the 
adjoining room. 

The ancient crone who sat knitting 
by the fire was not so cowed. As though 
age placed her above necessity she kept 
her bright little eyes fixed upon Trehearne with a mixture of hostility and 
interest. 

"What are you thinking, ma vieUe?" 
he asked her, smiling. 

She answered, in French that was almost unintelligible to him, "I am thinking, Monsieur, that Keregnac is greatly 
honored by the Bevil!" 

The man snarled at her in Gaelic, bidding her be silent, but Trehearne shook 
his head. 

"Don't be afraid, grandmere. Why do 
you say that?" 

"Every other year he sends his sons 
and daughters to us. They eat our food, 
borrow our horses and pay us well. Oh, 
very well !" Her white coif bobbed. Trehearne laughed. 

"And do I appear like the devil's son?" 

"You are the very breed." 

ON impulse he went to her and said, 
"Once my family lived here. Their 
name was Cahusac." 

"Cahusac. Eh, eh, Keregnac has forgotten them, the Cahusacs! That was 
long and long ago. They had an only 
child, a daughter, who gave herself to 



i STORIES 

one of these handsome sons of the Evil 
One and . . ." She looked at him wisely. 
"But forgive me, my old tongue has not 
yet learned caution." 

Trehearne put silver in her lap and 
thanked her and went outside. He 
walked the few paces to the end of the 
muddy street and looked out upon a 
moor that stretched still and desolate 
under the stars. 

Into the landes, the wastes, Shairn 
had gone with Kerrel. Why, for what 
purpose, he could not guess, any more 
than he could guess the answers to all 
the other riddles. He knew better than 
to ask his host. He lighted a cigarette 
and stood for a long time, staring out 
across the empty heath, his eyes narrowed and intense with thought. 

He had traced his family back to 
Keregnac and he knew now the reason 
for their leaving. But the secret of his 
birthright lay still farther on. 

How much farther he did not dream. 

At dawn he paid off his driver and 
his host, mounted the horse that was 
ready for him and struck out into the 
moor. He had no idea what direction he 
should take. However, the moor could 
not be endless in extent and if he 
searched long enough he was almost 
bound to find what he was looking for. 
If Kerrel and Shairn and other "sons 
and daughters of the Devil" came into 
the landes, they must have shelter of 
some kind. 

But all that day he rode across stony 
soil, through gorse and bramble and 
stunted trees, without seeing a cottage 
or a solitary sheep or even a distant 
smoke to mark a human habitation. 
Only here and there a lonely tor stood 
like a druid sentinel against a lowering 
sky. 

It drew on to dusk. The wind blew 
and it began to rain, a fine soaking drizzle that showed promise of going on all 
night. And the heath stretched on all 
sides of him, featureless, without comfort or hope. 

There was nothing to do but go on. 
He let the horse find its own way, sitting 
hunched in the saddle, wet and wolfishly 
hungry and at odds with the world. 



THE STARMEN 

His mood grew blacker as the light 
failed. The horse continued to plod on 
through pitch darkness. The land rolled 
a good bit and Trehearne knew from 
the cant of the saddle when his mount 
slid down into the hollow of a fold and 
then scrambled out again up the other 
side, slipping and stumbling in the mud 
and wet gorse. 

From the crest of that low rise Trehearne caught a glimmer of ''light, ahead 
and to the left. 

He said aloud, "There is a cotter's 
hut," and would not allow himself to 
hope for anything else. But he spurred 
his horse on recklessly and his heart was 
beating fast. 

It seemed hours before he reached 
that light. 

He was close onto the place before he 
could make out its size and shape in the 
thick night. Then he reined in, completely puzzled. This was no cotter's hut 
nor was it a manor nor any normal sort 
of dwelling. He saw a broken shaft of 
stone that had once been a squat crenellated tower and around its foot a ruin 
of walls and fallen outbuildings. It was 
obviously very old, probably the stronghold of some medieval robber, Trehearne 
guessed. 

Yet part of it was inhabited. Yellow 
lamplight poured from the window embrasures of the keep and there were 
horses in the courtyard, sheltered under 
prosaic canvas. 

He dismounted and let his weary animal join its fellows. Then, walking quietly over the sunken flags, he approached 
the tower. 

He would have looked inside but the 
embrasures were set several feet above 
his head. Instead he stood for a time by 
the door, listening. He carried a small 
automatic- in his pocket and it felt good 
under his hand. There was something 
wrong about all this — very wrong indeed. 

The planks of the door were weathered but he thought that they were new 
in the last thirty years. He could hear 
the sound of voices beyond, a number 
of voices all raised in talk, talk punctuated by bursts of laughter. 



OF LLYRDIS IT 

As he listened there was a glassy 
crash as though someone had dropped 
a bottle, then further laughter, in the 
midst of which a man began to sing in 
a deep, strong voice. The singer sounded 
not particularly drunk but very happy. 
The song and the words to it were both 
strange to Trehearne. It was a rousing 
refrain and other voices joined in, one 
by one. 

Instead of reassuring him the jovial 
uproar only made Treheaune's nerves 
creep more coldly down his back. He 
was sure that when he opened the door 
he would find Sirairn and Kerael among 
the company. What sort of folk were 
they, indeed, to hold high wassail in a 
ruined tower lost on this desolate moor? 

The shrill old voice whispered in his 
memory — Every other year the Devil 
sends his sons and daughters. 

He swore and laid his hand on the 
great iron latch, swinging the door wide 
open. 

The talking, the laughter and the 
song all died into the silence of astonishment. Trehearne stood still in the doorway and those within remained as they 
were, as though the opening of the door 
had stiffened them into figures of wood. 

MEN and women, a few less than a 
score, gathered in an archaic oblong room of musty atone. Their clothing 
and the -chairs on which they sat did not 
belong in that room nor in any room 
TreheaEne had ever seen — but they belonged quite naturally to the people. 
There was a long table laid with food 
andrfurnished with bottles of unfamiliar 
shapes. 

Most of the faces were handsome. A 
few were plain and one was downright 
ugly. But all of them bore the same 
racial stamp — the indefinable differentness from the rest of humanity that 
subtly marked Trenearne and Kerrel 
antf the girl. 

She was there. Shairn, wearing a 
loose, .short tunic of some strange fabric 
the color of flame, belted over soft dark 
trousers. Her belt was jewelled, anther 
sandal shoes had golden bosses on the 
strap*. She held a purple goblet full of 



18 STARTLING 

spicy wine and her eyes were fixed on 
his and even so he could not read them. 

She said without moving or looking 
away, "If you hurt him, Kerrel, I'll kill 
you." 

Trehearne saw then that Kerrel was 
taking from his belt a thing that looked 
like a narrow flashlight with a thick 
prism where the lens should be. He was 
dressed like Shairn — they all were, men 
and women both — except that his tunic 
was iridescent silver, open to the belt 
to show his muscular chest. 

Kerrel said, "He has a gun." 
' "He won't use it." 

"No," said Trehearne slowly. "I won't 
use it." His gaze had shifted from the 
girl to Kerrel. He did not take his hand 
i way from his pocket. Neither did Kerrel put away the prism tube. 

The ugly man stepped between them. 
He had a merry slightly drunken face. 
From the tone of his voice Trehearne 
knew that it was he who had begun the 
singing. 

"Nobody's going to use anything," he 
said and thrust down Kerrel's arm. 
"We're all friends. We're all happy. 
We're going home. No quarrels between 
two Vardda now. Wait till you get to 
Llyrdis and kill each other there." 

He glanced slyly at Shairn and added, 
"Still at it, eh? My, what fun we do 
have with our pretty games !" 

"Oh, shut up, Edri!" she snapped. 
"Michael, how did you find us?" 

"Yes, Michael," said Kerrel mildly. 
"Do tell us how." His eyes were not 
mild, nor the set of his mouth. 

Trehearne answered, "I went to Keregnac on business of my own." He would 
have gone on but the ugly man called 
Edri interrupted. 

"What's all this about?" he demanded. 
"Why shouldn't a Vardda find his own ?" 
He came and put his hand on Trehearne's shoulder. "I don't know you. 
my lad, but what the devil? I can't know 
everyone. Sit down. Have a drink. Did 
you miss your ship last time? We have 
our full quota now but there's always 
room." 

He thrust a glass of the aromatic wine 
into Trehearne's hand. It went down 



STORIES 

like mellow fire and took some of the 
chill out of his bones. Edri was still 
talking but he had slipped now, quite 
naturally, into that unknown tongue — 
the language of the song, the language 
Shairn had used when she mocked the 
Bretons at the festival. 

There were others around Trehearne 
now. They were full of laughter and excitement, deluging him with questions 
he could not understand. Someone took 
his wet coat off him. His glass was refilled. 

Shairn came up behind him and put 
her two hands on his shoulders. She 
spoke to Edri and the others. Their 
chatter slackened. They stared at Trehearne in amazement. Suddenly Edri 
flung back his head and roared. 

"I don't believe it," he said in English, and peered closely at Trehearne. 
"You're having a joke together." 

Kerrel smiled. "What Shairn says is 
quite true. Somewhere, far back, this 
man had a Vardda ancestor. That's his 
only claim. He's a remarkable atavism, 
no more." 

"Well," said Edri. "Well!" Again he 
peered at Trehearne, his ugly face puckered comically. His eyes, however, were 
remarkably cool and shrewd. "He looks 
like a Vardda," he said. 

Trehearne got up. There was a kind 
of anger in him now. He looked at these 
people who bore the name of Vardda. 
He looked at their garments and their 
furniture, and the taste of their alien 
wine was strong in his mouth. A shiver 
ran over him, almost of fear. 

He caught Shairn by the arms roughly and said, "Who are you? Why are 
you here in this place? And where 
are you going?" 

Kerrel answered. "Didn't she tell you? 
No — I see that she didn't quite dare do 
that. Well, there's no reason not to tell 
you now." 

He paused. And Trehearne felt a cold 
foreboding at the hateful satisfaction 
in Kerrel's eyes. He knew that Kerrel 
was going to say something that would 
hit him hard. He suddenly didn't want 
to hear it. 

Kerrel said, "We Vardda aren't of 



THE STARME 
your Earth at all. We're waiting here 
for a ship and we're going home to 
Aldebaran — to the stars I" 



CHAPTER III 
The Ship from Outside 



THE words thundered in Trehearne's 
ears but they had no meaning — not 
at first. He let go of Shairn, who whispered, "Do you understand now why I 
told you to forget the Vardda ?" 

Edri thrust him into the chair again. 
"Sit down, old man. It's a large mouthful to swallow all at once. Here — wash 
it down with this." 
Trehearne took the wine and drank it. 
Home to Aldebaran. Home to the 
stars! Instinctively he appealed to Edri. 
"It isn't true," he said. "It can't be." 
"Why not?" 

Trehearne's throat was strangely 
tight. He stammered in his speech, finding it difficult to breathe. "Star-flight? 
An alien race coming and going on 
Earth — and all this in secret, no one 
knows of it?" 

Edri laughed. "Oh, billions of people 
know about it, from Cygnus to Hercules. 
We Vardda trade openly between the 
star-worlds of the galaxy for we've an 
unbreakable monopoly on interstellar 
flight." 

He poured Trehearne's glass full 
again. "Better let the idea trickle in 
slowly with the wine." 

Trehearne drank mechanically, but 
the wine was tasteless now. He could 
not take his eyes from Edri's ugly sympathetic face. 

"You mean you've conquered all those 
stars and worlds?" 

Edri snorted. "That's your Earth 
war-obsession talking. War is not only 
backward, it's damned unprofitable. We 
Vardda aren't conquerors, we're merchant-adventurers." 

He added patiently, "It's this way — 
there are hundreds of inhabited starworlds. They're most of them civilized 



OF LLYKDIS 19 

and proudly independent. We Vardda 
rule our own world but no other. 

"But we have something the other 
star-worlds don't have. We've got a monopoly on interstellar travel for certain 
reasons. We Vardda and we alone can 
travel and trade between the galaxy's 
worlds — the richest monopoly of all 
time 1" 

"But if you come and go like that, 
why not openly to Earth?" 

Edri shrugged. "You can't trade profitably with worlds still in their warridden phase. Such worlds we prefer to 
visit secretly. Your Earth is one of 
them." 

Shairn broke in. "It's true, Michael! 
We keep Vardda agents here secretly 
to gather from Earth whatever of value 
its civilization produces. We've done 
that for several centuries." 

The blood hammered in Trehearne's 
temple. We are waiting for a ship. If 
they brought those ships down in these 
landes or in the Great American Desert 
or in a hundred other of the waste places 
of the globe, who would know or see 
them, especially if they landed by night ? 

And the Vardda themselves — the very 
truth would protect them. You might 
look at a man and speculate whether he 
came from some distant exotic land but 
you would never suspect him of having 
come from another star. 

A woman began to giggle. "I'm 
sorry," she gasped. "But his face — it's 
so funny!" 

"And so would yours be," flashed 
Shairn. Her voice whispered swiftly in 
Trehearne's ear. "I'm sorry you came, 
Michael. I truly am. But you've got to 
hang on now." 

He recoiled from the touch of her 
fingers. His mind was rocking from the 
terrible agoraphobia of a man of Earth 
who had suddenly looked through an 
opened window into the crash and roar 
and glitter of all the galaxy's stars. 

Woman not born of Earth, daughter 
of the unimaginable deeps beyond the 
world! Changeling, Lilith, starwitch . . . 

Trehearne's head reeled and the familiar Earth seemed to vanish behind a 



20 STABTLIN 

fiery mist that dimmed his vision. 

Home to Aldebaran! 

He was aware of voices, remote and 
far away. They were talking, in that 
unknown language. Kerrel was speaking 
violently to Edri, Shairn crying out, the 
others joining in and arguing. Edri 
drank and did not answer, his brows 
drawn in a frown. 

Shairn's clear voice overruled and 
silenced the others. She talked swiftly, 
her green eyes flashing with excitement. 
The others seemed to agree to her proposal. Kerrel protested angrily but was 
drowned out. And Edri reluctantly nodded to Shairn. 

"Michael, listen V Shairn's voice came 
urgently through the haze. "Listen to 
Edri!" 

WITH a great effort Trehearne 
drew himself back to reality. He 
looked up dazedly into Edri's ugly compassionate face. Edri said, "You're going with us." 

Trehearne stared at him without moving. He did not answer. He could not. 
For the moment he was beyond words. 
There was a sickness in him as though 
the solid ground had dropped suddenly 
from under him. 

Edri went on. He looked uncomfortable, almost guilty, like a man who hates 
the thing he is forced to do. 

"I wish you hadn't come," he said. 
"But you did and there's no help for it. 
I'm leader here and under orders. Earth 
must have no knowledge of the Vardda. 
You understand? I can't leave you behind." 

Trehearne began to understand. He 
looked at the faces of the Vardda watching him, doubtful and troubled. Only 
Shairn's face he could not see. He knew 
they would use force if they had to. 

He spoke and his voice sounded 
hoarse and strange in his ears. 

"I'm going with you?" he repeated as 
though he needed to assure himself of 
the sense of those words. "Going to 
Aldebaran." 

"I'm sorry," Edri said. "It seems preferable to killing you in cold blood as 
Kerrel wanted." Abruptly he swore in 



STORIES 

his own tongue. "Damn it, I didn't ask 
you to come here. I said I was sorry. 
Here. Have a drink." 

Trehearne sprang up. He struck 
aside the cup that Edri held out to him. 
His violence was born of fear — fear as 
deep as the abysses between the stars. 
He was no coward. But no man could 
have a thing like this flung suddenly in 
his face and not recoil from it in a kind 
of horror. 

To Aldebaran ... to the stars . . . 

It had a different sound now. 

Shairn was beside him, her fingers 
cutting into his wrist. "Michael, you 
have to go. I fought for you. I'm counting on you." Her eyes were hard and 
bright. They challenged him. She whispered, "Don't show them you're afraid 1" 

The man who stood by the door 
opened it suddenly and went out, leaving it wide. A curious silence fell on the 
room. It had an electric quality, a thrill 
that even Trehearne could feel through 
the daze of shock that numbed him. 
They waited and the time seemed endless. He was very cold. 

The man thrust his head back in and 
shouted something, a high excited cry 
that was echoed from every throat. 

"Michael, the ship is coming. Do you 
hear me?" Shairn's voice, edged, commanding, ruthless. He heard it. 

"Walk with your head up, Michael! 
Don't make them take you by force!" 

Trehearne's face tightened. Something dark and cruel came into it. He 
shook her hand off roughly. He turned 
and Edri was there, holding out another 
cup of wine. He smiled, an honest smile, 
friendly, apologetic. Trehearne took the 
cup. 

It was strange. He saw the others, 
laughing, shouting, pouring toward the 
door. He heard and felt. And yet he was 
like a dead man. Everything was remote, without reality, the flimsy stuff of 
dreams. 

He drank the wine. He knew that he 
had done so because he put down the 
cup again and it was empty. He saw 
Edri watching him and again surprised 
in that ugly face a look of pity. Then 
he was walking out with the others. 



THE STARMEN 

He stood beside them in the windy 
darkness of the moor. It had ceased to 
rain. There was a wide rift in the 
clouds. The Vardda were looking upward toward it. Trehearne looked also 
and saw the huge bulk of a great ship 
dropping silently down from the stars. 

Softly, soundless as a drift of the 
night itself, the star-ship settled down 
over the heath. There were no noisy 
jets or clumsy bursts of flame to mark 
its landing. Trehearne caught the faint 
and subtle throbbing of motors different 
from any he had heard before and somehow that quiet song of power was more 
frightening than thunder. 

He watched, alone in his strange 
dream, alone among all the men of 
Earth who dreamed, for they would 
wake and he knew that he would not. 

The great sleek powerful stranger 
came to rest on the moor, bringing with 
it a dark breath of mystery from the 
outer Suns. Its hull was scarred by the 
atmosphere of unnamed worlds and its 
ports had looked upon infinities where 
the stars were swallowed up like clouds 
of fireflies. 

Trehearne began to tremble, an inner 
shuddering of the soul. 

The humming of the motors ceased. 



CHAPTER IV 

Ordeal in Space 



THE Vardda began to run toward 
the ship. And Trehearne was aware 
that Shairn was pulling him toward it. 



OF LLYRDIS 21 

He saw that there were two men behind 
him, holding little prism tubes. 

The ship was before him. He had to 
go into it. He was afraid but fear would 
do him no good. It was like bailing out. 
You had to do it and you did it. 

He was angry too. But most of all he 
was numb. Things had happened too 
fast — too fast and too hugely. 

He found himself shaking off Shairn's 
grip for the second time. He heard himself sayii»2, "I can walk quite well by 
myself." He was surprised at the tone of 
his voice. It was sharp as a whiplash 
and perfectly under control. 

A lock-door had opened high in the 
looming flank of the monster. White 
light blazed from it. A folding metal 
stair came down and then men and 
women descended to join the Vardda 
waiting eagerly below. There were greetings, talk, laughter. Those who had been 
exiles on Earth for two years had much 
to say to the newcomers who would replace them here. 

A cargo hatch was open lower down. 
Vardda crewmen were setting up a conveyor belt with the swiftness of long 
practice. 

Things were being brought to it from 
the tower. What things, Trehearne 
neither knew nor cared. Machinery clattered softly. 

He had reached the foot of the ladder. 

He looked up. The vast alien bulk of 
the ship was above him. It hung over 
him like the end of the world and he 
knew that it was just that. He thought 
of where that ship was going to take 
him, out into the darkness between the 
stars, out to unknown worlds, a stranger. [5T«r» page] 



RELIEVES • HEADACHE 
•NEURALGIA rvr^f 
• NEURITIS PAIN f&ijf 



Kerens Why... 

Anacin® Is like a doctor's pre* active ingredients. Anacin It 

scription. that is, Anacin con* specially compounded to give 

tains not one but a combina- FAST, LONG LASTING relief, 

tion of medically proved Don't wait. Buy Anacin today. 



22 STARTUN 

He heard Edri talking to the newcomers. They turned and stared at him, 
startled. Edri asked them earnestly, 
"What do you think? Is he Vardda or 
isn't he?" 

A man shook his head. "You'll soon 
find out." 

A woman, looking soberly at Trehearne, said, "It's cruel to find out that 
way. But there's nothing else you can 
do with him." 

Shairn . said quickly, "Come on, 
Michael. Come aboard." 

He wondered what the woman had 
meant. He remembered the look of pity 
in Edri's eyes, the uncomfortable 
troubled look of the others. 

The treads of the ladder rang hollow 
under his feet. 

A bell inside the great ship began to 
shrill, sharp and urgent. The freightbelt was already going up. A leonine 
young man clad in scarlet and black, 
with the tabs of rank on his shoulders, 
came running down and bawled a demand that they hurry. 

Trehearne said, "Shairn, what did she 
mean — It's cruel to find out that way?" 

"Nothing. I'll explain later. Come 
on." 

There was a great emptiness inside 
him. He was aware of the motions of 
his body, of the sounds and smells and 
colors, of the jostling of people behind 
him on the ladder. And yet none of it 
was really happening. It did not touch 
him, it was not part of him. 

He trod upon a metal deck and passed 
from the round lock-chamber into a 
long transverse corridor faced in the 
same dull metal. He saw the scars of 
time and hard use upon it. Now and 
again through a bulkhead door he caught 
a glimpse of a cabin or orderly room. 
Men lived and worked in them. They 
had a disturbing look of reality. 

There was a lounge and there were 
chairs bolted to the deck and he was 
sitting in one of the chairs. 

The bells rang sharply. 

Shairn stooped over Trehearne and 
whispered, "Kerrel is watching you. He 
wants to see you break." 

They were all watching him, all the 



STORIES 

Vardda in the rows of chairs. Their talk 
had faded away and they were looking 
at Trehearne uncomfortably, almost 
guiltily. It was as though something 
were going to happen to him, something 
that they didn't want to see happen. 
Edri's ugly face was bleak and sad. 

Trehearne fixed his gaze on the one 
unfriendly face, on Kerrel's sullen eyes. 
They gave him a focus, a definite point 
of thought to cling to. He said over 
again to himself, He wants to see me 
break. 

The bells rang again. 

Swift, smooth and awesome as the 
hand of God, acceleration pressed down 
upon him. And this is it, he thought. 

Muttering an all-but-silent thunder 
the ship rushed upward into the sky. 
For the first time in history Earthborn 
ears listened to the banshee scream of 
atmosphere past a cleaving hull. 

The weight on Trehearne's chest 
seemed as heavy as all Earth but he supported it and breathed and did not black 
out. His gaze did not waver from Kerrel's. 

The wailing shriek rose to a crescendo 
and died away. 

Earth was gone. They had stepped 
away from it. Even its sky was behind 
them. He was horribly afraid. 

He waited for the pressure to ease. 
It did not. There was a change now in 
the pitch of the motor-vibration. It 
seemed to climb higher and higher in 
a sort of demoniac frenzy. 

Shairn was bending forward, watching him. Her face was tense, without 
color. All the Vardda were peering at 
him now in a sort of climax of halffearful expectation. What was it that 
they were afraid was going to happen 
to him? 

The pressure grew and grew. 

He labored to breathe. Something 
happened to his vision. The faces around 
him began to waver and grow vague., 
to recede slowly into a reddish twilight. 

And still the pressure grew. 

Fear became near-panic. Something 
was happening to him — something unearthly and strange. He was a flier, & 
test-pilot. He had known pressure be


THE STARMEN 

fore. He had taken all the gravs a 
power-diving plane could bear and he 
had never come close to blacking out. 
But this was different. 

Speed, he thought. Light-years of 
speed — ft long way between stars! 

HE felt it in the fibers, the very 
atoms of his being. The incredible 
accelerations of interstellar speed were 
tearing at the separate cells of his flesh, 
riving them apart, rending the tissues 
of physical existence. 

He knew that the Vardda still watched 
him half-fearfully. This is what they 
were afraid of. They're used to it but 
I'm not. I'm going to die. 

He thought he heard a voice saying, 
"Fight, Michael! Fight!" 

"Shairn," he muttered. The word 
never got beyond his throat. Because a 
girl in a white dress had beckoned to 
him he was going to die in an alien ship 
between the stars. 

Kerrel settled back. He began to 
smile. With almost the last of his sight, 
Trehearne saw that smile. Kerrel knew 
that he was going to die. And he was 
glad. 

Kerrel — Shairn — the Vardda — death. 
Kerrel had known it all along. They all 
had. That was why the others had looked 
at him with that half-guilty troubled 
pity. They had known that he would die. 

Fierce resentment blazed up in him 
like a sudden fire. 

Shairn with her lying tears. She must 
have known it would come to this when 
she had drawn him to the tower. Yet 
she had done it, coolly gambling with his 
life. 

Rage shook him. Some buried part of 
his mind broke free and fury spurred 
it on. Why must he die ? Why should he 
not live? The Vardda lived and their 
blood ran in him. 

Anger — anger such as he had never 
known. He would not die under Kerrel's 
smiling eyes. He was filled suddenly 
with a raging determination to survive. 
He began to fight the pressure. 

He had nothing to fight with but willpower. It seemed a frail thing to pit 
against the unthinkable powers of veloc


OF LLYRDIS 2$ 

ities such as the men of Earth had never 
dreamed possible. Reason told him that 
but he was beyond reason. He fought 
and it was a strange inner struggle 
without sound or motion — a blind battle 
to regain control of his own flesh. 

He fought against the unseen force 
that sought to destroy the very cohesion 
of his body cells. Anger flogged him on 
and the instinctive will to live. He set 
his muscles and forced himself to 
breathe and his flagging heart stumbled, 
steadied and began to beat more evenly. 

He did not understand then what 
happened. He only knew that strength 
came to him from somewhere, a strength 
he had never known he possessed. It was 
physical strength — not the sort that can 
move great weights but a more subtle 
kind, a tensile force that strung his body 
taut against the terrible vibrations of 
speed and fought them back. 

He did not understand, not then. But 
he caught at that unguessed core of 
strength within him and drew upon it 
and it was simple, so simple, just a 
matter of tensing the muscles in a certain way. Suddenly the ghastly sense of 
his atoms falling apart was gone and 
the battle he had thought impossible 
was won. It was easy and he was strong 
— strong as any Vardda! 

It was then that he came near blacking out from sheer reaction. And he 
knew the victory had not been easy but 
very hard. The opening of that buried 
well of strength had left him paradoxically as weak as a newborn lamb. 

Some deep ancestral wisdom told him 
that he had been newly born in a way 
that was still beyond his knowledge. He 
was a different man now. He would 
never be the same again. 

He knew now that this was the important thing his body had been designed for — this proud ability to race 
between the stars. 

Shairn's voice rang out. "He lives! 
He lives! I told you he was true 
Vardda !" 

Kerrel's face had gone slack with 
amazement. Trehearne, drunk suddenly 
with a heady exultation, glanced at him 
with fiercely mocking eyes. The other 



24 STARTLIN 

Vardda had relaxed as though from a 
sick taut apprehension. They grinned 
approvingly at Trehearne. 

But Edri, mopping his damp brow, 
said between his teeth, "By God, Shairn, 
if your tricks had made me an executioner, if he'd died . . ." 

Kerrel interrupted furiously. "Perhaps he'll wish he had when we reach 
Llyrdis! You know Vardda law!" 

Trehearne heard and recognized the 
menace in the angry threat but he paid 
no attention. 

He said softly, "Shairn." 

She came to him. She was radiant. 
She was like nothing he had ever seen 
before and he would never get her out 
of his heart if he lived forever. He got 
up and set his hands on her shoulders 
and he asked her, "Shairn, what is 
meant by true Vardda? How do they 
differ from other men?" 

She laughed. "You have just proved 
your birthright, Michael. Don't you 
know ?" 

"That inner strength," he said slowly. 
"The ability to withstand interstellar 
speeds ?" She nodded. She was still smiling. He went on. "I want to understand 
this, Shairn. Do the Vardda alone have 
this ability?" 

Edri had arisen. He had the look of 
a man who wishes to avoid an ugly 
situation. He said uneasily, "There's a 
lot I want to show you, Trehearne. Come 
on and I'll explain about the Vardda on 
the way." 

"No." 

Shairn said, "It's quite simple, 
Michael. Controlled hereditary mutation, altering slightly the form and 
structure of the body cells so that they 
have enormous resistance to pressure 
and vibration. The other races of the 
galaxy are tied by their human weakness to their own solar systems — only 
the Vardda have the freedom of the 
stars !" 

"Then," said Trehearne, "if the mutation had not bred true in me I would 
have died." 

Edri spoke again but Trehearne did 
not hear him. He was smiling at Shairn, 
a peculiar smile. She began to draw 



STORIES 

away from him but he held her and 
asked, "Are you glad I lived, Shairn?" 

"Of course I am ! From the first minute I saw you, Michael, I was sure you 
were one of us." 

"That was very clever of you. And 
you were so sure you weren't afraid 
to gamble oa it — with my life." 

She said uncertainly, "Michael . . ." 

His hands moved swiftly from her 
shoulders. Her throat was warm and 
strong. The veins beat hard against his 
palms. He could not see her clearly, only 
her great startled eyes. 

Edri snapped, "Sit down, Kerrel !" He 
drew a small prism tube from his belt. 
To Trehearne he said, "I don't blame 
you one damn bit. But I'm afraid you'll 
have to stop it all the same." 

A pale beam sprang out from the 
prism. It touched with exquisite care 
against Trehearne's temple. He sighed 
once and fell. 



CHAPTER V 

To Aldebaran 



TREHEARNE looked up from the 
bunk where he lay and asked, "How 
long have I slept?" 

"Nearly twenty-four hours by Earth 
reckoning," Edri answered. "You needed it. The ship's doctor gave you a shot 
to make sure." 

"I seem to remember," Trehearne 
said, "that you gave me a shot of some 
kind yourself." 

"No hard feelings ?" 
Trehearne smiled briefly. "Under the 
circumstances — no." He sat up. They 
were alone in a small neat cabin. Edri 
was sprawled in a chair. 

He leaned over and offered Trehearne 
a prosaic pack of American cigarettes. 
"Smoker' 

Trehearne took one and lit it. He sat 
for some time in silence, remembering. 
He remembered most clearly Kerrel's 
angry threat. He asked, "What did Kerrel mean by Vardda law ? What will they 



THE STARMEN 

do with me when we reach Llyrdis?" 

Edri looked worried. "I wish to 
Heaven I knew." 

"What can they do? I'm a Vardda. 
I've proved it." 

"Ye-es," Edri agreed dubiously. 
"Actually, you're all Vardda, a complete 
atavism. But legally — " 

He began again. "You see, the law 
Kerrel referred to is a prohibition 
against admitting non-Vardda strains 
of any kind. Cross-breeding is forbidden 
under penalty of death, is the one unbreakable law. Keeping the Vardda 
blood pure isn't just pride, it's an economic necessity." 

"Then that was true about the mutation?" 

Edri nodded. "It's the foundation upon which the Vardda monopoly is built. 
No one else can fly at interstellar speeds 
and live, so we are the only species of 
Galactic Man, holding the stars in our 
two hands." 

"A star-flight monopoly of the galaxy, 
built on a simple mutation in bodycells!" 

"Yes," said Edri. "Simple — but fundamental. Tissues having a certain cellular structure possess a tensile strength 
in their cell-walls that can withstand 
incredible acceleration-pressure without collapse. You're lucky that the mutation was a recessive that finally bred 
true in you." 

He paused, then added somberly, 
"Some day I'll tell you the story of 
Orthis, who long ago found the secret 
of the mutation. A grand proud story 
it is — with a most shameful ending." 

He seemed to brood upon some 
thought of his own, before continuing. 
"So, Trehearne, though actually Vardda, 
you're legally not one. It will be up to 
the Council. I have no influence there 
but Shairn has some." 

Trehearne said bitterly, "Much help 
I'll get from that damned witch who 
was gambling with my life without telling me." 

Edri grinned. "I don't say you haven't 
reason for resentment. Still, don't forget that if Shairn hadn't proposed that 
ordeal for you, Kerrel would have in


OF LLYRDIS 25 

sisted on killing you in cold blood." 

He lifted the cover off a tray on a 
small table by the bunk. "I brought you 
some breakfast." 

It occurred to Trehearne that he had 
not eaten for two days. He got up, looking for his clothes. They were gone but 
others were laid across the foot of the 
bunk — a tunic of dark green silk, dark 
trousers, jewelled belt and sandals. He 
examined them doubtfully. 

"Put them on," said Edri. "You can't 
go about in those ridiculous tweeds. 

Trehearne dressed and sat down. The 
food was unfamiliar but palatable. Synthetic, he guessed. He wolfed it down. 

He tried not to think. He knew that 
if he thought of Michael Trehearne, 
bound out across the universe toward an 
unknown fate, his mind would crack. 
It could not accept that, not yet. 

Edri said, "If you're finished, come 
with me. I'll show you something nobody of your world has ever seen before." 

Trehearne got up. He caught a 
glimpse of himself in a reflecting surface and was startled to see how changed 
he was in the Vardda dress. 

They went out into the long corridor. 
Edri led the way forward. Now that 
the ship was in free space and making 
its unthinkable speed Trehearne could 
feel the deep inner vibration of power 
in it — a sort of humming drone that 
seemed to challenge the whole universe 
to make it stop. 

Trehearne shivered with the joy of a 
man who has handled power and is 
privileged to see the ultimate. He had 
flown the fastest jets and they were 
like children's toys compared to this 
mightiness. 

He cried, "What is the motive power ? 
And the principle? And how can you go 
faster than light? The limiting speed, 
contraction, mass . . ." 

EDRI laughed. "One at a time! And 
such simple little questions too! It 
took thousands of years to evolve a technology capable of answering them and 
you want me to explain it all in a few 
words. Well, a few words is all I know 



2« STARTLIN 

about it. I'm a drinker by profession, 
not a scientist. 

"A really functional ship, whether it 
plies water, air or space, must get its 
motive power by reacting against the 
element it travels in. And so, right now, 
the big atomic-powered generators in 
the stern are producing fifth-order rays 
which react against the fabric of space 
itself — and space, not wishing to be 
torn apart, obligingly thrusts us forward. 

"As to limiting speeds, long ago the 
Vardda physicists believed absolutely 
in them too — until they discovered fifthorder rays. They found then, as your 
scientists will find, that the theoretical 
absolutes you set up from limited knowledge will prove illusory when your 
knowledge expands. I could explain all 
that to you if I knew continuum-mechanics better than I do!" 

They had reached the forward end of 
the corridor. There was a narrow circular stairway leading upward. Edri 
motioned Trehearne to precede him. 

He did so and emerged into a round 
observation dome of immensely heavy 
quartzite. Through it there was nothing 
to be seen but utter darkness, streaked 
with creeping lines of light. 

"Those are stars," said Edri. "Or 
rather the radiation patterns of stars. 
At our present velocity we are overtaking the lines of luminous energy they 
have left behind them. Star-tracks, we 
call them." 

He closed a switch, and the thick 
quartzite became suffused with a pallid, 
milky glow. Edri consulted a masterdial, and made adjustments. 

"Watch the dome," he said. "It's triple thickness, of a special molecular 
composition, each plane laid at a different oblique angle. I've switched highfrequency electronic current into hairline grids between the three planes and 
all sorts of interesting and complicated 
things are happening in the molecular 
structure of the quartzite." 

Trehearne watched. His heart was 
beating hard. 

"Benold," said Edri, "the light-impulses of the star-tracks are caught, 



S STORIES 

stepped up, wrenched about and finally 
held on the inner lens." 

Trehearne beheld and, beholding, forgot Edri and the ship and himself. He 
forgot almost to breathe. 

Edri's voice came to him softly. "You 
may see this often, Trehearne — but 
never again for the first time." 

Trehearne looked into the dark and 
splendid loneliness of space. The ship 
seemed to fall away beneath him, leaving him suspended in the plunging gulfs 
of infinity. 

Through the magic of that quartzite 
dome he watched the great suns march 
in flame and thunder on their way, some 
solitary hunters, others joined together 
in companies of stars. He saw their cosmic pageant of life and death — the 
young suns, blazing with a blue-white 
strength, the golden suns, the old red 
suns, the dead suns, dark with funeral 
ash. 

He glimpsed the far-off island universes, the coiling fires of the nebulae, 
the wondrous terrifying nations of the 
Milky Way streaming along the rim of 
creation. And as he looked all thought 
and feeling went from him, leaving him 
naked and dumb with awe. 

Some of the stars he recognized — 
Algol, beating like a bloody heart of fire, 
the splintered glory of Sirius. To his 
left Orion strode gigantic across infinity, girded with suns. Dead ahead, tipping the far-flung Hyades, Aldebaran 
burned in sullen splendor. 

How long Trehearne stood there wondering he had no idea. He was lost, a 
man gone astray in a titan's dream. 
Edri was forced at last to drag him 
bodily away and even then he hardly 
knew where he was going or why. 

He found himself in the corridor outside the lounge. From within came the 
sound of Shairn's voice raised in laughter and the easy murmur of talk. 

Edri stopped. He said quietly, "You'll 
be spending much of your time with the 
others and the sooner they get used to 
you, the better. I want no trouble over 
Shairn. Is that understood ?" 

Trehearne smiled. His head was ringing with stars, his vision dazzled by the 



THE STARME 

blaze of nebulae. Shairn had ceased to 
matter very much. He said so and Edri 
gave him a wry glance. 

"The longer you feel that way, the 
longer you'll stay out of trouble." He 
paused and added, "Perhaps you ought 
to know why Shairn was among us observers on Earth. She went with Kerrel. 
He's mad over her and talked her into 
it — though she soon was bored with 
him and with Earth too." 

"I think I understand why you're telling me, Edri," said Trehearne, nodding. 
"Thanks." 

He went on into the lounge. Shairn 
was curled in a chair beside Kerrel, a 
wine-glass in her hand. She looked up 
as Trehearne came in, her eyes challenging and half amused. Kerrel's dark 
face tightened and suddenly everyone 
had stopped talking. 

Trehearne followed Edri past them 
without turning his head. He was perfectly sincere in his indifference, too full 
of that outer immensity to care what a 
woman thought or did. He sat down, 
only vaguely aware of the curious 
glances with which the Vardda watched. 

Shairn lifted her glass mockingly to 
Edri. "A good beginning for a happy 
voyage !" 

Trehearne did not look up at her. He 
sat still, thinking his own far thoughts. 
Someone laughed and Shairn's green 
eyes flashed angrily. 

But neither her anger nor her mockery could distract Trehearne from the 
wonder that had caught him, from the 
wild thrill of this plunge into infinity. 
And in the time that followed, its grip 
upon him strengthened. 

AT first there were periods when he 
felt that he was dreaming, that the 
ship and all within it would disappear 
and he would waken. But as his mind 
readjusted itself, shaking free from the 
narrow horizons of Earth, ancestral 
pride and ancestral longing began to 
stir. All the ill-fitting craggy corners of 
his personality, that had jarred so 
harshly against the world he knew, fell 
into place perfectly now. 
He was of one blood with these 



OF LLYRDIS 27 

Vardda. He knew it as he came to know 
them better. They had the same fullblooded joy in living hard, the same 
storming recklessness and delight in 
danger, that he knew was in himself. 
They were Galactic Man — the men who 
alone voyaged the interstellar gulfs, 
who alone strode between the stars. 

The power, the magnificence of this 
voyaging between the suns ! No wonder 
the little ships and little skies of Earth 
had seemed so futile. This was his heritage, the freedom of the stars, the long, 
long endless roads of outer space, the 
swift ships plying between the island 
continents of suns, the windless, timeless, boundless gulf that washed the 
shores of a galaxy. 

Trehearne stood for hours in the 
observation dome. He haunted the 
bridge, watching the intricate controls, 
the staggering complexities of astrogation. In the generator rooms he learned 
by heart the pulse of the ship, listening 
to the silence of free flight after acceleration was complete. He learned much 
and yet it was nothing and he was mad 
for learning, mad to hold under his own 
hands one of these proud giants of the 
stars. 

And the Vardda saw and understood 
his hunger and warmed to him. They 
accepted him, these gusty eager folk 
whose pride was as great as their cosmic horizons. He learned the Vardda 
tongue from Edri and his head spun to 
the tales he heard then from these mariners of the galaxy, of peril in far-off 
clusters of suns, of lonely dead stars 
booming forever dark through darkness 
with their frozen worlds, of tricky 
routes through nebulae, of all the thrill 
and danger that was life to them. 

Within Trehearne there grew an iron 
determination not to be robbed of his 
newfound birthright. The threat of that 
hung over him like a black cloud. Having, found them, to be barred now from 
the Vardda ships, the Vardda life, would 
be worse than dying. 

With that determination in mind he 
began to question Edri about Vardda 
law. 

"Final decision on your case will lie 



28 



STARTLING STORIES 



with the Council," Edri told him. "And 
they'll be dead against admitting you to 
Vardda status." 

"But damn it, I'm one of you!" Trehearne said. "They can't deny that after 
the ordeal I passed. And why should one 
more Vardda make a difference?" 

Edri shook his head. "To recognize 
an Earthborn man as a Vardda ? No — it 
might inspire vain hopes in all the 
peoples of the Galaxy who are bitterly 
envious of our monopoly." 

That was something Trehearne hadn't 
thought of. He thought of it, now. "I 
suppose the non-Vardda do envy your 
power of interstellar flight." 

"Would you like to be prisoned in 
your own solar system and have strangers carrying on all your commerce with 
other stars?" Edri countered. 

HE added, "And there's more to it 
than the economic problem. You're 
mad over this star-voyaging, Trehearne. 
I've watched you. Well, do you think 
other men can't feel the same way? Do 
you think the young men of all those 
star-worlds like to see the Vardda starships come and go and know that they 
can never take that road?" 

"I can see how they feel," Trehearne 
said. "A wonder they haven't found a 
way to force the Vardda to share the 
secret of the mutation." 

"That secret was lost with Orthis. 
We haven't it to give if we wanted to," 
Edri said gloomily. Then he added, "But 
I'd better shut up, or I'll be accused of 
Orthist talk myself." 

"Orthist?" said Trehearne, and Edri 
explained. 

"Long ago, when Orthis discovered 
the mutation, he dreamed of giving it 
to every race. He couldn't see that that 
would only lead to interstellar rivalries 
and conflicts. A few Vardda still think 
the way he did and so are called 
Orthists." 

"gut if the mutation secret is lost 
how can they hope to change things 
now ?" 

Edri shrugged. "There are still fools 
who dream of finding the secret again. 
They claim that Orthis' lost laboratory 



ship, which holds it, might still be found. 
It's only a useless dream but it makes 
trouble. And with all that in mind you 
can see your problem with the Council." 

"Altogether," said Trehearne, "it 
looks like a grim prospect for me." 

He got up. 

"You might as well know," said Edri. 
"It won't be easy." 

Trehearne went out. He climbed the 
stair to the observation dome, manipulated the controls and stood there, gazing at the red flare of Aldebaran, lost in 
brooding thought. 

After a time a hand touched his and 
he turned his head, slowly, for his mind 
was far away, thinking it was Edri. He 
saw instead the face of Shairn. 

She smiled. "Do you still hate me, 
Michael?" 

The light of the outer suns caught in 
her eyes, filling them with radiance. 
Trehearne looked at her, standing slim 
and tall against infinity, a luminous 
creature crowned with stars, and he 
thought again that she was no woman 
as he knew women. 

He said slowly, "I don't know." He 
thought of how she had tricked and led 
him, how she had gambled so lightly 
with his life. "Why did you do it, 
Shairn?" 

"I think," she said, "because I love 
you or because I could love you." 

"Or perhaps because you were only 
curious ?" 

"Perhaps." She took his hands and 
laid them on her white throat, holding 
them there, pressing them in against 
the beating veins. "You started this 
once, Michael. Will you finish it now ?" 

Her lips were curved and laughing. 
She was sure of herself, sure of him. 
Trehearne's eyes narrowed. They were 
suddenly hot and the starlight flickered 
in them. 

"I ought to," he whispered. "I ought 
to . . ." He called her a short cruel 
name and caught her arm as it rose to 
strike him and then her mouth was 
under his. 

Dead ahead, Aldebaran watched them 
from oat of the darkness of space, the 
eye of a basilisk, baleful and bright. 



THE 



CHAPTER VI 
Judgment on Lhjrdis 



THE long arc of deceleration was 
completed. The great starship was 
cruising now at planetary speed. Aldebaran had grown from a remote point of 
fire to a giant sun, terrifyingly near at 
hand. The small companion was visible 
only as a faint disc above the upper 
limb, its bluish light drowned out in the 
flooding ruddy blaze of the larger star. 

The Vardda had crowded up into the 
observation dome, eager for the first 
glimpse of home after two long years on 
Earth. A heavy shield now covered the 
dome to sunward and in its shadow the 
returning exiles pressed and chattered. 

Trehearne stood among them, listening to their excitement and feeling at a 
loss in it. Their talk was suddenly the 
talk of strangers, full of names and 
references that were meaningless to 
him, strident with a joy he could not 
share. 

They were coming home but he was 
homeless — and before him loomed the 
imagined faces of the Vardda Council, 
passing judgment. 

Shairn tugged at his sleeve. "There!" 
she cried. "There it is, Michael. Llyrdis!" 

He followed her pointing hand, squinting against the tawny glare of space, 
and saw a golden planet wheeling toward 
them, bright and beautiful, with a trio 
of circling moons. 

He became as excited as the Vardda. 
He forgot to worry. He could only think 
that presently he was going to tread the 
soil of a strange world, warmed by an 
alien sun, tasting the winds that blew 
from unknown seas. Tensely now, quivering with eagerness, he watched with 
the others. And Llyrdis grew. 

It seemed about the size of Earth. As 
the ship swept in upon it Trehearne 
could make out misty continents and the 
shadow-forms of oceans, wrapped in a 
cloud-shot atmosphere that burned red


OF LLYRDIS 29 

gold in Aldebaran's light. 

The ship plunged into it as into a bath 
of fire. Down, rushing down with a long 
triumphant scream, and in the lower air 
the clouds rolled and whipped in golden 
fury where the dark hull clove them. 

They swept low over an ocean the 
color of hammered brass and at length 
Trehearne saw ahead a low shore and 
beyond it a rolling verdant plain, girdled 
with tall mountains, and on that plain 
the gleaming vastness of a city. 

Still dropping, but slowly now in a 
soundless glide, the ship bore southward 
of those lifting towers. Here for miles 
the great docks ran, cradling the giants 
of the stars. They were close enough 
for Trehearne to glimpse the ceaseless 
swarming magnificently-ordered chaos 
of men and machines in this central 
focus of a commercial empire that embraced a galaxy. The sheer size of it was 
stunning. 

Edri's voice spoke quietly beside 
them. "I've just come from Communications. We've been ordered to land in 
the government dock and you and I are 
to present ourselves immediately to the 
Coordinator of the Port." 

"Old Joris," said Shairn. "You're in 
for a bad quarter of an hour, Edri. I'll 
come with you, of course." 

"We'll both come." That was Kerrel. 
He laid his hand with a light possessiveness on Shairn's arm ana smiled 
over her head at Trehearne. Trehearne 
shrugged. It crossed his mind that some 
day, if he were lucky, he would kill 
Kerrel for nothing more than his way 
of smiling. 

The warning bells rang. Trehearne 
went below with the others to await the 
landing. But his mouth was set and the 
keen edge of wonder was all gone. 

Smoothly, softly, the great keel 
touched down, home again from the 
edges of the universe. 

Trehearne rose. There was much 
hearty slapping of his shoulders, many 
assurances and offers of help. He knew 
they were sincere. He bade them all 
farewell with a jaunty carelessness that 
was not sincere in the least and stepped 
out onto the apron of adamantine con


30 STARTLII 

crete that edged the dock. 

To his right, some distance away, was 
a huge white building. Edri nodded and 
Trehearne began to walk toward it. 
Shairn and Kerrel were behind him. 

The roar and clang and thunder of 
the spaceport engulfed the building, 
dwarfed it, so that it resembled a lonely 
island in a monstrous sea. The air was 
heavy with the reek of oil and metal and 
strange odors out of a thousand gaping 
holds. Above, in a golden sky, the clouds 
were like little nebulae of flame. 

There was a bitter taste in Trehearne's mouth, and the palms of his 
hands were sweating as the white building took them in. 

The halls seethed with activity. 
Bronzed men in the black and scarlet 
of the Vardda ships, hurrying clerks 
and orderlies of a breed Trehearne had 
not before seen, a clamor of voices and 
the racing pulse of Port Administration. 
Trehearne caught only a glimpse of it. 
A lift took them swiftly upward to the 
highest level. 

There was an office there, bare and 
spacious, with window walls that looked 
on all four sides across the spaceport. 
Trehearne thought fleetingly that it was 
almost like the bridge of a starship, 
pathetically shackled to the soil. 

There were three men in the office. 

ONE was hardly more than a boy. 
He was in charge of what appeared 
to be a recording device. The second was 
not rntieh older, a brisk efficient young 
man who stared at Trehearne with frank 
curiosity. 

The third man dominated the room — 
a grizzled heavy-shouldered giant who 
had never been made to occupy an office. 
The walls cramped him, even such walls 
as these, because they were bounded by 
horizons. His large scarred hands rested 
uneasily on the polished table and his 
eyes seemed better used to watching 
stars than men. 

He glared at them all impartially, reserving one direct, hard glance for Trehearne. Then he addressed himself to 
Edri. "I believe you're responsible for 
bringing this man aboard the ship. Will 



; STORIES 

you please explain your action?" 

Edri explained. His voice was clipped 
and firm. He finished, "I felt — we all 
did with the exception of Kerrel — that 
Trehearne should be given a chance." 
He laid a particular emphasis on his 
final words. "He had a right to that 
chance. He proved himself a Vardda." 

"A mongrel, a freak," said Jons impatiently. "An Earthman ! You did him 
no kindness to bring him here, where he 
doesn't belong. And you, Shairn!" He 
rounded on the girl. "I didn't ask you 
to come but since you're here I'll — " 

"You won't tell me a thing, Joris," 
Shairn interrupted him with the ease 
born of many quarrels. "I'll tell you. 
Trehearne is as much a Vardda as you 
are and I'm going to see that — " 

It was Joris' turn to interrupt. "I took 
orders from your father when I flew his 
ships but you're not the man he was! 
And I don't hold this job from you !" He 
favored both Shairn and Edri with his 
anger. "What the devil got into you? 
Don't you know the law ? 'No non-Vardda personnel under any circumstances 
to board any craft designed for interstellar flight.' " 

He went on to give them a dressingdown that was a masterpiece. Edri 
listened with a wooden countenance. 
Shairn seemed to find it genuinely interesting. When he was finished she said 
admiringly, "You haven't forgotten how 
to roar !" 

Surprisingly Joris laughed. "No," he 
said, "no more than you've learned manners." He swung around to the brisk 
young man who sat at the end of the 
table, indicat ; ng Trehearne wifh a jerk 
of the head. "Tell him what's to be done 
with him." 

The young man cleared his throat. In 
painfully stilted English he said to Trehearne, "You will remain in custody ill 
a suitable place until the Gouncil ha* 
had time to decide what disposition . . ." 

Trehearne moved forward to the table. 
He leaned over and looked at the young 
man with a yellow gaze that stopped 
the words in his mouth. 

"If you're thinking of going to Earth," 
Trehearne told him in good Vardda, 



THE STARMEN 

"you had better learn the language." 

He straightened up. He was angry. 
He was very angry and no longer interested in keeping his temper under control. He faced Joris and said, "The devil 
with your custody ! You have no authority to imprison me." 

Joris stared at him. He shook his head 
irritably as though he thought his ears 
must be playing him tricks. His bronzed, 
seamed jowls took on a tinge of red. 

Trehearne went on, rather loudly, 
"Unless he is guilty of a crime no Vardda may be detained by anyone against 
his will. Have I committed any crime?" 

It took Joris some time to recover his 
voice. When he did it had a sound of 
thunder. "You're not a Vardda!" 

"No? Think a minute. What is the 
one distinguishing quality of a Vardda 
that marks him as different from all 
other men?" 

"All right, I'll answer that! By some 
freak or other you managed to survive 
the flight. But that doesn't change the 
fact that you're an Earthman, born and 
bred, and therefore no Vardda!" 



OF LLYRDIS 81 

Trehearne's eyes had acquired a hard 
glitter. "Then suppose," he said, "that 
you imprison me — an Earthman who 
has crossed the galaxy from Sol to Aldebaran and lived. That'll make quite an 
uproar, won't it? All the non-Vardda 
peoples will be mightily interested! So 
will the Orthist party. I don't doubt 
they'll spread the news all over the 
galaxy — the Vardda have admitted that 
they're not the only ones who can fly 
interstellar space!" 

Joris' brows drew down into a 
straight gray bar. "What do you know 
about the Orthist party?" 

"Enough to know they could make 
trouble for you. Either I'm Vardda or 
I'm not — and if I'm not I could be 
the start of a whole new movement. 
The first non-Vardda to fly the stars, the 
first crack in the monopoly!" 

Joris controlled himself with visible 
effort. He said, "You can be put away 
so quickly and quietly that no one will 
ever hear of you." 

"Good," said Trehearne. "Put me 
ITurn page) 



A DIME BUYS A DOLLAR'S WORTH 

OF SHAVING PLEASURE! 

BLUE STAR Blades are Sharper, 
Longer-Lasting because they are 
ground and honed in oil. 

No other blade gives you so much 
for so little! Try a Blue Star Blade 
on hard-to-shave spots. See how 
smoothly, easily it takes off the 
toughest whiskers. For better 
shaving at a real saving, get Blue 
Star Blades today. 





ALSO IN 
HANDY 
DISPENSER 
10 for 25* 



WlueJ STAR 



t nccitio* JtsJ rumen 




eooe M^m DOUItfEOeS 
MMftlCAM SAFETY KAZOR CO«f, BUOOKIYN I, N.4 



32 STARTLH 

away. Put away all the officers of the 
ship. Put away all the passengers. Put 
away all the crew. That's a lot of people 
to keep quiet." 

Shairn broke in on a triumphant note. 
"Yes, Joris ! How do you plan to silence 
me?" 

"And me?" said Edri. He had begun 
to hope. 

Joris looked from one to the other 
and back again, angry as an old bull but 
for the moment, baffled. 

KERREL said contemptuously, 
"Orthists! That should be enough 
to show you, Joris. The man is trying 
to blackmail you with the threat of 
treason." 

"Yes," said Trehearne, "I am." His 
voice was suddenly quiet. There was an 
iron quality about it and about the set 
of his jaw. He ignored Kerrel. He was 
speaking straight to Joris, to the man. 

"When I made that flight and lived 
I won my right to the freedom of the 
stars. Do you understand that? I won 
my right to fly deep space, between the 
suns and I'll use any weapons I can get 
my hands on against the man who tries 
to keep me from it!" 

He was silent then, standing motionless, looking into the old man's eyes. 
And Joris was silent also. Kerrel laughed 
but no one heard him. 

"By God," said Joris slowly, "I take 
it back. There can't be any mongrel 
blood in you. Only a Vardda could have 
that kind of insolence !" 

He swung about and began to pace 
up and down behind the table. The 
young man gaped. The boy by the recorder gnawed his thumb and shivered 
in an ecstasy of excitement. Kerrel came 
forward, intent on saying something. 
Shairn gave him such a murderous look 
of warning that he hesitated and in that 
moment Joris made up his mind. 

He went to the recorder, took out the 
spool and broke it. He gathered the slack 
of the boy's tunic into one hand. With 
the other he reached out and collared 
the young man. He brought them close 
together in front of him and glared 
down into their faces. 



; STORIES 

"If one word of what you've heard 
here goes beyond this office," he said 
distinctly, "you will regret it. Understand?" 

They understood and said so. Joris 
nodded. "Now get out." 

They left, the boy reluctantly, the 
young man with his faith in the eternal 
Tightness of things shattered forever. 

Joris said, "I'll talk to Trehearne 
now." 

Kerrel could contain his rage no 
longer. "What kind of a fool are you, 
Joris?" he demanded. " 'Freedom of the 
stars' be damned! Can't you see he's 
playing with you?" 

"If he is," answered Joris grimly, 
"he'll pay for it. Meanwhile, I'll be the 
judge of my wisdom. Dismissed!" 

"Come on," said Shairn and took Kerrel's arm. They went out together. Edri 
paused in the doorway and gave Trehearne a parting grin that meant "Good 
luck !" Then he too was gone. 

The old spaceman and the younger 
man of Earth stood alone in the sweep 
of light from the windows. From the 
eastern quadrant of the port Trehearne 
saw a great ship rise and clear away, 
outbound for distant suns. 

Joris tilted his head. "Come here." 

Trehearne obeyed. Joris' eyes were 
harsh and keen as an old eagle's, weighing, studying, judging. Trehearne stood 
erect and waited. He said nothing. There 
was nothing more to say. 

"Vardda blood," Joris muttered to 
himself. "Unmistakable. And he wants 
to fly the stars." He asked abruptly, 
"Were you a foundling?" 

"No," said Trehearne. And then, slowly, "But I might just as well have been." 

Joris turned away, scowling thoughtfully, his head and shoulders massive 
against the background of burning sky. 

"How old are you?" 

"Thirty-three." 

"I have an idea. Whether it will work 
or not I don't know. The Council sits 
again in five days, at which time I will 
make my report on you — and since I'm 
taking you on faith and my judgment 
you'll have to take me the same way. 
Ill do my best. Meanwhile, for the sake 



of my neck as well as yours, you'll have 
to go where I tell you and stay there. 
Is that clear?" 
"Yes." 

"Good. And Trehearne . . ." 
"Yes?" 

"If I succeed with the Council — you 
will fly the stars!" 

It was as much a threat as a promise. 
For the first time, Trehearne smiled. 

Thirty minutes later, after a journey 
in an underground tubecar that left him 
in complete ignorance of his whereabouts, Trehearne was conducted into 
a square neat cubicle, comfortable in all 
respects but none the less a prison cell. 
The lock of the door clicked behind him 
and he was alone. 

There were no windows. He did not 
even know whether he was above or 
below ground. There was neither day 
nor night nor time. 

He paced the narrow floor and ate the 
food brought to him by a silent darkfaced jailor and tried to sleep. He 
smoked the last of his hoarded cigarettes 
and thought of Earth and the distances 
between the suns. He hoped and hope 
became gradually a grim despair. 

No one came. Shairn had forgotten 
him, Edri's friendship had been a feeble 
thing. The trap that Joris had set for 
him became more obvious with each 
passing hour. He hated them all. He 
raged and waited and remembered the 
old man's words — You can be put away 
so quickly and quietly that no one will 
ever hear of you. 

This was his landing on Llyrdis, the 
fruit of his journey across the star-shot 
universe. This was the end of his dream. 

He ceased to rage. He only waited 
and wondered why the messenger of 
death was so long in coming. 

There came a time when he awoke 
sharply from uneasy sleep to hear the 
low click of the lock and a soft slurred 
step on the padded floor, coming toward 
him. 

He sprang up, reaching out to grapple with his killer, and saw that it was 
Shairn. She cried out, "Michael!" and 
he stopped, uncertain, and her words 
came to him with a sound of unreality 



THE STARMEN OF LLYRDIS 33 

like the voices heard through fever. 

"It's all over, Michael — and you're 
free!" 



CHAPTER VII 

In the Silver Tower 



AN hour had gone by and he still 
could not quite believe it. 
He had left the cell behind him and 
the five eternal days of waiting. He 
stood on a terrace high above the city. 
It was night and the burning moons 
were golden in the sky. The wind from 
the sea had the clean sting of wine. 
Around him were the tall fantastic towers bathed in light. Far below the shining web of streets was a pattern of 
sensual beauty, many-colored, sounding, 
alive. 

Shairn said softly, "Look at it, 
Michael. It's all yours. You're a Vardda 
now by order and decree." 

"Vardda," he whispered to himself. 
Vardda, lord of the starways ! His hands 
were tight on the terrace rail and his 
gaze was far away. 

"I had something to do with it, 
Michael. Aren't you going to thank me ?" 

He turned. She had put on a flowing 
thing of white, cunningly draped and 
spangled over with a diamond frost, so 
that her bosom and shoulders seemed to 
rise from sea-foam and there were 
strange jewels caught in the dark masses of her hair. He started to speak and 
then forgot the words. There were 
better ways of thanking her. 

He had not nearly finished when 
sounds from inside the apartment — it 
was Edri's — announced the arrival of 
Joris, and Shairn pulled away from him, 
laughing. 

"Come now and hear how the mir.acle 
was done. But you'll have to find a different way of thanking Joris !" 

Joris greeted Trehearne with a demand to know what he had been thinking those five days in the cell. Trehearne 
grinned. "I won't tell you since none of 



34 



STARTLING STORIES 



it was true." 

Edri said, "We've told Trehearne 
nothing." He found glasses and poured 
wine. Joris settled heavily into a chair, 
full of an honest pride in his own cleverness, beaming with it. 

"It took a lot of juggling," he said, 
"and more than a little downright forgery — but it worked. A full record of 
all voyages is kept at Port Administration. I went back between thirty and 
forty years and managed to supply you 
with a pretty good background." 

He leaned forward: "Get this into 
your head, Trehearne, and keep it there. 
You were born on Earth thirty-three 
years ago of Vardda parents then stationed on that planet. Your mother, died 
in childbirth and your father was forced 
to abandon you, since even a Vardda 
Infant cannot endure interstellar flight." 

He handed Trehearne a slip of paper. 
"Here are the names of your parents. 
Memorize them. Your father has since 
been killed in a wreck off Orion Nebula 
and you have no brothers or sisters. 
Incidentally you have no inheritance 
either, for your 'father's' estate was 
divided according to law upon his 
death." 

He added, "From now on this is your 
only history. Don't forget it." 

He paused to empty his glass and 
Shairn took up the story. 

"Joris and I persuaded the Councillors not to have you appear for questioning, Michael. The records and your 
Vardda characteristics were sufficiently 
convincing. We pointed out to them that 
the less talk there was about it all the 
better. They passed their resolution in 
less than thirty minutes, then followed 
it by another to tighten the laws against 
Vardda children being born on any 
world but Llyrdis!" 

She burst into laughter and Trehearne held out his hand to Joris. He 
said one word. "Thanks." 

Joris' grip was hard and horny and 
his eyes were sharp. "Perhaps I was a 
fool to do this for you. We'll see. In the 
meantime you've got to make a living. 
We Vardda count our wealth in ships — and until you own one you'll have to 



work for someone else. Do you still want 
to fly the stars?" 

He saw the look on Trehearne's face 
and smiled. "I need a supercargo on my 
ship Saarga, outbound in two weeks, for 
trade in the Hercules Cluster. Officers 
and crew fly on shares and it's a rich 
voyage. Even a supercargo should do 
well." 

Edri said, "I ought to warn you, Trehearne — the Hercules run is one of the 
toughest in the galaxy." 

"That's why it pays so well," said 
Joris. "Well?" 

Before Trehearne could answer 
Shairn laid her hand lazily on his shoulder and remarked, "Nonsense, Joris. He 
doesn't have to take on anything like 
that. I can find a better opening in my 
fleet and he won't starve until I do." 

Trehearne's face had tightened. He 
said, "You never told me much about 
yourself, Shairn. I gather you're quite 
well off?" 

"Oh, quite ! As Joris says our wealth 
is in ships. He owns two, I own thirty. 
My father built one of the richest fleets 
on the trade lanes and I was fortunate 
enough to be his only heir." She laughed 
and shook her jewelled head. 

"The devil with all talk of business 
anyway ! This is a night for celebration." 
She pulled him to his feet. "Come on. 
Michael ! We'll show you the city." 

"In a minute," he told her curtly. 
Joris was looking at him with an odd 
expression. 

Trehearne went over to him and said, 
"When shall I report to the Saarga?" 

Edri leaned over Shairne's shoulde.' 
and whispered audibly, "I think you've 
got our Michael angry." 

Joris looked at Shairn and roared. 
"Missed your guess, didn't you ?" He got 
up, "All right, Trehearne! Let's see 
about that celebration !" 

They went. But for the next hour or 
so Shairn was inclined to be sulky. The 
more so because Trehearne seemed to 
have forgotten her existence. 

RESPLENDENT in black and silver 
supplied for him out of Edri's 
wardrobe, free, accepted and with & 



THE STARMEN 
future ahead, Trehearne walked the 
streets of the city, drunk with color and 
sound and movement. 

The city surged magnificently, crowded, thriving, beautiful, devoid of poverty, drenched in the wealth and inventiveness of a thousand far-flung cultures, 
Mecca for all the peoples of Aldebaran's 
seven inhabited planets. 

The little ships that tramped the narrow planetary roads set down beside the 
scornful giants of the star-trails and 
poured into the metropolis a never-ending tide of visitors, come to touch the 
fringes of a glory they could never touch 
themselves — to revel in alien pleasures 
and barter for the gems and spices and 
•pider-woven silks of worlds that they 
would never see. 

Most of them were human or nearly 
no, their skins of a variety of tints, their 
costumes outlandish or sober according 
to their native custom. Some were not 
human at all. 

"See those black-skinned hawk-nosed 
chaps with the bronze wings?" Edri's 
hand guided Trehearne's wondering 
gaze. "They're from Suumis. And the 
three silvery ones over there with the 
bright crests and the crimson robes — 
they're the dominant race on Mirris and 
proud as Lucifer for all they've got 
scales instead of skin. That little blue 
fellow is a merchant-prince from Zaard, 
the outermost planet. See his diamond 
caste-mark ?" 

Trehearne saw. He saw them all and 
his head swam with it. The pulse and 
rush of the city, the kaleidoscopic multitudes, the companies of lordly Vardda 
like peacocks in their jewels and brilliant tunics, the babel of outworld 
tongues, the drifting sound of music. 

From place to place the four of them 
wandered, drinking the dark wine of 
Antares, the pungent snow-white brew 
of Fomalhaut, endless wines of many 
colors from the worlds of many stars. 
Shairn forgot to sulk. To Trehearne 
she seemed to float in moonlight and 
laughter, bewitching, unattainable. 

His head commenced to swim in earnest. 

Faces, human, half-human, unhuman, 



OF LLYRDIS 35 

beautiful, grotesque, ludicrous. Carnival masks, reeling, dancing. Vardda 
women lovely as sin, dressed in a thousand fashions, smiling with red mouths. 
Music throbbing, passionate, soft, mingling with the smell of wine and perfume and the sharp sea wind. 

Dancing-girls with emerald skins, 
outlandish beasts that capered with an 
eerie cleverness, a spinning whirl of 
pleasure-palaces infinitely strange. Terraces, gardens, parks and squares, nameless trees blowing under the triple 
moons, Joris flushed and jovial, a greypolled ox on holiday, Edri . . . 

SOBRIETY was not habitual with 
Edri but Trehearne had never seen 
him drunk. He was drunk tonight. And 
as Joris and Trehearne grew gayer he 
grew steadily more solemn and withdrawn. He sat drinking silently now, hie 
eyes gazing into inner distances, a 
brooding look on his ugly face. 

They were in a place of trees and 
crystal columns, with bowers drowned 
in bloom and the open sky above, when 
Kerrel joined the party. He sat down 
between Shairn and Joris, erect, handsome. He did not touch the wine. "Well, 
Trehearne," he said. "Welcome to the 
Vardda race." 

"Thanks." And then, deliberately, 
Shairn moved and laid her head against 
Trehearne's shoulder. 

"Do you have to go voyaging. 
Michael?" Her lap was full of the great 
pale moonflowers and her hands toyed 
with the musky blossoms. Something 
wicked and demure was in her eyes. 

Joris poured ruby liquor into Edri's 
goblet. "Here, man. You look too sober." 

Edri pushed the goblet away. "No. 
I'm going home. How about the rest 
of you?" 

"But I've just come," said Kerrel 
easily. He turned to Shairn. "Did you 
her'- about Arrin?" 

"What about him?" 

"It seems he's one of the Orthi3t leaders. They caught him today. Odd thing, 
though — they couldn't find any of his 
papers." Very casually he added, to 
Edri, "A friend of yours, isn't he?" 



36 STARTLING 

"I know him." 

"Oh, come now! You've known him 
for years." 

Edri said nastily, "I've known you for 
a long time too. Don't cat-and-mouse 
with me, Kerrel. If you have something 
to say, say it." 

Kerrel shrugged. "I was only thinking that a man can have too many unfortunate friendships." It was perfectly 
obvious that he included Trehearne 
among the undesirables. 

"Your field is comparative technology," Edri said. "I understand you're 
quite good at it. Stick to it. I'm leaving." 

He walked away, staggering a little. 
Trehearne watched the solitary figure 
moving down an avenue of trees, 
splashed with shadows and golden light. 
He hesitated, then got to his feet and 
followed. 

Edri stopped when he felt Trehearne's 
hand touch him. He looked at him curiously as though he had never seen him 
before. 

"What's wrong, Edri?" 

"Nothing. A man is going to be punished but that's not wrong. It's right 
that he should be punished. He is an 
Orthist, a traitor." 

Trehearne understood now. "Your 
friend Arrin?" 

"Yes — my friend. But he deserves 
punishment for being an Orthist. And 
do you know how they punish such 
traitors? With exile — bitter lifelong 
exile on the lonely world of a lonely 
star. They are never allowed to fly space 
again. To a Vardda that's worse than 
death!" 

TREHEARNE felt a trifle sick. He, 
who had just won the right to starflight, could realize the crushing enormity of such a sentence. 

"I didn't know they did that to 
Orthists." 

"Oh, yes. Not all of them, not the 
talkers m the salons who only play at it. 
But the men who work — oh, yes !" 

Edri went on. He was very drunk and 
now that he had started it seemed that 
he- could not stop. He was not talking to 
Trehearne but to himself, to the wind 



STORIES 

and the casual moons and a world that 
had turned bitter around him. 

"Arrin worked. He searched the records, the forbidden files, until they 
caught him. He never found what he 
was looking for but he might have — a 
little more time and he might have!" 

He looked up into the sky, the empty 
sky that stretched to the rim of the 
galaxy. 

"Somewhere out there Orthis sits in 
his ship and waits — waits to be found 
again. But where? That's it, the question that no one has answered in a thousand years. Where?" 

He turned aside and was abruptly, 
violently sick. Trehearne waited. 

After awhile Edri said, "Curious, th3 
things a man will say when he's drunk." 

"I don't know," Trehearne said. "I 
didn't hear anything." 

Edri managed a grin. "I'm all right 
now. I'm going on home." 

When Trehearne returned to the 
others Shairn complained sweetly, "You 
were gone so long, Michael. Was Edri 
sick?" 

"Yes — very. But he's all right now. 
He went home." 

"I think," said Shairn with a dainty 
yawn, "that I'll go home too. Come 
along, Michael." 

Kerrel turned a dull red and there 
was sudden murder in his eyes. He said 
thickly, "Am I to understand — " 

"You are to understand anything you 
wish," Shairn smiled. 

Joris came out of his vinous fog and 
enquired hopefully, "Is there going to 
be a fight?" 

Trehearne asked Kerrel, "Is there?" 

They looked into each other's eyes, 
the direct intimate look of hate. Then 
Kerrel said softly, "No, not now. It's 
only a matter of time. But not now, not 
tonight." 

He had mastered himself when he 
turned to Shairn. "I trust you'll find 
your new toy amusing." 

"I shall — until he begins to act as 
though he owns me." Her smile became 
more beautiful, more sweet. "Tell me, 
Kerrel, now that it's over — did you love 
me or my thirty ships ?" 



THE STARME1 

The angry flush went out of Kerrel's 
face, leaving it deathly white. He stood 
for one long moment, then turned without a word and stalked away. His heels 
left small sharp scars in the turf. 

Shairn lifted one exquisite shoulder. 
"He's tiresome. Oh, well! Come along, 
Michael." 

She took his hand and he went with 
her. Joris' booming laughter followed 
them down the avenue of trees. 

Trehearne realized only later just 
how wine-flushed he was. He had no 
clear memory of how they reached the 
car — an ultra-streamlined sublimation 
of a car, powered by humming generators—nor of the drive out from the city. 
He was suddenly aware of a broad road 
running along the coast, of the golden 
sea on one hand, dark mountains on the 
other. Shairn was at the controls. He 
hoped she was more sober than he. She 
was going very fast. The sea wind battered at them, wild and cold. 

Shairn stopped the car. "This is my 
home, Michael. My family has lived here 
for hundreds of years — here in the Silver Tower." 

She led him inside. He tried to see it 
all clearly but things tended to melt and 
run t o g e t h e r — tapestries, carvings, 
colors, the loot of many worlds. Shairn 
went before him, floating, a white foamwraith. 

"Michael." 

"Yes?" 

They were in a long gallery above 
the sea. The moonlight lay in great 
angled blocks along the floor. 

"You're a Vardda now — but you're in 
greater danger than ever. Kerrel will 
kill you if he can." 

"Yes," said Trehearne. "If he can." 

"Don't underestimate him, Michael. 
He can be very deadly." 

He drew her to hira, not tenderly. 
"You took good care to make him so. 
You wanted Kerrel and me to battle it to 
the death right there, didn't you?" 

She laughed. "It would have been exciting." 

"Listen to me, Shairn, The next time 
you try to make trouble, you'll get it — 
from me." 



OF LLYRDIS 3/1 

"Now you're being masterful. And no 
man is my master!" 

He took her face between his two 
hands and looked down into it. His 
thumbs bit cruelly into her white cheeks. 

"I think you're going to be sorry you 
ever met me, Shairn," he whispered. 

Two weeks later, dressed in the black 
and scarlet of the Vardda spacemen, 
Trehearne left Shairn for the starship 
Saarga, outbound for Hercules. 



CHAPTER VIII 
Under the Cluster Swms 



THE Saarga was not like the ship 
that nad brought Trehearne from 
Earth. She was older and shabbier with 
enormous capacity for cargo and no 
space at all for passengers. Officers and 
crew were cramped in quarters functionally reduced to the absolute minimum and there were no such luxuries as 
lounges and observation domes. 

But to Trehearne she was a thing of 
wondrous beauty. Every dent and scar 
on her unlovely bulkheads recorded a 
voyage to a nameless sun. The crammed 
and odorous vaults of her belly were 
storehouses of exotic riches, the fruits 
of unimagined worlds. And he was part 
of her. He was no longer merely a hungry observer. He belonged. 
He worshipped her. 
His shipmates discussed Trehearne's 
curious history — official version — with 
great interest, asked him questions 
about Earth, then forgot it. The officers 
treated him with the affable contempt 
of the veteran for the amateur, liked 
him and were patient with his feverish 
insistence on learning to be a starman. 
There was little else to do on the long 
haul out and they taught him much. 

They thowed him the purring metal 
giants that drove the ship, the mighty 
generators powered by almost automatic atomic turbines. They taught him 
how to read-the radar-screen, that functioned not by slow electro-magnetic 



38 STARTLING 

waves but by rays, incomprehensible to 
him, which were far faster than light 
— another flat contradiction of the 
Earth theoreticians. 

He listened in Communications to 
Vardda ships talking across the galaxy 
in ^thin ghostly converse by the same 
super-swift rays. He was allowed — and 
that was like realizing an impossible 
dream — to hold the controls of the 
Sa-arga in his hands as it raced through 
infinity. 

Trehearne became especially friendly 
with Yann, the Second Officer, a cheerful young rakehell who had made nine 
voyages into the Cluster and had once 
been stranded for the equivalent of an 
Earth year on one of its wildest worlds, 
pinch-hitting for a Vardda factor who 
had died. 

"Wait until we hit that system," he 
fold Trehearne. "I'll show you things 
you never dreamed of. You want to see 
real barbarism? They have it there!" 

Yann had made a brace of fortunes 
and gambled them away. He still clung 
firmly to the belief that some day he 
would have a ship of his own. 

"This trip will do it," he would say 
and laugh and build vast empires that 
stretched across the star-clouds of the 
Milky Way. 

He was good company. He was very 
helpful to Trehearne, instructing him 
in the diverse arts of starmanship. They 
got on well. 

The great Cluster of Hercules grew 
from a patch of hazy brilliance, lost in 
the blaze and crash and thunder of the 
universe, to a monstrous star-swarm, 
blinding even through a darkened port 
— a swirling hive of suns, white, red, 
yellow, peacock blue and vivid green, 
booming across the eternal night of 
space with the rush and roar of a cosmic avalanche, hurtling onward toward 
some unknown destination, guided by 
the evil blinking eyes of the Cepheid 
variables. 

The Saarga plunged in among the 
edges of the swarm and Trehearne began to discover why Edri had warned 
him about the Hercules run. 

"All the globular clusters are bad," 



STORIES 

Yann told him. "Omega Centauri — 
there's another one to break a starman's 
heart. A strong ship, a strong captain 
and no imagination — that's what it 
takes for a voyage like this." 

Trehearne was introduced to gravity 
tides and for the first time in his life 
he knew what real fear was. 

The generators throbbed incessantly. 
The Saarga groaned and shrieked in all 
her metal bones, moving in erratic 
bursts of speed and sudden brakings, 
pitching and swerving as she felt her 
way in through shoals of suns, fighting 
the complex changing gravitational 
fields. Trehearne got the feeling that he 
was trapped inside an iron football being battered back and forth between 
the stars. 

Yann grinned. "It gets worse as you 
go farther in." 

It did. 

Trehearne felt that it was impossible 
for any ship to live in those mighty 
cross-currents of gravitation as the suns 
thickened like swarming bees. But the 
Saarga went doggedly on her way and 
after a while Trehearne got used to her 
complaints and violent pitchings. 

They stopped first at the single lonely world of a waning star on the fringe 
of the Cluster — a shadowy place, flooded with the distant glories of other suns 
but cold and barren and dying. The 
Saarga discharged food and ores, took 
in payment gems of royal purple, mined 
out of the grey rock by little men with 
sorrowful eyes. 

The little men looked at the great 
ship and the men who flew in her, then 
at the flaming suns that were out of 
reach. They made their bargain silently 
and went away. Trehearne was glad 
when they left that world. 

They visited the eerie planet of a 
variable star, where there was no life 
at all but a creeping fungus, valuable 
in the preparation of a medicinal drug. 
Trehearne, clad in insulating armor 
against the radiation of that evil sun, 
went with his shipmates to reap the 
ugly harvest, sank up to his knees in 
spongy dust. 

They traded with scaly humanoids 



THE STARMEN 

under the glare of a blue-white sun. 
They stripped the worlds of a red giant, 
leaving gilded trinkets in exchange for 
rare radioactive minerals. They dealt 
with life-forms so degraded that there 
was no semblance of humanity, while 
the Vardda stood with shock-cannon 
ready to guard the ship while the bartering went on. 

And they touched at systems that had 
a high degree of civilization, where for 
the first time Trehearne saw the Vardda 
factories — vast walled compounds held 
under treaty, crammed with warehouses in which were gathered the salable goods of a family of planets. 

That, he learned, was the universal 
system wherever trade was openly and 
regularly carried on — the walled compound and separate landing-field presided over by a Vardda factor, an island 
fragment of Llyrdis preserved intact 
amid an alien culture. 

Trehearne became accustomed to the 
open envy of the non-Vardda races. He 
no longer thought of it except to notice 
its variation according to cultures — the 
aboriginals who mixed with it a worshipful fear of the Vardda starlords, the barbarians who would have 
killed them except that they were greedy 
for the luxuries of trade, the more 
civilized folk who treated them with 
cold respect and ate out their hearts 
with envious longing. 

He got used to the eternal neverchanging question, asked on every world 
by the old and the young and the largeeyed children — What is it like to fly 
among the stars? 



OF LLYRDIS 5» 

BY the time they reached the system 
of the green star he was a thorough 
Vardda. 

Yann was full of excitement. "This 
is the system I told you about, Trehearne — the one where I was factor so 
long. I got to know the natives like a 
brother." He laughed and clapped Trehearne on the shoulder. "We make a 
long stop here and I'll see to it that it 
isn't dull !" 

The Saarga set down on a world of 
emerald heat. Besides the starship the 
landing-field contained half a dozen battered interplanetary craft, brought out 
piecemeal by the Vardda and operated 
by them between the wild planets of the 
system. The great stockaded factory 
was one of the largest Trehearne had 
seen and the strangest. 

The "logs" that formed the stockade 
and made the walls of the warehouses 
were of crystal, cut from the crystalline 
forests that covered much of the land. 
Trehearne thought of them as trees and 
forests, simply because they had stems 
and branches, but they were inorganic, 
the glittering proliferation of sublimated alien chemicals. 

They glowed and flashed under the 
fierce green sun, showing glints of 
weird color where a prism formation 
broke the light. And also, in their shining branches, they netted the manycolored rays of the brighter stars that 
burned even in the daylight sky. 

There was a town beyond the factory. 
It too was built of the crystal logs over 
foundations of black rock sunk in the 
[Turn page] 



A TEN-THOUSAND-YEAR INVASION OF EARTH 




West*™ 

ibly ever since, surviving setbacks and disasters no human 



|T BEGAN when humanity was young and the Druids ruled what 

It has continued 
invaders could take. 

It is winning its final victory all around us today with only a few men and wome* 
even aware that an enemy exisfs. 

To learn the frightening facts, read — 

THE SEED FROM SPACE 

A Novel by FLETCHER PRATT 

ccmiNG MBxr issue: 



40 STARTLING 

ooze. Thick vines clambered everywhere, bearing bulbous fruit. Undergrowth, green almost to blackness, stood 
rank between the trees. There was a 
smell of fragrant rottenness, cloying, 
sweet. 

Trehearne moved and sweated 
through a bath of molten jade. It was 
a large world and heavy. The gravity 
dragged at him. The letters of the 
freight lists swam under his eyes. When 
he was finished at last with his job he 
was glad enough to follow Yann. 

"Wine, cooled in deep wells," said 
Yann and smacked his lips. "Make a 
new man of you." 

"A hell of a world/' said Trehearne. 

"You should see the others of this 
system. This is the pick of the lot." 

They walked through the outer compound, a sort of caravanserai crowded 
with folk from the other planets, 
brought in for the trading. Cold-blooded 
creatures with crimson eyes, ophidian 
princes of the inner worlds, wrapped 
in golden mantles against the chill. Slim 
furred kings of the outer planets, capped 
and girdled with precious stones, still 
and panting in the heat. These and 
others watched the two tall Vardda, 
thinking their own thoughts. 

They passed through the gate out of 
the factory, wading in soggy mud. The 
sun was setting in a welter of lurid 
green, tinged with peacock hues. Trehearne looked at the town ahead, the 
straggling lanes, the crystal huts that 
crouched in sordid beauty, the encircling forest of ungodly trees. Doubt 
assailed him. 

"Perhaps we should stay in the factory. There'll be plenty of wine and 
more comfort." 

Yann cursed him good-naturedly. "I 
told you I know these people better than 
I know my own children ! Come on, Trehearne, there's nothing to do in the factory. Don't you want a good time? I've 
got friends in the town. You'll like 
them." 

Trehearne glanced back at the factory. It was not inspiring. He shrugged. 
He was beginning to feel the long confinement of the voyage, the tensions and 



STORIES 

the haste of trade. It would be good to 
cut loose for once, to see something of 
life outside the compounds, to get a 
change from the same faces. It was 
against orders but . . . 

He made sure of the prismed shocktube in his belt and followed Yann. 

Night came. The glorious sky of the 
Cluster crashed down on them, sown 
to bursting with stars as bright as 
moons. The crystal trees took on opaline 
fires. The hut walls glittered. 

Around the two Vardda there gathered a crowd of sloe-eyed children, silent 
and solemn, with hides of dusky green. 
Women watched them from the doorways. Human enough and pretty enough 
too, the younger ones, sleek and olive 
colored, wearing bright silks from Llyrdis around their hips and baubles in 
their hair. 

Trehearne asked Yann a question 
that had puzzled him. "How is it that 
there are humans or humanoids on so 
many worlds? Earth scientists had the 
idea that the human form was likely to 
be unique." 

"Oh, the Vardda biologists have been 
busy with that for centuries. ^They've 
compared data from all over the galaxy, 
and worked out a theory that at some 
remote time great clouds of spores were 
deliberately released into space — you 
know, little life-seeds with a basic tendency to develop toward the human 
form or something like it. What longdead civilization tried to perpetuate the 
human form by releasing the spores 
we'll never know." 

He laughed. "Anyway, who cares? 
Here they are and mostly human and I 
take them as they come !" 

HE chattered happily as they went 
along tne winding lanes, telling of 
his multifarious sins and adventurings 
apd the clever ways in which he had 
cheated the factory. The hostile curious 
eyes of the women followed them and 
now and again a man spat expressively 
into the mud behind them. 

They came at last to a hut on the outskirts of the town. Beside it were 
chained four pairs of beasts the size of 



THE STARME 

harriers, milk-white with dark muzzles 
and feet, their undulating bodies built 
light and long for speed. They made 
shrill barking sounds and leaped at the 
strangers, showing hungry fangs. Trehearne thought they looked like gigantic 
weasels — and quite as friendly. 

"Hounds," said Yann. "Kurat is a 
hunter. I had a private arrangement 
with him for skins." He winked hugely 
and lifted up his voice, shouting in the 
native tongue an obvious demand for 
Kurat to come out and welcome his 
brother. 

A lean hard-muscled man emerged. 
He wore a loin-cloth of brilliant blue 
silk, not very clean, and a necklet of 
hammered metal. He greeted Yann with 
glad cries. Trehearne smiled inwardly. 
They were two of a kind, the Vardda 
and the hunter, a brace of happy scoundrels. 

Kurat welcomed him in the lingua 
franca of the factory towns. A brother 
of Yann, it seemed, was his brother 
also. He swept Trehearne before him 
into the hut. 

There was a numerous family inside. 
A very old man and woman sat in a 
corner, doing nothing. Babes and children cluttered the floor. Kurat's hulking wife waded imperturbably among 
them. A handsome younger woman 
brought in a great sweating jug and 
poured from it into Trehearne's cup. 

The wine was cold and bitter. Trehearne, draining it, began to forget the 
heat and his weariness. Then, as he 
looked up into the young woman's face, 
he was startled by the hatred in her 
watching eyes. 

He said suddenly, "Why do you hate 
us so?" 

She laughed metallically. "Is there 
any world where the Vardda are loved ?" 

"Because we are able to fly the stars 
and you aren't?" 

"Because we too could have had the 
freedom of the stars and you Vardda 
kept us from it !" 

Trehearne stared at her, disconcerted 
by her sudden passion. "But the secret 
was lost ..." 

"Oh, yes ! And even on this far world 



OF LLYRDIS 41 

we know how it was lost! All the universe has heard of Orthis, of how the 
Vardda drove him into the depths of 
space and destroyed him when he would 
have shared his knowledge. And so you 
are free and I am chained and my children after me forever." 

She turned abruptly away from him. 
He looked after her, disturbed and 
oppressed by the revelation of what 
bitter depths of hostility lay behind the 
faces of the non-Vardda. 

But Yann shook his shoulder. "Kurat 
has made a kill today — a rare skin. 
Come outside and look at it. It's worth 
money." 

LESS from interest than to escape his 
own oppression Trehearne rose. 
They went out a back way. There was a 
shed some distance away, where Kurat 
said the hide was drying. Yann and he 
chattered in the unfamiliar jargon. Trehearne was not much interested in the 
whole business. 

It was dark inside the shed. Yann 
said, "Wait a minute while I make a 
light." 

Trehearne waited but not long. The 
light exploded inside his own skull. He 
heard Kurat grunt behind him with the 
exertion of the blow, then laugh. Yann 
was laughing too. 

Trehearne knew a moment of murderous fury and then the world of the green 
star slipped away from under him. 

When it returned again into his ken, 
he was sprawled on his face in mud, 
stripped of his tunic, his jewelled belt, 
his sandals. The hut of Kurat had vanished, the town with it. He was in the 
forest, encircled by trees whose crystal 
branches glittered under the savage 
stars. His head hurt and he had no 
weapon. 

He got unsteadily to his feet with 
only one thought in mind — the determination to get his hands on his good 
friend Yann. He took three steps in no 
particular direction. — and then stopped, 
bathed in a sudden icy sweat. 

In the distance and not too far away 
he heard the high-pitched cry of Kurat's 
strange hounds. 



42 



STARTLING 



CHAPTER IX 

The Hunting of Trehearne 



IT dawned upon Trehearne then that 
this was not merely assault and robbery. This was murder. He had walked 
unsuspecting into a trap, haa sat there 
while Yann and Kurat talked jovially 
over his head, arranging the details of 
its springing. 

They would not want his body in the 
hut or in the town. They would not 
want it to look like murder. They would 
carry him into the forest, then set the 
hounds after him and leave the beasts 
to do the final work. Who could be 
blamed if a drunken Vardda wandered 
off where he had no business to be and 
was pulled down by a pack of hounds? 

He wondered if Yann and Kurat were 
following the hunt. 

And why did Yann want him dead? 
He began to run. 

The ropy vines that crept and clambered among the crystal trees were like 
nooses set to catch his feet. He fell and 
rose and ran again and the spongy 
ground gave treacherously. It was very 
hot, and he was heavy, heavy with the 
drag of a heavy world. 

Behind him, clear and shrill, came 
the yap-yap-yaahhk! of Kurat's weasel 
hounds, racing over a fresh scent. The 
crystal branches gleamed and sparkled, 
tipped with star-fire — sharp-tipped like 
spears. Trehearne stopped and tried to 
break one and it was like trying to break 
a bar of steel with his bare hands. He 
gave it up and fled onward, not knowing where he was or where he was going, only wanting to stay away from 
the lithe white demons that pursued him. 

There was a little river, black and 
warm. He waded upstream in it, splashing to his waist, swimming the deeper 
pools. The bitter wine had left him 
thirsty and he drank. The water tasted 
foully of pitch and slime and he spat tt 
out again, gasping. 

He heard the voice of the pack change 



STORIES 

to a querulous whining as they checked 
by the bank. He sank down to rest and 
listened to them casting back and forth. 
He thought he heard a man's voice 
shouting but could not be sure. 

He went on again, striking into the 
forest. The great stars were pounding 
against his head and his body was leaden 
with many extra pounds of weight by 
gravitation. 

Trehearne prayed for a fallen branch 
but there was none. He prayed to find 
the town and that too was denied him. 
He ran heavily under the glittering trees 
and behind him the hounds burst suddenly into full cry, more distant now 
but as chilling to the blood. 

It would not be long before they overtook him. 

He measured the trees with an eye 
to climbing one for refuge. They were 
glassy and badly shaped and they were 
low. He remembered the long whipcordbodies of the weasel-like beasts. He 
thought they could leap as high as they 
needed to pull him down. 

He staggered on and every time he 
fell it was harder to get up again. The 
cry of the pack swept closer. 

Abruptly, from somewhere ahead of 
him, came the challenging voices of 
other hounds. 

Trehearne stopped, despairing. He 
was caught now between two fires. 
There was no use in going on. He choked 
on the acrid gorge of fear and cast about 
for a weapon, something, anything to 
hold in his hands, to kill with, at least a 
little before he was torn apart. 

It came to him that the yelping of the 
beasts ahead was stationary and irritable. They were not hunting. They were 
chained. 

Trehearne sobbed. He began to run 
again. 

There was a clearing. He saw it ahead, 
dimly through the starshine and the 
trees. He strove to reach it and the pack 
cry clamored at his heels. 

He tripped and pitched headlong and 
was almost happy because he had fallen 
over a tangle of branches left from the 
breaking of the crystal trees. He caught 
one up. It was not long but it was better 



THE STAR MEN 

than nothing. 

He plunged forward into the edge of 
the clearing. It was there that the 
hounds of Kurat bayed him. 

Swift and undulant, white as frost 
in the starlight, they came leaping between the glistening trees. They voiced 
one final cry of triumph and then were 
still, still as arrows in mid-flight. 

Trehearne set his back against a 
glassy trunk. Their fangs were like hot 
irons in his flesh and he was as maddened as they. 

There was a hut across the clearing. 
Four of the hunting-beasts were leashed 
beside it. A man, a woman and a tall 
boy came out of the hut. The boy started 
to run toward Trehearne, shouting. The 
man caught him. He spoke to the boy 
and made him be still. They stood there, 
watching. 

Trehearne swung his broken crystal 
branch. 

ONE he killed and one he crippled. 
The remaining six boiled around 
him, a liquid tangle of bodies leaping, 
flowing, slashing with the white knives 
of their teeth. The blood ran on Trehearne's body. He swung and swung 
again and still the man and woman 
watched stolidly and did not move. 

The boy cried out and the man cuffed 
him. 

Trehearne yelled and dropped the 
branch. One of the brutes had fastened 
on his wrist. Its weight dragged him to 
his knees and he knew that this was 
the finish, the last of his voyaging 
amidst the stars. He tore the strong 
jaws out of his flesh and swung the 
brute as a flail in the faces of its mates 
and then he could hold it no longer and 
the pack closed in. 

The boy had slunk back into the shadows by the hut wall. Now, suddenly, he 
reached and slipped the thongs from 
around the necks of the tethered hounds. 

They tore across the clearing over the 
jagged stumps and flung themselves 
upon the pack of Kurat. 

For a moment the beasts forgot Trehearne. He scrambled free of the snarling tangle and went toward the hut. 



OF LLYRDIS 43 

The man rushed by him, howling. He 
picked up a branch and began to beat 
the hounds, struggling to separate them. 
The woman wailed and ran to help him. 
The boy came to Trehearne. 

He was not much above sixteen, tall 
and well made. He put his arm around 
Trehearne's waist and took him into the 
hut and sat him down. Trehearne was 
glad to sit. The room reeled and darkened around him. When his sight cleared 
the boy had brought cloths and a pungent salve and was binding his cuts. 

"What is your name?" asked Trehearne in the lingua franca. 

"Torin." 

"You saved my life, Torin. I will not 
forget it." 

"I would do anything for the Vardda." 
Instead of hate there was hero-worship 
in this non-Vardda face. It was obvious 
that in the boy's eyes Trehearne was a 
figure of glory. Trehearne was touched. 

Torin stared at him, his task forgotten. And he asked the question, the old 
unchanging question that was always 
on the lips of boys. "What is it like — 
what is it really like, to fly between the 
stars?" 

Trehearne put his hand on the lean 
young shoulder and lied. "It is long and 
hard and not nearly as adventurous as 
hunting. I'll wager that you're as good 
a hunter as your father." 

"Not yet," said Torin. "Some day " 

He bent to his work again. His fingers 
moved over Trehearne's flesh, touching 
the muscles, spreading the wounds, gentle with the thick salve. He scowled, 
brooding ever some question of his own. 

"It feels like mine," he said. "It bleeds 
like mine and here is an old scar and 
there will be new ones. It is not a different flesh, made of iron or some other 
thing." 

He sprang up. "Look!" he cried. "I 
am strong, very strong. See, my flesh is 
hard like yours. Surely it is not true 
that only the Vardda can fly in the great 
ships ! Surely I am strong enough to go 
out and see the stars!" 

Trehearne could not meet his eager 
eyes. He said, "It takes a different kind 
of strength." He tried to explain and 



44 STARTUP 

gave it up. He could only say, "I'm 
sorry." 

He got up. "Will you guide me to the 
compound, Torin? And think what you 
would like out of all the things that are 
there. I can't take my life from you 
without giving something back — a little 
gift between friends." 

Torin whispered, "I want to see the 
ship." 

Trehearne frowned and in the interval of silence he heard the noises from 
the clearing — the whining growl of the 
hounds and a sudden lifting of human 
voices. 

"Torin," he said. "Look out and see 
who has come." 

He flattened himself in the corner behind the door. The boy opened it and 
peered. 

"Two have just come into the clearing," he whispered. "A hunter whose 
name is Kurat — and a Vardda." He 
drew back and looked at Trehearne. 
"They were hunting you?" 

Trehearne nodded. His face had tightened and grown cruel. "Give me a 
knife." 

Torin handed him a skinning blade 
of crystal chipped to a razor edge. Trehearne said, "Go and tell them I am 
dead from the hounds' tearing. Tell the 
Vardda to come and help you carry out 
my body. And see that he comes in 
first!" 

Torin hesitated, then he went. Trehearne heard him calling across the 
clearing. The gabble of voices increased 
and Yann's familiar laughter sounded. 
The boy was talking, telling the details 
of Trehearne 's dying. 

Yann strode into the hut. 

He came confidently. He had nothing 
to fear. And then Trehearne's arm was 
around his throat and the point of the 
knife was biting in under the angle of 
the jaw. 

"Bon-'t move," said Trehearne. And 
again, "Don't move!" 
Ifann stood still. 

"Undo your belt and let it drop." 

Yann did that very carefully lest Trehearne become nervous. Blood ran down 
the side of his neck. "You'll cut the 



STORIES 

vein," he whispered. "No deeper, please, 
no deeper!" 

The belt dropped. Trehearne set his 
foot on it. Then he flung Yann from 
him savagely, so that he fell sprawling 
on the floor. Torin stood wide-eyed in 
the doorway, watching. 

Trehearne knelt and took the little 
prismed shock-tube swiftly from its 
sheath on Yann's belt. "Now," he said. 
He did not take his eyes off Yann. "Keep 
watch, Torin, and tell me if anyone 
comes." 

"They are busy with the hounds and 
with talking," the boy said. 

YANN sat sullenly on the floor, holding his neck. He glowered at Trehearne but he made no move to rise. 

"This wasn't my idea," he said. "I was 
only doing a job. You don't have to kill 
me." 

"I don't have to but I'd enjoy it. 
Whose idea was it, Yann?" 

"He was going to give me a ship," 
Yann muttered. "A ship of my own. Any 
man would do it for a price like that. 
You'd do it yourself, Trehearne. That's 
just common sense." 

Trehearne said, "Who offered you a 
ship?" 

"Kerrel. You go fight it out with him. 
I've got nothing against you, Trehearne, 
it was just a business deal. One life, one 
ship. You fight it out with Kerrel." 

Trehearne kicked him. "You're not 
worth killing. Get up and get out. And 
Yann — " 

"Yes?" 

"Stay away from me!" 

"All right, all right! But I don't see 
that you've so much to complain about." 
Yann hauled himself upright and started toward the door. "I'm the loser. 
You're alive, aren't you? And I've lost 
a ship!" 

"That's too bad," said Trehearne. 
"You and Kurat can go away and mourn 
about it. And if I were you I would go 
fast." 

Yann glanced back at him. He began 
to run. Within seconds he and Kurat 
had leashed what was left of the pack 
and vanished out of the clearing. 



THE STARMEN 

Trehearne watched them go. He was 
shaking with fury. Already he had forgotten Yann. He was thinking of Kerrel. 

"He can be deadly/' Shairn had said. 

The man and woman returned slowly 
to the hut. In his hand, by its loose 
scruff, the man carried a limp dead 
hound. He flung it down at Torin's feet. 

"There's your work," he said. "Two 
of the others will not hunt for days. We 
will go hungry because you are a fool." 

He did not look at Trehearne. The 
woman did with stolid indifference. 
Torin said angrily, "I don't care. I 
couldn't just stand and watch him die!" 

The man growled, "Learn to think of 
your own and not the Vardda. You will 
be happier." 

Trehearne picked up Yann's fine jewelled belt and tossed it on the table. 
"That'll pay you for your hound." He 
went out across the clearing and in a 
minute Torin joined him, pointing 1 out 
the path. 

"I'm sorry," he said. "My parents are 
good and kind but they do not understand the Vardda." 

"Perhaps they do," said Trehearne. 
"Better than you know." 

It was morning when they reached 
the compound, a green morning oppressed with heat. Trehearne was ready 
to drop but Torin strode blithely ahead 
and all the way he talked of the great 
ship. He would accept no other gift but 
that, to see the ship, and he pleaded so 
that Trehearne had not the heart to 
refuse him. 

After all it was little enough reward 
for what the boy had done. 

It was the last great day of the trading and all the Vardda were inside the 
compound except one man who guarded 
the Saarga. The hatches were closed. 
Only the airlock port was open and the 
guard sat in front of it, yawning in 
the heat. 

He brightened up when Trehearne 
came, "What happened to you?" he demanded, and laughed. "A big night, eh ?" 

"I spent it with a pack of hounds," 
Trehearne answered and spoke to him 
about Torin. 

The guard looked doubtful. "It's 



OF LLYRDIS 45 

against the rules — the skipper'd have 
my head if he found out." 

"How can he find out? Don't worry, 
I'll see the boy gets clear of the ship. 
You can look the other way." 

The guard could not withstand Torin's 
hungry gaze. "Well — all right. Only be 
sure you get the kid out again fast !" 

Trehearne saw to it. He showed Torin 
what he could, from the bridge to the 
generator-rooms, and the boy trod softly 
as though he were in a holy place, touching, sighing, wondering. Trehearne was 
sorry he had brought him. He felt a pity 
to see that longing that could never be 
fulfilled. 

He pressed upon Torin what few 
trinkets from other star-worlds he had 
in his own cabin and led him out from 
the ship and stood with the guard, 
watching the boy go slowly away across 
the field, looking back, always back, until he was lost behind the compound wall. 

"Star-crazy, like all the rest of them," 
said the guard. "Well, he'll get over it." 

"I suppose so," said Trehearne and 
was glad he would not see Torin again. 

He went into the factory, found the 
doctor and told the captain a brief story 
of how he had had too much wine in the 
town and been set upon by stray hounds. 
The captain remarked that it was no 
more than he deserved and bade him 
learn thereby the folly of breaking rules. 
Trehearne slept until he was routed out 
to check the lading. 

Toward midnight the cargo was all 
aboard and the hatches locked. The 
Saarga lifted into the star-shot sky, and 
the acceleration built and built to the 
thrust of the throbbing generators. 

Trehearne was almost asleep again 
when he heard the screaming. 



CHAPTER X 
Death Between Stars 



THEY found Torin lying beside the 
well that led up from the hold. He 
had made it that far. His skin was al


46 



STARTLING STORIES 



ready darkened with the subcutaneous 
hemorrhage, his body twisted and 
writhing, his face almost unrecognizable. And he screamed and would not 
stop. 

Trehearne held him and watched him 
die. 

It seemed to take a long, long time. 
It was not a clean death. It was dissolution. Trehearne remembered his own 
torment and there was nothing he could 

do. 

The others watched also with sick 
white faces. In the end it was the guard 
who went to fetch a cloth to wrap the 
body in and there were tears on his 
cheeks. 

Trehearne laid Torin on the sheet. 
His flesh was not hard any more. He 
was no longer straight and well made. 
He was not even a dead boy. He was a 
rag, a shapelessness, an obscenity. It 
crossed Trehearne's mind how nearly 
he had come to dying that same death. 

He got up. He returned to his cabin, 
stripped and scrubbed himself in a kind 
of frenzy. He kicked his sodden garments into the corridor for someone else 
to deal with. He could not touch them 
again. And all the time he heard Torin's 
voice crying, "Surely I am strong 
enough to go out and see the stars!" 

They came a little later and told Trehearne that they had found where Torin 
had hidden himself under the wrappings 
of a bale, to be carried aboard with the 
cargo. 

"It wasn't your fault," they told him. 
"There was no way you could have seen 
the boy." 

Trehearne was not comforted. 

They buried Torin in deep space, to 
drift forever among the Suns of Hercules. And Trehearne thought of a hut, 
of a man and a woman who were waiting for their son to come home. He 
wished that Torin had listened to the 
wisdom of his father. 

The Saarga tramped her way onward 
among the worlds of the Cluster. Time 
and events gave Trehearne other things 
to think about. He was a starman now, 
tested and hardened, a functioning part 
of his environment. His horizons were 



boundless and the stars had not lost 
their lustre. But somehow, even so, the 
first fine flush of glory was gone. 

He remembered the bitterness of the 
woman who had said, "You are free 
and I am chained and my children after 
me forever." He remembered the countless young men who hungered, the eyes 
of children wide with dreams. Each time 
he saw the new-healed scars on his body 
he remembered the boy who had dressed 
those wounds and found the Vardda 
flesh no different from his own — a 
treachery too subtle for his understanding. 

Over and over, when he slept, he held 
Torin in his arms and watched him die. 

He told himself that it was all wasted 
pity. Whatever had been done to Orthis 
long ago was not his doing. Things were 
as they were and there was no help for 
it. He was one of the lucky ones and he 
should be content with that. 

Most of the time he was content. But 
now and again there would come the 
small sharp doubts, the creeping sense 
of guilt. 

If only Torin had not come aboard 
the ship to die ! 

He needed to talk to Edri. He needed 
to ease his mind, to get things straight 
with himself, and he knew that Edri 
would understand. 

He was glad when they started the 
long haul back to Llyrdis. He discovered 
that, much as he wanted to see Edri, he 
wanted even more to see Shairn. He 
wondered if she had forgotten him by 
now or if she would be waiting when 
the Saarga landed. 

The voyage back seemed to take a 
million years. And Yann was always 
there, a constant reminder to Trehearne 
that there was someone else he had to 
see on Llyrdis. 

The Saarga made her worldfall at last 
under the tawny-red glare of Aldebaran. 
Trehearne watched the golden planet 
rush and grow toward the ship. He. 
cheered with the others at the first sight 
of home and did not think it odd that 
he should strain as eagerly as they to 
see the familiar towers of the city rising 
out of the mountain-girdled plain. 



THE STARMEN 

The freighter found her dock and wallowed into it. 

Joris was on hand to watch his ship 
come in. He had been in contact with 
the Saarga by the ultra-wave radio and 
now he boarded her before her ports 
were fairly open. The skipper had given 
him good news of the venture and he was 
in jovial spirits, clapping shoulders all 
around, peering at manifests, firing 
questions, demanding to know how Trehearne had acquitted himself. 

"A good voyage, eh?" he cried. "Well, 
any voyage through the Cluster is a 
good one if someone doesn't get killed I" 

Trehearne said bitterly, "Someone 
did." 

Joris stared at him, uncomprehending. 

"Oh, not one of the crew. A native 
hoy, crazy to fly the stars. He stowed 
away." 

All the light went out of Joris' face, 
leaving it bleak. It was a long time before he spoke and then it was only to 
make a routine statement about the ship. 
He seemed to have lost all his joy in it. 
Trehearne was surprised at the impact 
that those few words about a nameless 
boy had had on the old man. 

Joris left soon after. He told Trehearne, "I'll see you in a day or so. Meanwhile I think Shairn is waiting for you 
at the sector gate." He spoke as though 
his mind were not really on what he was 
saying. 

He turned away, then hesitated and 
asked, "How old was that boy, Trehearne?" 

"About sixteen." 

JORIS nodded. He walked away across 
the apron as though he carried on 
his massive shoulders some heavy burden that weighed them down. 

Trehearne signed over his manifests 
to the port official in charge of unloading and went in search of Shairn. 

She stood outside the great barred 
gate, watching for him. She was just 
as beautiful as he remembered. He 
caught her in his arms and kissed her 
and her lips were just as he remembered 
them. 



OF LLYRDIS 47 

He said, "You haven't forgotten me 
then?" 

"No. Did you expect me to?" 

"I wouldn't have been surprised." 

She laughed — the sweet familiar 
laughter spiced with mockery. "You're 
a wise man." She cocked her head back 
and studied him. "You've changed. 
You've got so brown and hard and — 
older. I think I like you even better now. 
But I'll have to learn to know you all 
over again." 

She pulled him toward the long, sleekvehicle that waited, "It will be nice," 
she said, "this getting acquainted 
again !" 

A broad road took them northward 1 
along the coast, away from the clamoring spaceport and the city. Cliffs began 
to rise from the golden sea, wild and 
rocky. Trehearne had been this way before and now he saw nothing but Shairn. 

She asked suddenly, "Where did yoffget that?" 

His sleeve had fallen back and she* 
was looking at the scars on his wrist. 

"Someone set the hounds on me," Tre-i 
hearne answered indifferently. Then, t 
"By the way, how is Kerrel?" 

"I haven't seen him. He's not in thet 
city." She glanced at the scars again,, 
"How did he work it?" 

"How did who work what?" 

"Oh, stop trying to be subtle! I waa 
pretty sure that Kerrel would arrangesomething for that voyage. He's not a, 
man who takes his defeats lightly." 

Trehearne told her briefly the story; 
of Yann and the hounds. He finished, "I! 
want to see Kerrel." 

"You will!" Shairn's eyes sparkled. 
"And I want to be there when you do!" 

The car swung around s curve, where 
a great crag jutted out from the sea, 
backed by a mountain wall. On it, seeming as proud and enduring as the rock,, 
was built a tower faced all in silvery! 
metal. 

The wind and the spray beat upon it,! 
the wild things of the ocean sky nested I 
at its feet, yet its tall windows looked 
over the distant city and counted every 
ship that came and went from thesprawling port. Trehearne had beeiv 



48 STARTLING 

here before too. It was Shairn's ancestral home, built by generations of Vardda men and women, reaching out with 
strong hands to grasp the stars — the 
Silver Tower which gave her her name. 

Inside it was Trehearne who led the 
way to the long gallery looking to the 
west, a place of cool pastels that tempered the molten glory of the sea. For a 
time, with Shairn, he forgot about Kerrel and Torin and all the things that 
preyed upon his mind. He only knew 
that it was very good to be here again. 

It was evening when he was again 
reminded of them. They were still sitting in the gallery, sipping the sharp, 
cold wines, and Shairn said, "Are you 
happy, Michael?" 

He remembered another time when 
she had asked that question — the night 
that Edri had walked away alone down 
the avenue of trees. He remembered 
Edri crying out in the dark against injustice and instantly the old restlessness 
was back upon him. 

"Yes," he said. "Yes, I'm happy." He 
turned the wine-glass in his hands, 
brooding. "Shairn, could you get Edri 
out here? I'd like to see him." 

He felt her stiffen and draw away 
and he thought that she was angry with 
him. He went on, "It doesn't have to be 
now. Tomorrow's time enough. But I — 
well, I want to talk to him." 

"You're fond of Edri, aren't you?" 

"He was a good friend to me." 

"Yes — and to me." She turned around. 
"You might as well know now as later. 
Edri was arrested a month ago." 

Trehearne sprang up. "Arrested?" 

"Yes. They sentenced him yesterday. 
Exile to Thuvis — for the rest of his natural life." 



CHAPTER XI 
Fateful Decision 



FOR a moment Trehearne stood still 
like a man stunned. Thuvis — for 
the rest of his natural life! 



STORIES 

"No," he said. "Not Edri. There must 
be some mistake." 

Shairn shook her head. "I wish there 
were but there isn't. Edri is an Orthist, 
caught, confessed and convicted. He was 
unable even to offer a defense." 

She turned away from him. "I don't 
like it either. But Edri knew what he 
was doing. He brought this on himself." 

Trehearne asked, "What happened?" 

"You remember that night in the wine 
garden when Kerrel spoke of a man 
named Arrin who had been arrested?" 

"Yes. He was a friend of Edri's." 

"Well, they couldn't find Arrin's papers. They wanted them very badly. It 
seemed that Arrin had found some clue 
to the course of Orthis' ship, on that last 
voyage when it was lost, and had been 
making calculations." 

She paused, then added grimly, "Kerrel got the idea that Edri had those 
papers." 

Trehearne's yellow eyes took on a 
peculiarly evil glint. "Then Kerrel was 
at the bottom of this ?" 

"That's why he retired to his estate 
for a while. He's not very popular just 
now. Everybody liked Edri. They don't 
approve of his ideas but Kerrel went 
about it in such an underhanded way, 
setting spies on Edri and digging pits 
for him to fall into. He's told all over 
just how cleverly he did it. Now he's got 
himself appointed as an agent of the 
Council on the strength of it. Well, he 
did his duty. Edri had the papers, all 
right, and more of his own." 

Trehearne groaned. "The idealistic 
fool! Why wasn't he satisfied to be a 
Vardda himself, without worrying about 
the rest of the galaxy !" 

Shairn seemed relieved. Then, "That's 
what / said ! But knowing your friendship for Edri I was afraid you'd lose 
your head when you heard." 

She went on quickly. "I know you'll 
have a reckoning with Kerrel over this 
and your own score. But you'll have to 
be careful and clever since he's now a 
Council agent. I can help you — " 

But Shairn's voice faded out of Trehearne's hearing, except for that one 
phrase. 



THE STARME 

" — knowing your friendship for 

Edri—" 

Yes, Edri had been his friend. He 
was sorry for Edri. But should he let 
friendship be a chain to drag him back 
down from all that he had dreamed and 
desired and finally achieved? 

No! He would not let himself be 
trapped by friendship and by pity! He 
had been merely indulging in emotionalism, to sympathize as he had with the 
non-Vardda peoples' hunger for starfreedom, to remember as he had the 
hopeless longing in their eyes, to brood 
as he had over the dying of Torin. 

A sick fatal foreboding grew in Trehearne as he realized the decision shaping in his mind. He knew that it was 
shaped by emotion, not by reason, and 
he felt a savage contempt fo 1 ' his own 
weakness. 

He spoke, interrupting Shairn. "I'm 
sorry, Shairn, I was thinking. And I 
think I've got to try to help Edri." 

She stopped, looking at him with wide 
steady eyes. Then, rapidly, "Michael! 
Don't be a fool !" 



OF LLYRDIS 49 

He smiled mirthlessly. "That's what 
I've been telling myself. But it doesn't 
work. It seems that I'm determined to 
be a fool." 

"You're taking it too tragically ! After 
all, Edri's not going to be executed." 

Remembering Edri's words about the 
fate of Arrin, Trehearne answered, "I 
think he'd almost prefer that. Exiled to 
a remote star, never to fly again, nothing to do but sit and wait for death — 
no!" 

"But there's nothing you can do, 
Michael! He's convicted, sentenced. 
They're taking him off tonight. So 
there's an end to it." 

Trehearne rose to his feet. "I'm going 
back to the city, Chairn." 

"For what?" 

"I'm going to try to get him away." 

SHE understood then the full depth 
and danger of his thinking. She 
caught him fiercely by the arm. 

"Are you going to throw away everything you've worked so hard to get for 
[Turn paffe] 




"JIFP HITS the headpin right, but hell never mate 
a hit with that unruly hair; He's got Dry Scalp* 
Dull, hard-to-manage hair ; a ; loose dandruff, too* 
He needs 'Vaseline' Hair Tonic, i *' 



M7/r/oofe6effer.„ 
' w6enyo(/c6ee£D/ySGcr/p\ 

great WAY to start your dayl A few drops of 
'Vaseline' Hair Tonic each morning check loose 
dandruff and those other annoying signs of Dry 
Scalp . . . give your hair that handsome, natural 
look. Contains no alcohol or other drying ingredients ; ; g and it's economical, toot 

Vaseline HAIRTONIC 



T*«D[ MARK <§) 



resist ercd trade mark of the Cbesebrouah Mfg. Co., Cont'd 



Linen to DR. CHRISTIAN, 
■tarring JEAN HERS HOLT, 
on CBS Wednesday night*. 



50 STARTLING 

nothing? Remember, Edri's a traitor. 
No matter how good a friend he was to 
both of us he's a traitor and deserves his 
punishment." 

"That's how you feel, is it?" 

"Is there any other way I could feel ? 
You know what the Orthists are as well 
as I do." 

He said quietly, "I'm not sure I do. 
Perhaps you'd better tell me." 

"They're destroyers. They want to 
ruin Llyrdis, the Vardda trade, everything as it is now." Her passionate voice 
took in the star-trails, the swift ships 
flying, the Vardda pride of race and 
achievement. 

"Orthis had his laboratory in his ship. 
The secret of the Vardda mutation is 
there. They want to find that ship. They 
want to find the secret in it and spread 
it all across the Galaxy." 

"Would it be so terrible," asked Trehearne, "if others should have the ability to fly between the stars ?" 

She looked at him as though he had 
spoken blasphemy. He added, "Except, 
of course, that it would wreck the Vardda monopoly." 

"That sounds very strange, coming 
from you," she said bitterly. "You, the 
outsider, who fought so hard to be a 
part of the monopoly. It looked pretty 
good to you then after thirty-three years 
of crawling in the mud of Earth !" 

"I've seen more of it now. I've seen 
a boy die because of it. I don't think I 
like it any longer." 

"You don't like it?" Her voice was 
low and passionate. "You! And what do 
you know about it? We earned the right 
to what we have. We were the first — 
first of all the races of the Galaxy to 
go into interstellar space. 

"And we did it without mutation, 
without anything! Four generations 
that first voyage took. Four generations 
of children born in deep space, in a little 
ship crawling between the stars ! No one 
else ever did that. No one else ever 
dared ! 

"And as for our wicked monopolyit keeps the peace of the Galaxy. It keeps 
worlds alive that would have died. It 
brings wealth and comfort where they 



STORIES 

never were before. But you don't like it 
and so it must be destroyed 1" 

She stopped for breath and then she 
whispered, "You make me ashamed that 
I have loved you!" 

She turned from him and went swiftly along the gallery. There was a purpose about the way she did it that m«de 
Trehearne uneasy. He followed her and 
found her at the visiphone. The screen 
was already brightening. 

She looked at him with blazing eyes. 
"I fought once to get you into Llyrdis. 
Now I'll undo that mistake !" 

HE struck her away from the instrument and closed the switch. She 
was on him then like a cat, clawing him, 
calling him mongrel and freak and 
worse names, raging at his ingratitude. 
She was hard to hold but he held her and 
she could reach neither the visiphone 
nor the bell to call her servants. 

He held her, and she laughed her 
mocking laugh at him. "All right. Go on, 
then. Go and make a fool of yourself, 
trying to free Edri. See how far you get. 
And remember that it's bad enough for 
a Vardda born to betray his people but 
for you — " 

He held her a moment longer, swallowing his own rage, thinking. He could 
not let her go. The moment he left she 
would send out the alarm, denounce him 
to the Council, put an end both to his 
own freedom and to any remote hope he 
might have of saving Edri. 

It took him only a few seconds to decide. In the mood he was in it was not 
difficult to strike the necessary caft3f ullycalculated blow. 

He carried her out to the car in his 
arms. If any of the servants were watching it would look very sweet, very romantic, her dark head on his shoulder, 
her arms around his neck. They would 
not be able to see that her wrists were 
tied. 

He put her down gently in the padded 
seat. She did not stir. There was the 
shadow of a bruise already forming on 
her chin. He got in beside her and sent 
the car humming down the wide road 
that led to the city. 



THE STARMEN 

WHEN he was far enough away 
from the tower he stopped. He 
bound Shairn securely with strips torn 
from her own garments, taking especial 
care with the gag. He arranged her on 
the floor as comfortably as he could, out 
of sight. Then he drove on and did not 
atop again until he reached the spaceport. 

The lights were still on in the office 
of Joris. Probably he would stay late 
tonight, to oversee the business of taking Edri away in the prison ship. Trehearne felt guilty about Joris, almost as 
though he were betraying his own 
father. The old man had been good to 
him. 

Shairn seemed to be safely unconscious. Trehearne left the car where he 
thought it would be least likely to attract 
attention and went into the Administration Building. He had only the vague 
beginnings of a plan in his mind but 
whatever he did it would have to start 
here. 

The roar and bustle of the spaceport 
were not diminished by darkness. Some 
of the Vardda officers h& knew. They 
hailed him as he passed them in the corridors, congratulating him on his voyage, asking him when he was going out 
again. Trehearne almost faltered then, 
thinking what a fool he was to give up 
all this for an idle hope. And then he 
remembered Edri and went on. Edri 
had done his best for him when he 
needed it. It seemed that he could not 
do less for Edri. 

The lift took him up to the high room 
that was like the bridge of a starship 
that would never fly. Joris was there. 
He was quite alone. He had been drinking for some time but he was not drunk. 
He looked up when Trehearne came in 
and his eyes were heavy and rimmed 
with red. 

"What do you want?" he said. 

"A favor." 

"Another time, Trehearne. Get out. 
Get the hell out." 

"Another time won't do." Trehearne 
leaned over the table. "They're taking 
Edri out for Thuvis tonight. I want to 
say goodbye to him, Joris. That's all, 



OF LLYRDIS 51 

just a word before he goes. Tell me what 
ship it is and where — or if you can't 
do that tell me what sector and I'll see 
him outside the gate." 

"That's right," said Joris. "You're a 
friend of Edri's." He reached for the 
wine bottle. There was an empty one 
beside it and another on the floor. "How 
good a friend, Trehearne? That's what 
I'd like to know. How good a friend?" 

His bloodshot gaze was sharp and 
very shrewd. 

Trehearne said angrily, "You know 
I'm not mixed up with him. You know 
where I've been." 

"Yes, I know. You've been watching a 
young boy die in space. What did you 
think when you saw that, Trehearne? 
How did you feel?" 

"Let's not talk about that," said Trehearne harshly. "Tell me where I can 
see Edri and when. That isn't much to 
ask, Joris, just a minute to say goodbye." 

"A boy sixteen," whispered Joris, 
"full of hope, full of longing, proud of 
his strength. ... I ought to hate you, 
Trehearne. You're not even half Vardda 
in the ordinary way and yet you can fly 
the stars." 

He filled his glass again and emptied 
it. His hands were steady. He was 
neither drunk nor maudlin. And yet 
there were tears in his eyes. Trehearne 
saw them and was somehow shocked. 
It did not seem possible that Joris could 
weep. 

"Joris," he said gently, "forget about 
the boy. Let me see Edri." 

Again the red-rimmed leaden gaze 
locked with his, weighing, measuring. 
"I like you, Trehearne. So I'll tell you 
again. Get out. Go away. Forget you 
ever came here." 

Trehearne did not move. Abruptly 
Joris picked up the empty bottle and 
flung it, not at him but near him. "Get 
out, you fool! I'm giving you a chance 
to go !" 

There was nothing to do but obey. 
Trehearne moved toward the door, 
thinking angrily that he would have to 
risk the sector map in Operations. He 
stretched out his hand to the latch and 



$2 



STARTLING STORIES 



the door opened under it fast and he 
was looking straight into the prism lens 
of a shock tube, held by a tall spaceport 
guard. Shairn was beside the guard. 

The guard said, "Back up." 

Trehearne backed. He looked at 
Shairn. "I should have clipped you again 
to make sure." 

"You should. I got my feet loose quite 
easily. This silk is pretty flimsy stuff." 
She walked past him toward Joris. The 
guard came in and closed the door, setting his back against it. 

Joris demanded, "What's all this 
about?" 

"I found her out by the gate," the 
guard said. "She was gagged and her 
hands were tied." 

"Trehearne," said Shairn to Joris. 
"He's an Orthist. He came here to help 
Edri escape." 

"Did he!" said Joris. "Did he now!" 
He looked at Trehearne. "You stand 
where you are. Don't try anything." He 
reached into a drawer of the table and 
covered him with the lens of another 
tube. 

"An Orthist, eh?" he said softly. He 
began to laugh. 



CHAPTER XII 
The Fight at the Spaceport 



SHAIRN sat down on the edge of 
Joris' table. She smiled at Trehearne and in this moment he hated her. 
He looked from Joris to the guard and 
back again and did nothing. There was 
nothing then that he could do. 

"Would you have believed it of him, 
Joris?" said Shairn. "Would you have 
thought that he could turn on us after 
all we did for him ?" 

Joris leaned back in his chair. 
"Shairn," he said, "I'm sorry it had to 
be this way." 

"Yes," she answered, and then added 
bitterly. "Kerrel was right about him, 
after all." 

Joris said, "That isn't what I mean." 



Something in his tone made Shairn 
turn and look at him. He went on. "I'm 
sorry you got yourself into this. You're 
only doing what you believe to be right. 
But so is Trehearne. So am /." 

He dropped his bombshell so quietly 
that for a moment neither Shairn nor 
Trehearne could quite believe that they 
had understood him. 

Shairn got up off the edge of the table. 
She backed away, her eyes fixed on Joris 
in horrified incredulity. "You, Joris! 
You an Orthist!" Her tone made the 
words a denial. 

But Joris nodded and said, "Yes." 

Abruptly, Trehearne laughed. Shairn 
swung around. "You heard?" she said 
to the guard. "Arrest Joris !" 

The guard shook his head and smiled. 
"Hardly. I'm Joris' man." 

It was Shairn's turn now to stand 
like a trapped thing, searching for escape and not finding it. 

Trehearne said, "May I move now?" 
His voice was a bit shaky with relief. 

Joris grinned. "I didn't want you 
throwing yourself around. Somebody 
might have got hurt. Yes, you can 
move." 

Shairn burst out, "I can't understand 
this, Joris! You, of all people — it's 
insane !" 

"Perhaps. But I think Trehearne 
would understand." He scowled at his 
own hands, brooding, and then he said, 
"It doesn't matter who knows now. I did 
the forbidden thing. I married a woman 
of another world, a non-Vardda. I had 
a son. He wanted to fly the stars. He 
used to beg me to take him aboard my 
ship. 

"After all, he was my son, halfVardda. He thought he could do it. He 
hid himself away in my cabin and — the 
Vardda blood had not bred true in him." 
He glanced briefly at Trehearne. "He 
was not quite eighteen. I never flew 
another voyage after that." 

He got up, kicking the empty bottle 
away. "I guess that was why I first gave 
Trehearne his chance. It seemed to make 
up in a way for — " 

He broke off abruptly. "Well, that's 
over and done with. We have other 



THE STARMEN 

things to think about and not much 
time to do them in. Trehearne, you've 
upset my plans rather badly by fetching in Miss Spitfire here." 

"It wasn't intentional." He went to 
Joris. "Is it true then? You're going 
to get Edri free?" 

"I'm going to try. You see, this is a 
thing I could only do once. I've had 
to sit here for years, watching more 
than one good man go out to Thuvis, 
waiting — waiting for the time when I 
could make my action really count. Now 
it's here." He turned and glowered at 
Shairn. "The main question is — what 
are we going to do with you?" 

She answered him angrily and without fear. "Whatever you do you'll live 
to regret it!" 

"H'm," said Joris. "Tie her up again, 
Trehearne." 

He did so with immense pleasure. 
This time he used stouter bonds and 
took extra pains with the knots. 

Joris paced up and down, thinking 
hard. "I hate to say this but there's only 
one place I know of where there's no 
danger of her being found before we're 
gone. And that's aboard the ship." 

The guard said, "There won't be any 
time to get her off again." 

"I know it," said Joris grimly. "So it 
looks as though we'll have an extra passenger." 

Trehearne had finished with the gag. 
He looked at Shairn. Her eyes burned 
and her face was white above the cloth. 

Joris threw his cloak over her. "Take 
tier down in my private lift," he told the 
guard. "The sector has already been 
cleared, so you won't have any trouble 
there. Get her aboard and make damned 
sure she's locked in." 

THE guard nodded. He picked up the 
cloak-wrapped bundle and put it 
over his shoulder. The buzzer of the 
visiphone made a sudden jarring sound. 
Joris motioned the man to hurry, waited 
until he was gone before answering. 
Trehearne pressed himself back against 
the wall, out of range of the screen. 

Kerrel's voice said, "Joris — we're 
kringing Edri down in exactly fifteen 



OF LLYRDIS 53 

minutes. Is everything ready?" 

Joris nodded. "The sector is cleared, 
the guards are posted and the ship is 
ready for take-off." 

"Good. There's a good bit of feeling 
about this business and we don't want 
any trouble." 

"I've seen to it," Joris told him. 

The screen went dark. "The swine!" 
said Joris. "He's only doing what he believes is right but he's so bloody smug 
about it. Agent of the Council! Bah!" 

Unexpectedly he caught Trehearne's 
shoulders in a bearlike grip that nearly 
broke them. 

"I'm glad you're with us. Are you 
armed ?" 

"Yes." 

"Come on, then. This is the end of 
my waiting. I'm going back to space, 
Trehearne! I'm going to do the things 
I knew I'd have to do some day after I 
watched my son die. Come on then — 
move !" 

They went down in the tiny private 
lift and out of the building to a guarded 
sector where the lights burned brightly 
over silent ships, where there were no 
swarming mobs of non-Vardda workmen, no clatter of machinery and whizzing of busy trams, only the deserted 
aprons of the great docks and the empty 
spaces between them. 

As they went Joris told Trehearne 
what he had to do. "Only the guards at 
the gate, and the four who will pick 
up Kerrel's men when they come 
through belong to me. The others, we 
hope, will be too far away to interfere. 
But we'll have no time to linger." 

"Where is the prison ship?" 

"I spotted that at the far end of the 
sector. And they'll find its generators 
shot when they try to follow us. The 
Orthists are strong among the nonVardda. The mechanics were glad to 
do that little job for me!" 

Joris spoke briefly to the guards 
about Trehearne. They nodded a welcome. "In about ten minutes," Joris said. 
"Is the girl aboard?" 

"All secure, sir." 

"Good. Come along, Trehearne." He 
led the way past two of the towering 



54 STARTUP 

docks. By the time they reached the 
third they were out of sight and hearing 
of the gate. In this third dock was a 
long rakish starship, h'ghtless and silent, 
all hatches closed except the port. 

"The Mirzim, the ship we're taking," 
said Joris. "A long-distance light trader, 
built for speed. Well, we'll need that. It 
belongs, by the way, to a good friend of 
mine. He'll have to collect from the two 
good cargo-ships I'm leaving behind." 

He added, "The crew's waiting inside now. Only a half-crew really — not 
many navigators and technicians are 
dependable Orthists." 

He stationed Trehearne in the shadows under the corner of the apron. 
"We'll jump them right here. Try not 
to kill anyone. As soon as Edri is free 
make for the Mirzim." 

"Right." Trehearne settled back into 
the patch of darkness, hidden from anyone walking past in the areaway. He 
held his shock tube ready in his hand. 
Joris was already gone, heading back 
to the gate. 

Trehearne listened to the sounds of 
the spaceport. The sharp smell of the 
sea was in the wind, and in the distance 
he could see the shining towers of the 
city. He thought that this was probably 
the last time he would ever see Llyrdis. 

He knew a stabbing pang of regret. 
And then, coming from the direction of 
the gate, he heard the rhythmic tramp 
of perhaps a dozen men, moving at a 
brisk pace toward him. He was glad 
that the wait was no longer. 

He did not move but his body quivered, settling itself. 

There was Joris, walking first with 
Kerrel. There were four men without 
uniforms. There was a fifth man and 
beside him Edri, with his right wrist 
linked to the man's left. There were four 
more men without uniforms, then four 
of Joris' guards. 

The head of the little column passed 
the corner of the third dock. The four 
guards broke rank and pulled out their 
shock tubes, aiming the pallid beams at 
an angle to avoid hitting Edri. 

Trehearne sprang out and joined 
them. 



; STORIES 

Three of Kerrel's men went down 
on that first assault. Two were unconscious but one could still use his shocker. Joris had caught Kerrel unawares 
and knocked him down with nothing 
more than his great hammer of a fist. 
He pulled out his own weapon then 
and waded in. 

A vicious dogfight began, Bwirling 
around with Edri as its center. Edri 
grappled with his guard and they fell, 
both struggling, both hampered by the 
fetters. 

BOTH sides quit using the shockers. 
The fighting was too close for that, 
a small blundering nasty melee of fists 
and feet, men stumbling over each 
other, hitting the wrong people in their 
haste, going down, getting up again, 
shouting for help, swearing, astonished, 
furious. 

Trehearne, trying to get to Edri, 
smashed one man solidly in the face and 
sent another staggering. Then he was 
tripped and was kicked as he went down. 
He found himself sprawling on top of 
Edri, who grunted and struck at him, 
then said, "Oh, it's you. The key is in 
his belt." 

Trehearne chopped down with his 
fist. The man's head rang on the concrete. He lay still and Trehearne found 
the key. 

A heavy weight descended on him 
from behind, grinding his face into the 
cement. The hand that held the key 
was pinioned in an iron grip. He 
thrashed about, trying to unseat his attacker and in the meantime Edri had 
grabbed his hand as well, wrenching 
and clawing with a single-minded determination to have the key. 

He got it. Trehearne managed to get 
his knees under him and roll. He saw 
Kerrel's face close to his. In a second 
the two men had each other by the 
throat. 

They strained together, breast to 
breast, like two lovers, kicked and 
trampled by the feet of other men, oblivious. Edri got free and rose. He would 
have struck Kerrel but Trehearne 
gasped, "No! I'll handle him!" 



THE STAKMEN 

Kerrel smiled, an anguished baring 
of the teeth. His thumbs bit hard into 
Trehearne's neck. 

Trehearne let go of Kerrel's throat. 
He bunched his two fists together and 
struck upward. Kerrel's head snapped 
back. His hands loosened. Trehearne 
tore them away. He threw himself on 
top of Kerrel. He hit him hard in the 
face until Kerrel's head rolled like the 
head of a dead man. 

Hands grasped him and tried to drag 
him away. He shook them off. Kerrel 
moaned and turned on his side. Trehearne kicked him with his sandalled 
feet. "That's for Yann," he grunted. 
"That's for the hounds and for Torin." 

A voice roared at him. "Leave it, 
damn you ! Leave it!" A very strong 
arm thrust him aside. He recognized 
Joris. There were distant sounds of 
shouting, coming closer. Kerrel's men 
were down or scattered. Their own men 
were running for the Mirzim, dragging 
with them several who were stunned 
or partly paralyzed. Edri, with a bleeding face, was capering joyously and 
yelling at him to hurry. 

Trehearne shook his head to clear it. 
He ran beside Joris, stumbling up the 
metal stair to the apron. He was the last 
one through the port. Joris hauled down 
a lever, and the port closed and locked 
itself automatically with a squeal of 
compressed air. 

Instantly the lights went on. The 
great generators jarred to life. Joris 
strode heavily down the long corridor 
to the bridge with Trehearne at his 
heels. There was another man sitting 
there but Joris took over the pilot chair. 

Trehearne waited tensely but Joris 
did not touch the controls. He merely 
sat there, inspecting his bruised fists. 

"What the hell are you waiting for !" 
Trehearne cried. "We've only got a few 
moments at most 1" 

Joris looked at him stolidly. "We've 
only got one life too. We can throw it 
away by starting at the wrong moment 
and colliding with incoming ships. I 
know the dispatch-schedules. Wait." 

Trehearne waited. He could not hear 
inside the ship but he knew that by now 



OP LLYRDIS 55 

alarms must be shrilling all over the 
spaceport. 

It was mad to wait. It was craven 
surrender. Better to run any risk of 
suicidal collision than to wait. . . . 

And still Joris waited, an eye cocked 
on the chronometers, until through the 
window Trehearne saw lights flashing 
up outside and men running. And then 
he overheard the loom of a great ship 
descending fast. 

Joris grunted, suddenly punched the 
controls. "Hang on!" 

The Mirzim went up in a screaming 
arc that crumpled Trehearne to the 
deck. He clung to a stanchion and 
prayed that Joris had not lost his skill. 

He had not. Even the Vardda flesh 
had limits. So did metal and the bones 
of ships. Joris knew to the fraction exactly how much they could stand. The 
course had already been calculated. He 
cleared the system, found his coordinates, then hammered the signal relays 
to the generator rooms. 

The whine of the generators rose and 
the needle on the acceleration master 
dial rose with it. Trehearne watched it 
with bulging eyes, gasping under the 
pressure, barely restrained an impulse 
to scream. The second officer was clutching his chair, his face white. 

Joris watched the dial. At the precise 
instant he punched the relay bars again. 
The needle ceased to blur in its frantic 
ascent, climbing now with a decent 
deliberation. 

Joris turned around. He looked at his 
companions and shook with laughter. 
He had, for the first time since Trehearne had known him, the face of a 
completely happy man. 

Trehearne staggered up. He got out 
a handkerchief and wiped his face. 
There was blood on it as well as sweat. 
"Well," he said. "We're off. But if you 
don't mind telling me now, Joris — 
where the devil are we off to ?" 

"H'm," said Joris. "This may seem a 
little peculiar to you in view of all the 
circumstances — " 

He roared again with hearty mirth. 

"I'll tell you Trehearne. We're off to 
Thuvis!" 



STARTLING 



CHAPTER XIII 
Bitter Planet 



TREHEARNE stared at Joris. A 
small trickle of blood ran from his 
nose down over his lip. He forgot to 
wipe it away. 

"You're joking," he said. 
"Not at all." It was Edri who answered. He had come into the bridge 
behind Trehearne. He cried good-naturedly, "Blast you, Joris, what are you 
trying to do — -kill us all before we get 
started T' 

"They'll be after us soon enough," 
said Joris. "We need all the edge we can 
get." 

Trehearne demanded, "Why are we 
going to Thuvis?" 

"Partly," said Edri soberly, "to rescue the men who are rotting away out 
there. But chiefly because we must have 
Arrin. You see, Trehearne, he was arrested before he could finish his calculations. When I tried to carry on I added 
a good bit of my own material — but the 
missing factor isn't there. Arrin has it. 
He must have or he couldn't have gone 
as far as he did. Now if we put our 
knowledge together — " 

Edri sighed. "It's been a long, long 
fight. A thousand years of piecing together lie and legend and hearsay, of 
hunting down scraps of letters and 
secret reports, of dredging through 
tons of irrelevant nonsense in search of 
one little bit of truth. 

"The Vardda authorities of that day 
suppressed or destroyed all evidence 
connected with that last voyage of 
Orthis. They did their work well. Until 
now no one has even known in what 
general sector of the Galaxy the pursuit took place. 

"Yes, a long fight. And if we're wrong 
it means the end of hope in our generation. Others will have to begin the 
search all over again." 

It seemed a cruel question to ask but 
Trehearne could not keep from it. 



STORIES 

"Is there any proof that Orthis' ship 
still exists at all?" 

"No. We only know that it was not 
destroyed at the time that Orthis outran his pursuers and disappeared. Long 
afterward one of the life-skiffs of his 
ship was picked up in space. He had 
known it could only be picked up by his 
enemies, so there was nothing inside it 
but a message painted large on the waUs 
— You liave not destroyed me. The peoples of the Galaxy shall yet be given the 
freedom of the stars! 

Trehearne shook his head. "Orthis 
must have been quite a man." 

"He was," said Joris. "A true man 
of the stars. He was born in deep space 
between Aldebaran and the little yellow 
sun that is our nearest neighbor. He was 
one of the last of the four generations 
of men and women who made the first 
round-trip voyage of all time into interstellar space." 

Edri nodded, "He was only twenty 
when the ship returned to Llyrdis but 
spending his whole life in space had 
made him strange. He could not endure 
to be planet-bound. He built his laboratory ship and worked in it, almost alone, 
for another fifteen years and then announced his great discovery — the mutation, the birth of Galactic Man. 

"He never gave out the whole secret 
of his process. He said it was too dangerous in untrained hands. He built the 
whole apparatus himself and handled 
it himself and sowed with his own 
hands the seed of the Vardda race that 
would flower in the next generation. 

"He was revered almost as a demigod, 
at first. But there were the other planets 
of Aldebaran. There were the worlds of 
the neighboring yellow sun, inhabited 
by peoples of a high culture. Orthis 
assumed that they too were going to be 
included in the great new future of 
star-travel — they and all other starworlds truly civilized enough to be 
worthy of it. 

"Well, there were objections to that. 
Chiefest and soundest of them was the 
fear of terrible interstellar wars. Two 
parties sprang up and fiercely argued 
the question. Orthis' laboratory ship 



THE STARMEN 

was impounded and he himself was kept 
virtually a prisoner for many years. In 
the end his cause was defeated and his 
ship ordered destroyed. 

"Orthis succeeded in escaping with 
his party's help. He got his ship away. 
It looked as though he would be victorious after all. But by this time the 
new Vardda face had begun to flourish 
and some of them were old enough to 
fly. So these young wolves, believing intensely in their right, haled out after 
the old man, who clung just as intensely 
to his own beliefs. 

"He was undoubtedly able to endure 
ultra-speeds himself, for it was a long 
and bitter chase. They partially disabled 
his ship but even so he managed to elude 
them. There was no ultra-wave radar or 
radio in those early days and after all he 
had cut his teeth on the stars. They 
lost him. And that was the end of Orthis 
and his ship. Except for the life-skiffs 
message he was never heard of again." 

Edri paused, then added, "Do you 
wonder that we venerate such a man?" 

"I think," said Trehearne slowly, 
"that you have his kind of courage." 

"Maybe." Edri laughed. "I do know I 
have a most colossal thirst. You didn't 
forget the wine stores, Joris?" 

"The gods forbid I" 

"Let's go and drink." Edri took Trehearne's arm. "And you can tell me a 
story — where you came from and what 
in blazes you're doing here I" 

"No," said Trehearne, without relish. 
"I think I'd better see about Shairn." 

Edri's jaw dropped. "Shairn?" 

"Yes, unfortunately — Shairn." He explained rapidly how the extra passenger 
came aboard. 

EDRI said some low, hard words. 
"That isn't going to help matters 
one little bit. We can hardly leave her 
on Thuvis and we can't stop anywhere 
else." 

"It couldn't be helped," growled Joris. 

"No. Well, I think I'll go with you, 
Trehearne. I don't believe you'd be safe 
alone I" 

They found her, locked in an officer's 
cabin for which, on this short-handed 



OF LLYRDIS 57 

trip, there was no officer. She was still 
bound and gagged. From the look she 
gave them Trehearne thought she 
would have killed them both if she had 
the power. 

He freed her. She sat up on the bunk, 
rubbing her wrists. Two red marks 
ran from the corners of her mouth 
across her white cheeks where the gag 
had rubbed. It gave her a comical expression, like the mask of a clown. 
There was nothing comical about her 
eyes. 

She did not speak. 

Trehearne said awkwardly, "Shairn, 
I'm sorry about all this. But you might 
as well make the best of it now you're 
here." 

Still she did not speak. She only sat 
and looked at him. 

Edri said, "Come on, Shairn. A glass 
of wine will do you good." 

She ignored him. Silence and the 
green deadly eyes, fixed on Trehearne. 

He went to her and put his hand on 
her shoulder. "Be reasonable, Shairn. 
I know how you feel but none of it was 
done with intent. And we're all your 
friends, whether you agree with us or 
not." 

He jerked back but not quite in time. 
Her claws raked his cheek. He stepped 
away. She sat motionless and said not 
one word. 

Trehearne swung on his heel and 
went out. Edri came after him, and 
locked the door. "Perhaps Joris can talk 
to her," he said. His tone did not hold 
much hope. 

"Oh, she'll come out of it," said Trehearne. "Nobody can stay that mad forever." 

Edri shook his head. "I've known her 
longer than you have. I wouldn't count 
on it." 

The intercom boomed over their 
heads — Joris calling from the bridge. 

"Edri — will you and Trehearne step 
up here? The bad news is starting to 
come in." 

Communications was just abaft the 
bridge. Joris had relinquished the controls to the Second and was standing 
in the cramped space behind the opera


58 STARTLING 

tor, listening intently to the thin metallic voice that came from the ultra-wave 
receiver. 

"Channel One — Alert. All ships in 
Sector M29 . . . request radar confirmation on ship believed on course as follows . . ." 

"Port radar base would have got our 
coordinates at take-off, of course," said 
Joris. "They're just making sure." 

"Listen," said Edri. 

The metallic voice finished repeating 
the coordinates. It went on. "All ships 
will identify immediately when challenged. All ships will identify . . ." 

"Cruisers," said Edri. 

Joris frowned. "They could man at 
least one in a hurry. I told you we'd 
need a head start." 

He returned to the bridge to inspect 
the dials and order the generators 
stepped up. 

"We'll have to reach acceleration 
peak in half the normal time or we 
might as well have stayed on Llyrdis. 
I'm going to see what radar has turned 
up." 

Trehearne followed along, brooding 
on the subject of cruisers. The Vardda 
had no warships, being in the enviable 
position of having no use for them. But 
the Council maintained a small fleet of 
armed craft with maximum velocities 
considerably above those of the slower 
cargo ships, for the purpose of keeping 
down occasional outbursts of illegal 
trading among the Vardda themselves. 

The three-dimensional radar screens 
showed the normal number of tiny red 
sparks — the faster-than-light energy 
impulses of ships' generators. Joris 
scanned them with a practiced eye. 

"Nothing to bother us yet- Too early 
to tell — the sector immediately behind 
us is too crowded with shipping from 
the port." He turned to the technician. 
"Keep a damn sharp lookout astern. Call 
me the minute you see anything unusual. 
You're on a twelve-hour shift and I'll 
arrange for your relief." 

Relief was a problem on that voyage. 
No one got much of it. They had slightly 
over half the number of men required 
for a full crew under normal circum


STOH1ES 

stances and some of them were not 
trained technicians. Trehearne found 
himself doing one eight-hour trick on 
the bridge, calling out dial readings, and 
another in Communications. Since, 
obviously, there was no sending to be 
done he could handle the receiver well 
enough. 

Channel One, which was the official, 
top-priority voice of the Vardda Council, 
continued to request — and get — confirmation of their course. 

It was not long before Quorn, their 
Communications officer, reported that 
radar showed a red spark astern that 
seemed to be following their course. 

CALCULATING distance by intensity it was possible to judge the 
rate of approach. Joris demanded more 
thrust from the generators, ignoring the 
shuddering agony of the hull and the 
equally painful reactions of his men. 

"Until we pick up Arrin," he said, 
"it's got to be cut and run. Thuvis is the 
first place they'll block off and anything 
but a direct course on our part will givf 
them time to do it." 

They reached their acceleration peak 
— maximum stress for the fabric of the 
ship. Joris pushed it over. They prayed. 

The observation port began to show 
a thinning star-field ahead. Wider and 
wider the areas of darkness spread and 
the colonies of suns were fewer and 
more scattered. The red sparks on the 
radar screens dwindled and faded until 
only two or three were left — lonely 
traders, outbound to these isloated systems. Those — and the single spark that 
brightened always astern. 

The hours became a lagging monotony of constant watching, constant 
strain. Numb from lack of sleep, Trehearne went mechanically through his 
duties, forgot even to worry about what 
was going to happen. Yesterday was an 
eon ago, tomorrow was lost in nothingness. There was only today and he was 
tired. 

It was the same with all of them. 
Joris seemed neither more nor less exhausted than the rest and Trehearne 
marveled at the old man's strength. 



THE STARME. 

Shairne remained locked in her cabin. 
She would not speak to anyone, except 
the youngster who brought her food, 
then only to voice a curt thanks. 

Ahead the darkness deepened. The 
main axis of the Milky Way plane was 
"below" them. Beyond the isolated systems they could glimpse the lightless 
gulf of utter emptiness. Its black blankness afflicted Trehearne with a creeping 
horror. It was like seeing the primal 
Chaos before creation. 

At last a dim red sun was centered in 
the field. It began to grow. The radar 
screens were empty, save for the one 
grim following spark that had become 
almost a flame, ominously bright. 

Joris made his calculations and again 
they prayed. 

They completed deceleration in a little 
less than half the normal time. That 
was the period during which no one ate 
and only those who had to remained 
erect. 

Thuvis hung in the sky before them, 
an idiot sun, devouring the last of its 
strength and peering with a dull red eye 
at the cosmic face of death. It was 
circled by a single world. 

"We'll have to make it fast," said 
Joris harshly. "You be ready, Edri." 

The Mirzim landed on an arid tableland swept by bitter winds. Quorn stayed 
to maintain his tense vigil at the radar 
screens but the rest of them went out, 
glad of solid ground if only for a few 
minutes. 

The wind-driven dust tore at Trehearne, cutting into his flesh like tiny 
cold knives. The sky was dusky at midday but there were few stars. Even at 
night there would be few stars here. 

The sullen glare of Thuvis washed 
the dusty desert world with red and 
where a deep ravine cleft the tableland 
the shadows clung like clotted blood. 
Trehearne could not think of a place 
that more resembled hell. 

Edri had hastened to the lip of the 
ravine. Trehearne followed and looked 
down. Below the steep sides, below the 
ugly screens, was a tangle of pallid vegetation, stunted trees and leprous shrubbery, clustered around warm springs 



OF LLYKDIS 59 

that smoked like little fumaroles in the 
chill air. There was a settlement here, 
three or four small plastic structures 
surrounded by a wall, outside the wall a 
pathetic expanse of tilled land. 

"They're coming!" cried Edri. "They 
saw the ship. . . ." 

A narrow path led steeply up from 
the ravine. Men were already toiling 
along it. Trehearne counted them. Eight, 
ten, eleven — eleven men, the total population of this world of ultimate exile. 

Edri was shouting. His voice echoed 
back and forth in the ravine with a 
hollow booming sound. Other shouts 
answered him. The men on the path began to run. They slipped and staggered 
in their haste, clawing their way upward. Trehearne could see their white 
faces strained toward him. 

He watched them come — gaunt windbitten hopeless men with the greyness 
of living death upon them, striving up 
from that deep red-lit prison, answering the call of Edri's voice. He saw their 
eyes, the eyes of men called back suddenly from that terrible numbing of the 
mind that is worse than clean destruction. 

Edri threw his arms around the man 
who came first over the rim. He had not 
been there as long as the others and the 
stamp was not so deep on him. He 
turned and shouted at his mates to 
hurry. His beard and his unkempt hair 
blew in the wind and his voice was wild. 

Edri cried to him, "No time for talk 
now, Arrin! Is that all of you?" 

It was. The line of bearded scarecrows hastened toward the Mirzim. 
Ready hands helped them in. 

The voice of Quorn yelled over the 
intercom, "They're right on top of us! 
Hurry it up!" 

Joris had thrust his way forward to 
the bridge. He was at his station and 
waiting before the port was closed. 

"Ready for* take-off! Watch yourselves !" 

His hand reached out for the signal 
relays. And then Trehearne saw it hesitate and fall back. 

From the opening door of the Communications room another voice spoke, 



«0 STARTUP" 

perfectly audible at that short distance 
— the metallic voice of the receiver. 

"We have your range. Do not attempt 
to take off. We have your range. Do not 
attempt . . ." 

Over Joris' suddenly shrunken shoulders, through the bridge port, Trehearne 
saw the long slim shape of a cruiser 
sweep in toward a landing close beside 
them. 



CHAPTER XIV 
Toward the Shores of Night 



KERREL'S face appeared on the 
small screen. There was no need 
now for the ultra- wave and the ordinary 
visiphone unit had been cut in. Edri 
and Joris confronted him. Trehearne 
stood in the doorway, listening. Behind 
him were the rescued exiles and black 
despair was on them all. 

Kerrel regarded Edri and Joris with 
weary hatred. He seemed to have learned 
that being an agent of the Council had 
its rough side. But there was no slightest hint of leniency in his tone. 

"The gun crew has orders to open 
fire in exactly fifteen minutes," he said. 
"You have that long to clear your ship, 
bringing with you neither weapons nor 
personal gear of any sort." He repeated, 
"Fifteen minutes precisely." 

Joris looked at him with red and 
sunken eyes. Twenty years of age had 
come upon him in the last few minutes. 
He could not seem to bring himself to 
speak. Edri's hands were clenched so 
tightly that the fingers were bone white. 
They moved back and forth, seeking 
something to strike and not finding it. 
He too had become old. 

"Fourteen minutes," said Kerrel, 
without emotion. "You're wasting 
time." 

Edri turned abruptly and thrust his 
way blindly past Trehearne, who caught 
and held him in the doorway. 

"Let go," said Edri viciously and 
corsed him. "That ravine is deep. I can 



STORIES 

step off into it now as well as later. I 
won't be taken back." 

"Hold on," said Trehearne. A sudden 
wild hope had come to him. He lifted his 
voice. "Kerrel! Kerrel, can you hear 
me?" He was out of visual range of the 
screen. 

"Yes, Trehearne, I hear you." 

"Then listen! Tell your men to hold 
their fire. We have Shairn aboard!" 

Joris' head came up sharply. Edri 
stopped fighting. And in the screen Kerrel's mirrored face went through the 
shadings of surprise, shock, then understanding and a wry mirth. 

"You have a quick mind, Trehearne," 
he said. "But it won't do. Thirteen minutes." 

"Go and get her, Edri," said Trehearne. His mouth was dry, his body 
drenched with cold sweat. 

Edri plunged away into the corridor. 
Trehearne went and stood where Kerrel 
could see him. He smiled and wondered 
if Kerrel could hear the knocking of his 
heart against his ribs. 

Joris stood motionless, waiting. Kerrel counted off the minutes, and at each 
count his voice became more strained, 
his eyes less certain. 

There were six minutes left when 
Edri came back with Shairn and thrust 
her in front of the screen. 

"You see?" said Trehearne. "I wasn't 
lying." 

Kerrel forgot to count. He stared at 
the girl, the strong lines of his face 
crumbling into indecision. He said her 
name once. Suddenly he turned and was 
gone from the screen. They could hear 
him shouting somewhere beyond, "Hold 
your fire! Hold your fire! They have a 
prisoner aboard." 

Trehearne knew then that he had not 
misjudged the depth of the other's passion. And strangely that knowledge was 
bitter to him. 

Kerrel came into view again, and 
Shairn cried out, "Kerrel, they're after 
something more than these Orthist 
exiles! I think they're — " 

Trehearne put his hand over her 
mouth. "It doesnt matter what she 
thinks. The only important thing is her 



life. How much is it worth to you, Kerrel?" 

Kerrel ran his hand nervously over 
his face and did not answer at once. 
Trehearne kept his palm firmly on 
Shairn's mouth. 

Kerrel shook his head. "You wouldn't 
kill her, Trehearne." 

"No, / wouldn't," Trehearne said. 
"But I'm only one and there are others 
aboard. Eleven men of Thuvis, who feel 
that one life is very little to pay for 
escape from this hell-hole. Come on, 
Kerrel, how much is Shairn worth to 
you? You can have her — free, clear and 
alive." 

Kerrel asked, "What do you want?" 
"A head start." 

"It won't do you any good. You can't 
outrun a cruiser." 

Joris said, "We'll take that chance !" 

Again Kerrel hesitated. "What are 
your terms?" 

Trehearne said, "You will allow us 
to take off and we'll guarantee to land 
Shairn safely on the other side of this 
planet. You will keep your ship here 
until you receive our message that that 
has been done. We will both be able 
to check each other's actions by radar 
and if your generators are started before our second take-off we'll know it." 

Kerrel gnawed his lip and then asked 
sullenly, "What assurance have I that 
you will actually release her?" 

"You can take my word for that," 
Trehearne told him. "Either that or 
blow her to bits with the rest of us." 

There was another long tense moment 
of silence. And then Kerrel said, "All 
right." He spoke the words as though 
they had a taste of vitriol on his tongue. 

Joris was out of Communications in 
one long stride. Kerrel looked at Shairn 
and cried, "Wait! You must radio your 
position when you set her down." 

"We will." 

Trehearne flipped the switch. The 
screen went blank. The throbbing generators took the ship and lifted it and 
whirled it away and no gun spoke from 
the cruiser. Trehearne released his grip 
on Shairn. Reaction and relief had 
turned his knees to water, so that it was 



THE STARMEN OF LLYRDIS 61 

difficult to stand against the lurching 
of the ship. 

Shairn turned and looked at him. 
"You're a fool, Michael," she said, "but 
I'll give you this. You're not a coward." 



HE had her locked in her cabin again 
and went back to the bridge. Joris 
was scowling at the projection of the 
microfilm chart of the planet. 

"There," he said and pointed to a 
huge emptiness. "She'll be safe there 
until they pick her up — there's no predatory life in these deserts." He glanced 
up at Trehearne. "Good man," he said. 
"Me, I was beaten." 

Trehearne gave him a wry smile. 
"Me, I bluffed. From here on, Joris, it's 
all yours. Where's Edri?" 

"Shut in his cabin with Arrin. They 
know the general sector, clear out at the 
galaxy's edge. Now they're trying to 
figure out the true course together." 
And Joris snorted. "Course! If I can 
keep one jump ahead of that cruiser I'll 
be satisfied." 

The Mirzim skimmed over the darkling world of Thuvis into the starless 
night. Trehearne sat and brooded, thinking of Shairn, thinking of the two men 
who were bent over the final calculations of a dream that had balked men 
for a thousand years. 

He thought of what a dream can do 
to a man, of how far it can lead him 
away from the good safe life of common 
sense to the ultimate voids of creation. 
He hoped that Edri and Arrin would 
find what they wanted. He hoped they 
would live to find it. 

"Coming down," said Joris. "Better 
get Shairn a coverall. It's cold there." 

Trehearne found a warm coverall in 
the equipment locker and took it to 
Shairn's cabin. She put it on and he 
saw how her face was shadowed by 
weariness and strain. 

She said quietly, "Do you still love 
me, Michael?" 

Her question took him by surprise, 
and the answer came of itself. "Yes," 
he said. "I do." 

"Then we must stop behaving like 
two angry children and not throw away 



«2 STARTLING 

the life we can have together." 

He bent his head. "I'm sorry you got 
caught in this." 

"It's as much my fault as yours. I 
was too quick to lose my temper. I should 
have stopped to think that the Vardda 
world was so new to you that you had 
little to judge it by." 

She was not now the mocking Shairn 
of old. Her voice was full of a sombre 
passion, a pleading for him to understand. 

"Michael, your motives were good — 
devotion to a friend, reaction against 
what seemed to you injustice. But surely 
now you must see how hopeless this all 
is. I know you're hunting Orthis' ship. 
You'll never reach it. Kerrel will run 
you down. ItU all have been for nothing." 

It seemed to Trehearne that what she 
said was very likely true. But he only 
answered, "It's too late to think about 
that now." 

"No, Michael ! You can still save yourself !" She caught him by the shoulders, 
her hands urgent on his flesh. Her 
touch could still do things to him. "Leave 
the ship with me! Let Kerrel pick us 
both up !" 

Trehearne smiled mirthlessly. "Kerrel would like that — taking me back to 
a prison." 

"It doesn't have to be prison !" Shairn 
exclaimed. "You can say you pretended 
to join Joris and Edri only to save me! 
I'll back you up and not Kerrel nor anyone else can disprove it. You'll walk out 
free on Llyrdis!" 

It crossed his mind that he could do 
that. It would all fit. It was an out. 

"You won't be letting your friends 
down, either," Shairn insisted. "They'll 
go on without you. You've done all you 
can for them." 

She clung to him. Her mouth begged 
him with a silent language of its own. 

He took her arms slowly from around 
him and thrust her back and she caught 
her breath at the pain of his grip. 

"No," he said. And again, "No, 
Shairn." 

She stood back and looked at him 
steadily. "You could go back to the Sil


STOR1ES 

ver Tower with me but you won't — and 
for what? So that peoples you've never 
met on worlds you'll never see can someday fly the stars ?" 

"There was a man named Trehearne 
on the world Earth who got his chance 
to fly the stars," he said. "I thought 
that others should have their chance 
too. I have to play it out now." 

She was silent and then the dropping 
speed of the ship told them that it wa« 
almost over. Trehearne took her down 
to the airlock chamber. They stood there 
together, not finding anything more to 
say, and all that had been between them 
came silently and mocked them with the 
pain of vanished days. 

The Mirzim scraped her keel softly 
on a yielding surface and was still. 
Trehearne opened the port, looking out 
on the dark windy desert. 

Shairn spoke then. "A strange beginning for us, Michael, and now an even 
stranger ending. You told me once I 
would be sorry I ever met you. I am." 

He held out his hand to help her 
down and the pressure of her fingers 
was like something tearing at his heart. 

She looked up at him, a small lonely 
figure in the vast dark. He thought her 
lips moved but the wind came between 
them and took the words away and he 
had none of his own for answer. 

The warning bell jarred harshly in 
his ears. He closed the port and she 
was gone. 

Joris' voice roared from the bridge, 
through the intercom. "Flatten out, all ! 
This is the only start we'll get on Kerrel 
and I've got to pile it on !" 

The cruel hand of acceleration crushed 
Trehearne down. He lay on the scored 
plates of the deck and that last vision 
of Shairn's white face remained with 
him to remind him of all that he had had 
and lost. 

He said her name over and over in 
the silence of the empty lock and his 
mouth was filled with the bitter taste of 
dust. The Mirzim leaped through space 
like a wild thing, driving toward the 
sector that was the goal of a thousandyear hope and quest, toward the galaxy 
edge and the shores of outer night. 



THE STARMEN 



CHAPTER XV 
World of Death 



THEY had stepped clear out to the 
edge of the galaxy, where the fringing stars were lost in the outer void and 
the dead suns swept forever through the 
entombing dark, where even the memory of creation was gone, blotted out 
by unimaginable time. 

Trehearne tried to remember how 
long it had been since they had taken 
off from Thuvis. He gave it up. It didn't 
matter. He peered with aching bloodshot eyes into the lightless seas that lie 
between the island universes and tried 
to remember why he had come here. 
And that too was dim in his mind. 

Edri was bent over a table that had 
been set up in the bridge. He no longer 
looked like Edri. He seemed to have 
been working for a million years. Arrin 
sat near him. He held his head between 
his bony hands, a bearded mummy embalmed upright, hardly retaining the 
semblance of life. 

There were charts under Edri's hands, 
endless sheets of calculations, endless 
miles of figures. Joris studied them, 
bending beside Edri. His broad jowls 
hung down now over his wrinkled collar. His eyes had sunk deep under ridges 
of bone, peering out a« from two shadowed caves. 

Edri was talking in a voice that came 
from far away. The words reached Trehearne in droning snatches from beyond 
the fog of weariness. 

" — so our only way to locate Orthis' 
ship was to triangulate its position from 
two separate bearing3 on it. One bearing was the course of that life-skiff 
Orthis sent in with his last message, 
allowing for aberrations caused by the 
gravitational field of stars. The other 
bearing was Orthis' course in his last 
flight. We couldn't get that till I found 
the part of the Lankar manuscript that 
Arrin didn't have." 
Trehearne heard someone ask, "Who 



OF LLYHDIS 63 

was Lankar ?" 

"One of Orthis' last pursuers, who 
left a secret log of the pursuit to ease 
his guilty conscience. Enough of it survived — " 

Joris said, "The hell with Lankar. 
Get on with it." 

"We had to push the star-maps back 
in time — galactic motion, star streaming, a million complicated problems of 
relative motion and proper motion, back 
five hundred years and then another 
five hundred and then correlate them. 
That work's been going on a long, long 
time." 

Edri drew a long breath that was 
coupled with a racking yawn. 

"The charts indicate an unnamed 
dark star following an orbit here, outside the main stream of the galaxy." He 
traced a line with his finger. "These 
charts for the fringing stars are incomplete as you know. There's nothing to 
draw anyone out to these godforsaken 
regions and they've never been properly 
explored. 

"But according to our calculations 
that star was in the right place a thousand years ago and Orthis' life-skiff was 
launched from there. Now the wheel of 
the galaxy has turned so, taking the 
dark star with it . . ." 

He laid his hand on the crossing of 
two marked lines on the chart. "That's 
our destination, Joris. If we're right 
the ship of Orthis is there. If we're 
wrong — well, somebody else will have 
to try again in another thousand years." 

He remained standing, silent, his 
hands braced on the table, too tired to 
move. Joris rubbed his bleary eyes and 
began to read the coordinates aloud from 
the chart. Mechanically the Second Officer set up the combination on the finder. 

Joris moved heavily back to the pilot 
chair. He set the Mirzim on her new 
course. Then he spoke over the intercom 
to Radar. "What's the position of the 
cruiser ?" 

A croaking voice answered him. He 
listened. "Closer," he said. "Always 
closer." 

Trehearne's mind turned back to ito 
constant half-waking nightmare. The 



6 STARTLING 

cruiser, following, hanging on, dogged, 
persistent, relentless. He lived over painfully every maneuver, every trick by 
which Joris had managed to delay their 
pursuer, to grasp a little more time, a 
little more distance. 

He remembered the last-minute 
plunge into a dark nebula when the 
cruiser was almost close enough to 
range them. He remembered the turning and twisting and doubling inside the 
blackness of the cloud, where the absorptive cosmic dust fogged the radar. 
They had lost the cruiser there. They 
had got clear away and for a time they 
had hoped. They had made it to this 
fringe sector — and then the red spark 
showed again on the screen, coming 
closer, always closer. 

There were times when Trehearne 
forgot the physical fact of the cruiser, 
a ship of ordinary metal officered and 
manned by ordinary Vardda spacemen. 
At such times it seemed to him that the 
Mirzim was pursued by a demoniac 
nemesis striding naked across the plunging gulfs — a nemesis wearing Kerrel's 
face with Kerrel's hands outstretched to 
grasp them. 

Sometimes Shairn's face was there 
beside Kerrel's, white, unreadable, a 
misty cloud that blotted out the stars. 

The hoarse voice of the radar man 
croaked at intervals. The ship fled on 
toward the dark star. 

Joris turned around. The table had 
been taken out, the charts and the toilsome calculations rolled up and shoved 
away. Arrin lay on the deck against the 
after bulkhead, sleeping. He would not 
leave the bridge until he knew whether 
or not his life and work had gone for 
nothing. Edri sat beside him. He was 
not asleep. 

Joris said flatly, "It isn't going to 
work." 

Edri said nothing. He waited. 

Joris went on, as though he hated 
what he was saying, but had to say it. 
"Look at it. As soon as I start deceleration the cruiser will begin to cut our 
lead to nothing. And they're stressed 
for less deceleration time than I can 
make without tearing the Mirzim to 



STORIES 

pieces. What' 11 happen ? They'll be on us 
before we can even begin our search." 

Edri nodded. He leaned back against 
the bulkhead and closed his eyes. He 
said, "They know now what we're after. 
What do you suppose Kerrel would do 
if he found the ship of Orthis?" 

NOBODY answered that. There was 
no need to answer. A heavy silence 
followed, during which Trehearne 
thought of the messages that had gone 
out across the galaxy from the cruiser's 
ultra-wave — guarded messages that betrayed by their very spareness the desperate nature of this mission, urgent 
requests for other Council cruisers to 
close up with all speed. 

The others were still too far away to 
matter. Whatever happened would have 
happened before they could come up. 
Kerrel was going to finish this alone. 
Edri said, "What are we going to do ?" 
Joris rubbed his big hand over his 
stubbled face and blinked, and said, 
"Our only chance, if Orthis' ship and 
secret are really there, is to get the 
ultra-wave equipment to it in time for 
what we planned." ■ 

He went on slowly. "I think the lifeskiff could carry that equipment. If we 
drop the skiff it would travel on constant velocity for a while before it would 
have to decelerate. Meanwhile I could 
swing the Mirzim on another course, 
running back along the rim of the galaxy, away from the dark star. The cruiser would follow me. Chances are, with 
their radar concentrated on me to 
catch my lateral-impulse pattern, they 
wouldn't notice the skiff at all when she 
started deceleration." 

He sighed. "They'd catch us, of 
course. But the Mirzim isn't going to 
keep on forever after the beating she's 
taken. The generators are in bad shape. 
But we could keep going long enough 
to give you time." 

Edri thought it over. "I don't like it," 
he said. "But it looks as though it's that 
or nothing." 

Joris was muttering under his breath 
about maximum loads and capacity. 
"The main ultra-wave equipment," he 



THE STARMEN 

said, "and three men. The skiff would 
take that. We'd keep the auxiliary ultrawave set here, of course." 

"Who can you spare? You'll need all 
your flight technicians." 

"He can spare me," said Trehearne. 
"I'm the most nonessential. And I can 
still stand up if I have to." 

Joris nodded. "Yes. Quorn has to go 
to handle the ultra-wave, of course — and 
he can handle the skiff all right." 

"Who else?" 

"You," said Joris. 

Edri looked at the sleeping Arrin. 
"He ought to go instead. He's worked 
for it longer than I have." It was obvious that Arrin was unable to go anywhere and Edri sighed. He pulled himself erect. "All right, then. Come on, 
Trehearne. We'll start loading." 

The skiff was contained in a cell of 
its own, sunk in the side of the Mirzim — 
a miniature starship with a flight range 
long enough to give the crew of a disabled ship a chance to reach safety. 

Trehearne routed out every man that 
was off-station and could stand erect. 
Following Edri's orders he stripped the 
skiff of everything they wouldn't need. 
Quorn oversaw the removal of the heavy 
ultra-wave radio equipment from the 
Mirzim and its loading into the skiff. He 
seemed unnecessarily particular about 
it. Trehearne swore and sweated but 
got it done. 

He went back up to the bridge with 
Edri and Quorn. Joris studied his instruments. 

"Pretty soon," he said. He gave Quorn 
his flight instructions. "Trehearne is 
still a lubber," he remarked, "but he 
knows enough by now to give you a 
hand when you need it." 

Edri said, "Surrender as soon as 
you're challenged, Joris." 

Joris laughed, a pallid ghost of his 
old loud roar. "I will. Right now, I'm 
too tired to die." He glanced again at 
the instruments. "Time to go." 

They looked at each other, these fatigue-drunken red-eyed men whom a 
dream had dragged to the edge of the 
universe, and could find nothing to say 
in this moment of their parting. 



OF LLYRDIS 65 

"Good luck," muttered Edri then and 
turned away. 

"You're the ones who're going to need 
it," Joris called after them. 

Trehearne went through after Quorn 
and Edri into the skiff. Quorn took its 
controls and waited, watching his chronometer. His hand grasped loosely about 
a red-switch marked RELEASE. 

He closed the switch. 

There was a squeal and grind of machinery, an instant of extreme pressure, 
then the skiff had left the Mirzim. 
Though they could not see, they knew 
that skiff and ship had already diverged 
far apart at their unthinkable speeds. 

Quorn watched his instruments while 
Trehearne and Edri sat looking at nothing, afraid to sleep lest they should not 
be able to wake again. 

Presently Quorn started his forward 
generator and began deceleration. 

Trehearne lost track of things. Part 
of the following time he was unconscious 
or nearly so. The rest of it he observed 
as in a confused dream. He thought of 
how he had once been wild for starflight. 
But he managed to do the things that 
Quorn required of him. 

The port cleared. It had no adapter 
and functioned as a port only at visual 
speeds. Now, ahead of them, Trehearne 
could see a huge bulk of darkness 
against the outer dark, illumined only 
faintly by the galactic light. 

"There it is," said Edri. "The dark 
star." His voice shook a little. 

They swept closer, still slowing down. 
"It has a planet," said Quorn. "There, 
catching the starshine — " 

"Two," said Trehearne. "I see two." 

TWO dimly gleaming bodies, dead 
worlds clinging to a long dead sun 
out here at Galaxy edge. The glow of 
the Milky Way touched them, the ghostly glow of candles at a wake. 

Edri whispered, "We'll try the outer 
planet first. Give me a hand, Trehearne." 

,They crawled aft between the crowded banks of equipment to a detector 
that had come from the Mirzim's hold. 
Edri fumbled at it. 



66 STARTLIN 

"In Orthis' day they used radioactive 
fuel, of course," Edri mumbled. We calculated its half-life. Even supposing his 
bunkers were nearly empty there should 
be enough left to register on this counter. A teacupful would do it." 

Trehearne helped Edri adjust the 
shielding apparatus on the mechanism 
until the needle was still. 

"What about radioactive deposits on 
the planets themselves?" he asked. 

"We get a break there. Too old. The 
last radioactive element will have died 
millions of years ago." 

He raised his voice. "Keep the skiff 
as low as you dare, Quorn. The counter 
has a wide sweep. Take it slow." 

He crouched over the telltale. Trehearne moved forward again. 

The planet was small, less than two 
thousand miles in diameter. Between 
the intense gloom and the motion of the 
skiff he could see nothing but a black 
featureless desolation, rifted here and 
there with white that he took to be the 
frozen remains of an atmosphere. He 
thought what it would be like to land 
there and shivered. 

They swept the planet carefully. The 
telltale needle of the counter remained 
motionless. Edri said heavily, "We'll go 
on. Pray we find it on the other planet. 
Pray Orthis didn't come down on the 
dead star. It would take forever to find 
him there." 

Quorn fed in power and cleared away. 
The port dimmed again and Edri 
moaned. 

"He's about out," Quorn said. "Looks 
like whatever is done we'll have to do 
the most of it." 

The second world was larger than the 
first by three times or more. It was not 
content to be featureless. It thrust up 
gnawed and shattered ranges, stripped 
bones of mountains sheathed in frozen 
gases. It showed forth dreary plains 
coated white with congealed air, glistening faintly in the light of the great 
galactic wheel. 

It turned toward the watchers the 
naked beds of its vanished oceans, 
sucked dry to the deepest gulf. It displayed the scars of its long dying, the 



STORIES 

brutal wounds of internal explosion, the 
riven gashes of a shrinking crust. A 
hideous world that seemed to remember 
beauty still and resent the cruelty of 
death. 

Edri whispered, "Pray — pray that the 
damned thing moves." Instead of doing 
so he cursed the needle that it did not 
stir. 

"Keep going," said Trehearne. 

They kept going. 

The needle quivered. 

Edri let out a hoarse cry. "Easy! 
Easy!" Tears began to run down his 
cheeks. He sobbed. The needle jerked. 

"Circle!" Trehearne shouted to 
Quorn. "Circle till we get it centered." 

He ran his tongue over his lips and 
tasted salt and wondered how it got 
there. 

Quorn swung the skiff around in a 
tightening spiral. "Now" said Edri. 
"Let her down." 

He scrambled forward, thrusting his 
face against the port, trying to see. 
Quorn switched on a landing light. The 
blue-white blaze lit up a circular area 
below, the light intensely bright, the 
shadows intensely black. Its beam went 
sharply down. 

They followed it. It was as though the 
skiff were poised on that pillar of light, 
sinking downward. 

They were above a planetary surface 
racked and tortured by final diastrophism. Towering miles high, loomed a 
mighty cliff of riven rock. In front of it 
a chasm yawned and beyond the chasm 
a drear and tumbled landscape stretched 
dim under the great sword of the galaxy. 

They started down along the face of 
the titanic cliff. Looking at the chasm 
at its base Trehearne began to get uneasy. 

"There's no ship here," he said. "The 
counter must have picked up some last 
radiation from deep down in that 
chasm." 

Quorn agreed with him. But Edri 
said, "No, keep going." Trehearne could 
feel him tremble. 

They went on down the face of the 
giant, looming wall. 

Trehearne pointed suddenly. "Isn't 



THE STARMEN 

that a ledge?" 

The hard bright edge of the beam cut 
across a shelf of rock that jutted out 
halfway down the cliff. Quorn swung 
the skiff in closer. Something on the 
ledge glistened dully under the light. 

Quorn let the skiff drop with a sickening rush. Detail sprang clear — shattered rock, ancient magma, puddles of 
frozen air in the hollows. And among 
them an ovoid shape, symmetrical, 
smooth, giving back a metallic glint. 

Edri said the name of Orthis, as 
though it were a prayer. 



CHAPTER XVI 
The Star-Born 



jkUORN had set the skiff down on 
* ne ledge. They had scrambled into 
pressure suits. They had forgotten that 
they were already three-quarters dead. 

Awkward in the clumsy armor, stumbling on the jagged rock, slipping on 
the patches of frozen air, they clawed 
their way toward the goal they had 
crossed a galaxy and gambled their lives 
to find. Above them the ghastly cliff 
leaned outward against nothingness, 
below them the abyss plunged down into 
the dead heart of a world. Beyond them 
was spreading desolation and in the 
black sky the awful rim of the Galaxy 
lay like a blazing sword of light. 

Trehearne was aware of the silence. 
He had never been on an airless world 
before. He felt the impact as his metal 
boot struck against a shard of rock but 
it made no sound. All he could hear was 
the harsh breathing of Quorn and Edri, 
transmitted to him by the helmet audio. 

The ship of Orthis loomed before 
them, lightless, lifeless, cradled in the 
ashes of destruction. It had a look of 
patience. It had lain here waiting for 
a thousand years, untouched by time or 
rust, entombed in silence and the endless night, eternal as the dead suns that 
rove forever in uncorrupting space. It 
seemed that it could wait until the end 



OF LLYRDIS 



of time, cherishing its trust. 

Awe came upon Trehearne and with 
it a kind of fear. 

They found the lock port. It stood 
wide open, the valves still clean and 
shining. The light of Trehearne's beltlamp showed him, on the floor of the 
lock chamber, the scored marks of a 
man's boots. They might have been made 
only yesterday. 

The three men paused outside that 
open port. They looked at each other 
through their glassite helmets and their 
faces were strange. Then Trehearne 
stepped aside, and Quorn also. Edri bent 
his head. He moved forward to the port. 

Silently he clambered into the ship of 
Orthis. 

The others were close behind him. 
Their belt lamps cut hard slashes of 
light across the dark. They passed 
through the lock chamber and came 
into a corridor running fore and aft. It 
was utterly still. The heavy drag of their 
boots on the metal deck made not the 
slightest sound. Trehearne could hear 
the beating of his own blood in his ears, 
the dull throbbing of his heart. 

The whole after section of the ship 
was a laboratory. Much of the delicate 
equipment was shattered, either by 
speed-vibration or a hard landing. Trehearne could not make sense out of any 
of it but Quorn said, "He was studying 
interstellar radiation. Most of that stuff 
is beyond me,, but I can see that much." 

One section of the laboratory contained a complicated mass of coils and 
prisms and intricate banks of reflectors 
arranged around what must have been 
a great central tube. There was a small 
platform at the focal point of the mechanism, fitted with straps. Along one 
bulkhead was a stack of metal cages for 
experimental animals. Several of the 
little creatures were still there. They 
had died, the quick death of airlessness 
and cold, but their bodies were still perfect. They had, then, survived the voyage. 

Edri's voice came over the helmet 
audio. "Nothing for us here," he said. 
"No good trying to figure out this apparatus — they couldn't do that in all the 



66 STARTLING 

years they had the ship impounded. Most 
of it Orthis designed and built himself." 

Trehearne was still looking at the 
small furry bodies in the cages, lying 
as though in sleep. Somehow they made 
the betrayal of Orthis and his dream 
doubly cruel — that even beasts could be 
given the freedom of the stars, that so 
many generations of the races of many 
worlds had been denied. 

He turned and went forward with 
the others. They glanced into the living 
quarters. They were small and spare. 
The coverings of the bunk were rumpled and the pillow still retained the 
hollow where a man's head had lain. 
Trehearne shivered. They passed on to 
the bridge. 

Trehearne realized then what an act 
of heroism it had been to push this 
antique ship to the limits of the Galaxy 
and beyond. The instruments were so 
few and rudimentary, the system of controls so crude. There was a locking device, an Iron Mike that could keep the 
ship on its course without human attention. The science of starflight had come 
a long way since then. 

He remembered that this craft had 
not been built for starflight but rather 
as a spatial laboratory. And he wondered that it had survived at all. 

THERE was a door in the after bulkhead of the bridge. He went to it 
and looked through into the cabin beyond. The beam of his belt lamp speared 
brightly into the immemorial dark. 

Trehearne uttered a hoarse cry. The 
others ran to him. He was clinging to 
the bulkhead then, the cold sweat pouring down his face, his eyes staring. They 
looked past him, over his shoulder. 

The cabin was small. It was fitted as 
a library, crammed with metal cases of 
books, some of them microfilm volumes 
of an ancient type, others thick ragged 
notebooks. There was a great table, bolted down, and on the table was a metal 
box. 

Behind the table was a man. 

He sat in a metal chair. His right arm 
was outstretched, clenched fist resting 
squarely on the metal box as though de


STORIES 

manding that it be noticed. His head 
was lifted, looking toward the glassite 
port that showed the black sky slashed 
across with the mighty fires of the 
Galaxy. 

He was an old man. The years of his 
life had not been kind to him. They had 
shaped his face as though from dark 
iron, gouging the lines deep, hammering the ridges hard, driving out all 
traces of youth and hope to forge a mask 
of bitter anger and reproach and in the 
end despair. 

It seemed to Trehearne that he could 
read a whole life history in that face, 
caught forever in the moment of death, 
when surely the man was crying out 
upon whatever gods he worshipped, demanding Why? 

Edri made a strange harsh sound in 
his throat. "Orthis," he whispered. "Orthis! For a moment I thought . . ." 

"So did I," Trehearne admitted. "He 
does look alive, all right." 

Here in the airless utter cold, death 
held no decay, no change. But there was 
more to it than the lack of physical 
corruption. The fire in this man had 
burned so deep that even death could 
not erase its scars. 

"I think," said Trehearne, "that he 
wanted whoever found him to look inside that box." He suddenly wanted to 
get away from this funeral ship. 

They went in and he reached out and 
tried to move Orthis' hand from off the 
box. The arm was frozen rigid as a steel 
bar. Trehearne gave it up, and worked 
the box out from under it. 

It was unlocked. He lifted up the lid. 
The lamplight showed a notebook bound 
in cloth. On top of it lay a loose sheet 
of paper with a few angular lines of 
writing. Edri read aloud: 

" 'I have clung to life this much longer to write down for the first time all 
my formulae, complete and simplified 
so that they can be understood and used. 
In them lies the freedom of the stars. L 
the first of the Star-Born, was rejected 
by the greed and fear of the planet-born 
before but it will not be always so. . . . 

" 'I shall not see what comes. My ship 
has already flown too far, I have littl* 



THE STARME 

fuel and I am old. Therefore I have set 
the airlock control and in a few minutes 
it will open, a swift death and better 
than a slow one. 

"'After that, I shall wait. What I 
dreamed will never be forgotten. Someday will come others who believe as I do 
that the stars are for all men !' " 

Edri fell silent and then he whispered, "He watched the Galaxy for a 
thousand years and waited." 

Trehearne forced himself to break 
the spell. "We only have a little time!" 
be warned. He shut the box. "This is 
what you need. Let's go." 

They went out of the silent ship. Trehearne looked up at the flaming river of 
stars in the sky and thought what a 
mighty dream the first of Star-Born men 
had carried with him into the long night. 

He began to run toward the skiff, 
holding the box tight. A sudden panic 
of haste came over him. It seemed to 
him that Orthis had given them this 
trust with his own hands. If they failed 
now for lack of time . . . 

He shouted at the others, thrust them 
on, harried them into the skiff. They 
took off from the ledge. They did not 
want to be near the ^hip of Orthis when 
they did what they were going to do. 
Quorn sent the light craft racing across 
the dead world, searching for a place to 
land. 

"Keep your pressure suits on and 
your helmets ready," he said. 

Edri bent over the notebook from the 
metal box, tremblingly reading. 

"It's all here — the equations, the formulae, the instructions," he said hoarsely. "I don't understand them but others 
will!" 

He looked at Trehearne with redrimmed eyes. "Orthis has a foreword 
here. And he was the first of the StarBorn. The mutation began spontaneously on that first long voyage. The constant vibration of speed — not speed as 
we know it now but more than the human body was used to, speed approaching the velocity of light — and the impact of interstellar radiation on the living cell. That's what did it. Orthis was 
the end-product of four generations of 



OF LLYRDI9 69 

breeding under those conditions. 

"He was nature's first attempt to create Galactic Man, to readjust the human 
body to meet new needs. And the thing 
he labored on so long was the reduction 
of that long natural process to a workable formula that could accomplish the 
change in one generation instead of four. 
He found it, of course. And it's all here." 

Quorn broke in, "This place looks as 
good as any ! At least it'll give us a little 
more cover." 

He was taking the skiff down carefully toward the flat bed of an ancient 
watercourse. The channel was filled now 
with frozen air but in bygone ages it 
had gouged a deep canyon in the rock, 
leaving eroded holes and overhangs. 
Quorn worked the skiff into one of these, 
under the canyon wall. 

Edri was going over his book again, 
making sure, dazed with the hypnosis of 
exhaustion and the need to be right. He 
did not dare to fumble or read a figure 
wrong. Trehearne realized the weight 
of responsibility. 

Trehearni himself went aft with 
Quorn and began to struggle with the 
ultra-wave equipment. He was possessed 
by a demon of urgency, and he had not 
the slightest idea what he was doing. 
Quorn gave orders, and Trehearne 
obeyed. Hooking the power leads to the 
skiff's generators was the hardest task 
of all. 

Somehow they finished it. They sat 
Edri down in front of the transmitter 
with his book. Quorn adjusted switches. 
The generators hummed, feeding power 
into the big transmitter. Edri blinked, 
moistening dry lips. 

Quorn said, "I've got it on the emergency band, covering all channels. Every 
ultra-wave receiver within its range 
will pick it up — including non-Vardda 
communications centers. Also, the minute Kerrel picks it up he'll be able to 
center us and come in on our beam. So 
make it fast!" 

Edri nodded, glancing nervously at 
Trehearne. Quorn made the last dial setting, and then spoke harshly into the 
transmitter. 

"G-One! G-One! Emergency. Request 



70 STARTUP 

clearance all channels. Use your recorders! G-One, clear all channels. . . ." 

Edri drew an unsteady breath and 
leaned forward, and spoke rapidly. "I 
may not have time to repeat. We have 
found the ship of Orthis. We have found 
the ship of Orthis. Here follow the formulae for the Vardda mutation." 

IT was as short as that. He began to 
read from the notebook, going fast 
but taking pains to make each syllable 
clear beyond doubt. 

Quorn hung tensely over his dials. 
Trehearne sat motionless. His muscles 
quivered. Sweat ran into his eyes. Edri's 
voice went on. 

Suddenly, Quorn's hoarse voice cried, 
"Hurry! Kerrel's cruiser has already 
picked it up and they're trying to jam 
us! They'll be close enough in minutes 
to blank us out!" 

Edri's face became that of a hunted 
thing. His voice rose shrill, racing desperately to the last page. He started 
then to repeat. 

"Too late — we're blanked out !" Quorn 
yelled. "That means Kerrel is close 
enough to — " 

The skiff was suddenly shaken as 
though by a giant hand. Then it shuddered again, harder. Quorn leaped up. 
"Shell-bursts ! Kerrel's ranging us down 
the canyon !" 

Trehearne tried to thrust Edri's helmet over his head. Edri fought him 
off, clinging to the transmitter. Quorn 
helped pull him around. 

"You're jammed anyway!" he yelled. 
"You're not getting through ! Come on !" 

Between them they got Edri's helmet 
on. The skiff was racked again, and 
something broke with a crackle of exploding glass. 

Trehearne locked his own helmet. 
Through the audio he could hear Quorn 
shouting something about the airlock 
and getting clear. Half dragging Edri, 
Trehearne began to run, staggering 
against the bulkheads. 

They reached the airlock and got it 
open. Out on the canyon floor light blossomed and died. Great chunks of rock 
struck silently against the skiff. Th« 



! STORIES 

deck leaped up under their feet. Trehearne saw Quorn fall outward. Then 
he too was pitched out of the lock, carrying Edri with him. 

He hit the ground hard. He thought 
his helmet was broken. And then there 
was nothing but darkness. 

When he came to the cruiser had landed close by and men in spacesuits were 
coming toward the skiff, carrying weapons in their hands. 

Trehearne got to his feet. The moving 
beams of the belt lamps showed him 
faces inside the glassite helmets. One of 
them belonged to Kerrel. It came toward 
him and looked at Edri, motionless on 
the ground, and at Quorn, crawling on 
hands and knees. 

It said, "I ought to kill you all." 

Trehearne became aware of a smaller 
figure in a spacesuit, a figure that 
carried no weapon and had the face of 
Shairn inside the glassite. He heard 
her voice crying through the audio, 
"Michael, are you all right?" And then, 
bitterly, "Oh, Michael, you fool!" 

Kerrel turned. He said furiously, "I 
told you to stay in the cruiser." 

She answered, "I'm not under your 
orders, Kerrel — not yet." 

Men entered the skiff to search it. 
Other men picked up Quorn and Edri 
and carried them away. Kerrel looked 
at Trehearne and gestured with his long 
weapon that was like a gun. 

"Walk ahead of me, Trehearne." 

Trehearne began to walk ahead of 
Kerrel and Shairn. It was dark in the 
canyon, whose walls cut off the galactic 
light. He could hardly see the cruiser he 
was going toward. But the beam of Kerrel's belt-lamp was squarely upon him. 
The skin of his back crawled. 

"You'll get this one cheap, Kerrel," 
said Trehearne. "You won't even have 
to promise the price of a ship." 

"Do your talking when you get 
aboard," said Kerrel. "Go on." 

"What about the Mirzim ?"• 

"We overhauled her," Kerrel answered. "Your friends are all safely under hatches. Keep going, Trehearne. 
Don't try any tricks." 

The surface was rough underfoot 



THE STARMH 

Trehearne was still groggy and the light 
beam swung, making a shifting pattern 
of whiteness and black shadow. He 
stumbled and went to his hands and 
knees. 

"Ah," said Kerrel's voice, with infinite satisfaction. "A clear attempt to 
escape." 

SHAIRN'S voice gasped out, "No, 
KerrelP' 

Trehearne swung around, clawing at 
the frozen surface. Shairn was clinging 
to Kerrel's arm. He struck her twice 
with his free arm. Then, raging, he 
raised his knee and drove it to knock 
her back. 

Trehearne slammed solidly against 
Kerrel's turning body. He got both 
hands on the long weapon. Kerrel was 
cursing Shairn in a low hard undertone. 

Trehearne wrenched the weapon away 
from Kerrel. He raised it like a club and 
brought it down on the gleaming crown 
of the helmet. He brought it down hard. 
A lot went into that blow, a lot of memories. 

The glassite cracked. 

Kerrel had time to scream, just once. 

Trehearne dropped the weapon. Men 
came running toward him. Shairn had 
risen to her feet again. She came and 
stood against him so that the men would 
not fire. Trehearne looked down at the 
ghastly face inside the riven helmet. He 
shivered and turned away. 

Shairn was saying over and over, 
"Kerrel tried to murder him. There was 
no escape attempt. I'll swear to it." 

The men pulled her away and gathered around Trehearne. One of them 
said, "This isn't going to help you much, 
killing an agent of the Council." He 
turned on Shairn. He was a tired man. 
"All right !" he shouted. "We're not going to do anything! You can tell your 
story when you get to Llyrdis." He gave 
Trehearne a shove. "Get on, there." 

Trehearne plodded on to the cruiser. 
He was put into a locked room with Edri 
and Quorn and Joris and two other men 
Irom the Mirzim. Edri was still dazed. 
Joris looked at them. He was an old 
man, centuries old, but hope lived in 



OF LLYRDIS 71 

him still. 

"Did you do it?" he cried. "Did you 
find the ship?" 

Trehearne said, "We found it." He 
turned to Quorn. He reached out and 
caught him by the wrists and asked, 
"Did we do it? Did we get the message 
through ?" 

Quorn's mouth trembled. "I think 
there's a chance we did. Kerrel's jamming came in on us so fast. But I 
think . . .'* 

He suddenly wrenched his hands 
away, his face agonized. "How do I 
know if we got through? Oh God, how 
do I know?" 



CHAPTER XVII 
Galactic Man 



THE voyage was ending. They had 
known from the long period of deceleration that it was ending, and now 
the last pressures, and the small, grinding shocks as the cruiser settled into its 
dock, told them that they were again 
on Llyrdis. 

The bells rang, and the throb of the 
generators gave way to an unfamiliar 
silence. They waited, then. And nothing 
happened. The hours went by and nothing happened. 

Trehearne said finally, "They're not 
even going to remove us from the cruiser. They'll take us off to wherever we're 
bound for without even hearing us." 

Edri shook his head. "No. Vardda law 
sentences no man without formal trial." 

They could see nothing, hear nothing. 
Until, at last, the door of the room was 
unlocked. There were officers and guards 
— many guards, all of them armed. Their 
faces told nothing. 

"You will come with us," said the 
young captain of guards soberly. 

"Where?" demanded Joris. "To Llyrdis prison or — " 

"All communication with the prisoners forbidden," clipped the young captain. "You will come with us." 



72 STARTLI1S 

It seemed strange to Trehearne to 
walk again on unmoving floors, corridors, decks — on a planet. 

The tawny glare of Aldebaran was 
dazzling when they filed out of the cruiser. The air seemed unnaturally damp, 
heavy with the salt tang of the sea. 

He and Joris and Edri, the first to 
emerge, looked around with a throb of 
eagerness, of half-hope. They could not 
see much. The cruiser had landed in a 
closed-off sector and there were other 
guards waiting out here beside a number of ultra-cars. 

But Trehearne could hear. He could 
hear all the usual hum and din and 
clangor of the vast spaceport, the grind 
of cranes and rumble of trams, the 
scream of a fast planet-flyer coming in. 
And then the whoosh of a great bulk 
hurtling upward, a star-ship outbound 
for distant suns. And in the distance the 
shining towers of Llyrdis city still magnificently challenged the heavens. 

Trehearne felt a sick sense of futility. 
All this vast ordered turmoil of routine 
and activity, all the galaxy-wide trade 
that centered here, the thousand-year 
solidity of Vardda commercial monopoly 
— how could he have dreamed that a 
pitifully faint and aborted radio call 
could ever shake it? The faces of his 
friends showed him how their last hope 
had begun to wane. 

"The cars," said the young captain. 
"You four go in the first one." 

Edri found his voice. "What about 
Arrin?" 

"I am permitted to tell you that your 
comrade has been removed to the hospital and is in good condition." 

Joris said nothing. Trehearne saw his 
sunken eyes looking across the spaceport 
and thought how it must be for him to 
come back so to this place where for 
years he had sat with his hands guiding 
the Vardda ships that came and went. 

The car took them out of the spaceport fast. Trehearne saw that other 
cars, with guards alone in them, ran 
unobtrusively along ahead of and behind 
them. 

And nothing was changed in Llyrdis. 
The peacock city preened itself beneath 



STORIES 

the sun, iridescent, splendid, its streets 
thronged with the smiling Vardda and 
the other stranger races — echoing with 
music, brilliant with color. 

They passed a Vardda man and girl 
who stood, laughing as they talked. It 
was then that Trehearne ceased altogether to hope. 

"We're going to the Council Hall," 
Edri said presently. 

Joris nodded somberly. "I could have 
told you that. As a Council member, I 
have to be formally impeached and removed before charges against me can 
be pressed." 

He added grimly, "Old Ristin, the 
chairman, won't weep over that. We 
tangled pretty often, in thy past." 

The Council Hall sat amid a crowded 
nexus of governmental buildings. It 
dominated Llyrdis, not by size, but by 
age. It was a gray old pile, without 
beauty but with the massiveness and 
solidity of eternal things. 

Its courts and corridors and staring 
officials Trehearne saw only vaguely. 
They slid over his vision, and nothing 
seemed entirely tangible until, in an 
anteroom, Shairn's face leaped real to 
his eyes. 

She had been waiting to see him pass, 
he knew. Her face was white and 
strained, and she said nothing, but her 
eyes said, "Michael! Michael!" 

He looked back at her as they went 
on and he wondered what she read in 
his own eyes. And then they had entered 
the deliberative chamber itself. 

TT was not large and not crowded — a 
A half-moon-shaped hall with something more than a hundred Vardda in 
its chairs. Of the blur of faces turned 
toward him, most were grave, some 
curious, some open in their hatred. 

Ristin, the chairman, was a magnificent white-haired old Lucifer who disdained the petty vanity of pretending 
that this was a routine matter. 

"This Council is not a judicial body," 
he said. "This criminal charge against 
y o u — piracy, resisting of authority, 
murder — will be handled by the regular 
courts. We are here investigating a mat


THE STAKME 

ter urgent to the state." 

"As for murder — " Trehearne began 
savagely but the chairman interrupted. 

"I said the criminal charges will be 
examined later. The lady Shairn has 
already made her deposition, I understand. But what concerns us here is the 
much graver offense against the Vardda 
community." 

Joris got up, thrusting his gray 
head forward like an old mastiff's. He 
growled, "Since this is an investigation, 
you can't legally carry it out without 
hearing us." 

Ristin said grimly, "The Coordinator 
of the Port was always good at making 
himself heard. But you will have to wait 
this time, Joris." He looked up at the 
watching Vardda faces as he added, 
"The problem of your personal offense 
is not foremost. What concerns us most 
urgently is the general policy to be 
adopted by the Council." 

Trehearne hardly heard. That glimpse 
of Shairn had done things to him and 
his mind was far away. He wondered 
vaguely why Edri, who had sat sagging 
heavily beside him, suddenly stiffened, 
why Edri convulsively grasped his wrist. 

Ristin was continuing, "Therefore I 
emphasize again that we of the Council 
must not let any emotion of resentment 
sway our judgment. We are elected to 
serve the best interests of the Vardda 
as a whole and we must let no other considerations affect our decision." 

Then Joris laughed. His head came 
up, and his bellowing laughter echoed 
and re-echoed from the vaulted roof. He 
swung around to Trehearne and Edri 
and Quorn, and his eyes were blazing 
now. "By God, you did it after all!" 

Trehearne, still only half understanding, felt a white-hot thrill. Edri had begun to tremble violently. 

Ristin's cool voice cut in. "Believe me, 
your exultation is premature. Nevertheless there is no purpose in concealing 
the fact that your actions have presented us with an unprecedentedly grave 
problem." 

Quorn said hoarsely to Trehearne, 
"Don't you get it? Our message went 
through!" 



OF LLYRDIS n 

Trehearne understood then. The gravity of the watching faces, the bitter 
hatred in some of them, the strong leadership the old chairman was wielding to 
conquer the crisis — all these belied the 
everyday appearance of Llyrdis that had 
been the death-knell of his hopes. 

Through them, after a thousand 
years, the voice of Orthis had spoken 
to the Galaxy. And it had been heard — 
somewhere it had been heard. 

Ristin was saying, "So far only vague 
rumor and hearsay is abroad. Every 
operator who might have heard the 
broadcast has been warned not to repeat 
it but there are bound to be Orthists 
among them. The fact that non- Vardda 
worlds possess ultra-wave receivers for 
Use in their commerce with us is an 
even more serious matter. 

"It stands thus— that in spite of the 
news-services cooperation with us on 
the matter it is slowly becoming public 
knowledge that Orthis' secret was found 
and broadcast. At least three recordings 
of it have been found and two written 
copies. We can assume that there are 
more." 

Joris said grimly, "In other words — 
the secret is out and everyone will soon 
know that — and what are you going to 
do about it?" 

"The Coordinator- of the Port has 
summed it up," Ristin agreed, coolly. 
"What shall we do about it?" 

A tall Vardda leaped up and cried, "I 
suggest that the first thing we do is to 
execute these traitors !" 

There was a fierce chorus of agreement from a few dozen voices. Ristin 
rapped sharply for order. 

"I have reminded you that our paramount consideration is the ultimate best 
interests of our people 1 Let us have no 
more such outbreaks." 

An older Vardda man rose in the tiers 
and said quietly, "Before I advance my 
suggestion I should admit that I have 
always had secret Orthist sympathies. 
I don't think that I am the only one here. 
You must allow for that." 

He went on. "I would have liked long 
ago to see this unnatural monopoly ended. Now our hand has been forced. I 



74 



STARTLING STORIES 



suggest that our best and wisest course 
is to act at once — to declare publicly 
that we Vardda are going to give the 
secret to the whole galaxy. 

"The secret is out anyway. But by 
acting quickly we can take credit for it. 
We can aver that the broadcast was 
made with our consent. Remember, in 
a few generations other worlds will be 
flying the stars — and we do not want 
them cherishing a legacy of hatred for 
us then !" 

Trehearne, listening, smiled grimly. 
"Politics don't change much across the 
Galaxy." 

"But it's all we hoped for!" Edri 
whispered. "It would work too." 

DISCUSSION, angry debate, had 
sprung up. It went on and on, 
passionate voices accusing and denying, 
Kistin sternly maintaining order, bringing back the argument to the main issue 
time after time. Finally, in a lull of the 
disputing voices, Joris swung around 
and faced the Council. 

"Now listen to me," the old man 
roared. "You'd think the way some of 
you talk that this meant the end of the 
Vardda, the end of Llyrdis, the end of 
everything. That's utter asininity. 

"In the first place mutations don't 
take place overnight. It will be a generation or two before the other races start 
going out between the stars in any numbers." 

Trehearne saw that sink home. The 
Vardda Council, being human, could not 
worry too deeply for long about a future 
they wouldn't see. 

"And furthermore," Joris bellowed, 
"when every half-baked folk in the Galaxy does take to starflight, does that 
mean the great Vardda trade is ruined 
forever? Listen! We Vardda were the 
first to go out to the stars. The first! Do 
you think all the lubberly races of the 
galaxy can compete with us out there? 
Do you think so ?" 

He caught them with that, with the 
Vardda pride, the Vardda glory. Trehearne saw the strained faces changing. 
Not all of them but many. 

Joris paused before he said his final 



word. "Do you think there will ever be 
a time when we Vardda can't hold our 
own ?" 

There was not much talk after that. 
There were questions, protests, doubts, 
but little more argument. All the arguments had been spoken. 

"We have to decide this now or 
never," Ristin told them. "If we delay 
longer there will not be a choice." 

Trehearne heard the resolution read 
and the voting and the result. Not easily 
could the Vardda yield ! Forty-three voted against the resolution. But seventynine for it. 

Ristin said, "It will be announced by 
general broadcast tonight that, in view 
of the advance of civilization on many 
star-worlds, the Vardda deem the time 
ripe to share the secret of mutation with 
other selected races." 

Quorn said, "It's done. Trehearne, it's 
done." 

Trehearne still could not quite grasp 
that that simple statement marked a 
change forever in the Galaxy, that with 
it all human races began the great 
change toward Galactic Man. 

"And these criminals who forced us 
to do the thing?" demanded a Vardda 
recalcitrant, glaring at Trehearne and 
his fellows. 

"We have no choice there," Ristin 
said dryly. "To punish them for what 
they did would belie our own announcement. The ordinary charges against 
them can be dismissed. The murder 
charge has already been refuted by the 
lady Shairn." 

"So that for their crime they go unpunished ?" 

Ristin sighed regretfully. "The interests of the state demand it. Yes." 

Trehearne's comrades were breaking 
down, half stunned, half incredulous of 
the victory they had thought beyond 
them. But strangely Trehearne was not 
thinking of what they had won for the 
galaxy races. He was feeling a pride 
that Joris' phrase "We Vardda" had 
kindled in him. 

"We Vardda — " 

And he was one of them. He was one 
of the star-lords, the first, the oldest, 



THE STARMEN 

the greatest of the starmen. 

Edri was thinking of something else. 
He had stepped forward amid the genera] clamor to speak to Ristin. "There 
is one more thing. Orthis — " 

"A cruiser has been sent to guard 
his ship," said Ristin. 

Edri nodded painfully. "But Orthis 
was not ever child of a planet. He was 
star-born, dwelling always between the 
stars. He has sat long on that far world. 
If his ship could take space again . . ." 

Ristin said musingly, "A good 
thought. By putting that ship into an 
orbit around our system we'll create a 
monument that will remind all the 
Galaxy that it was a Vardda who gave 
them star-flight." 

Edri turned to Trehearne and Joris. 
He said, "Ortis is coming home." 

It was then that he began to cry. 

THE message left for Trehearne had 
told him simply that Shairn would 
be at the Silver Tower. It was handed 
him when they finally emerged from the 
Council chamber. Joris got him a car 
and driver. Trehearne hesitated, suddenly hating to part from the old man. 
Edri, and Quorn and the others had 
their eager plans. But Joris took no joy 
in their victory. 

"Had it been done a generation ago 
my son would be a star-captain now," 
he muttered, in answer to Trehearne's 
awkward words. "Well—" 

The car took him out of Llyrdis, 
smooth and fast, and the great flare of 
Aldebaran sank toward the sea and 
dusk came on. He saw the Silver Tower 
glimmering in the twilight and the dark 
figure down on the shadowy beach and 
he went toward Shairn. 

He put out his arms toward her but 
she held him off. She spoke to him 
steadily, her face a white blur in the 



OF LLYRDIS « 

dusk. "Let us have no hidden things 
between us, Michael. I want you to 
know. I hate you for what you have done 
to the Vardda. I will always hate you 
for that." 

He was astounded, all the firm hopes 
he had built up dissolving beneath him. 
Shairn went on. "But I love you, Michael 
— for everything else." 

He had her in his arms then, all 
doubts gone. He said presently, "You'll 
get over that resentment, Shairn." 

"No, Michael. It will always be there. 
I warn you of that now!" 

Life with Shairn would be no haven 
of peace, but he was not afraid. He 
knew that he was not the man for too 
much peace. 

They walked slowly back together 
toward the Silver Tower. The stars 
were burgeoning and Trehearne looked 
up at them. He looked at the far faint 
spark of little Sol and thought of Earth 
and of a changeling born there who had 
by miracle won his way home. 

That green and distant Earth knew 
nothing yet of the battle fought and 
won beyond the edges of the Galaxy. 
But it had been Earth's battle too and 
she would know in time. Even to Earth, 
when a generation had passed, the starships would begin to go openly. And 
with their internecine conflicts past, her 
young men too would go out among the 
stars to join the great march of Galactic 
Man. 

And who could say where that march 
might not lead them? To other galaxies, 
other island continents of suns . . . 

Trehearne's thoughts became lost in 
the immensities of the future. He shook 
his head and smiled and brought Shairn 
closer to him in the circle of his arm. 
They climbed the last of the steep path 
in the gathering dark and the Silver 
Tower took them in 



NEXT ISSUE 



LETTERS OF FIRE 

Hollywood Goe« All-Out for Atomic Space Writing 



A Short Novel by MATT LEE 



Earthmen No More 

A Captain Future Novelet 
By EDMOND HAMILTON 



CHAPTER I 
The Awakening 



STILL and cold in its lightless vault 
of bone, the brain stirred feebly. 
Slowly, slowly, it began to wake and 
remember — Hmeless memories, flowing 
across it in a dark inchoate tide from 
nowhere into nothingness. 

He was alone in space. Quite alone, 
floating, turning, drifting. He had no 
destination and he was in no hurry. He 



had lost the Sun and the planets. There 
were not even any stars. 

He did not worry. The dead do not 
insist on stars. He had forgotten how he 
came to die and he was glad. 

After a long while, far distant in the 




When the Futuremen 

revived John Cazey from 

his deep freeze, fie wanted to 

go home — but where in space was home? 

7« 




"Tak* it easy," Curt Newton told them. "You a 



infinite night, he saw a tiny gleam. He 
regarded it without curiosity or fear 
and then he realized that some inexorable current had caught him and was 
sweeping him toward the light, hurling 
him at it in a swift relentless rush. He 
knew that he did not want to go to it — 
but there was no escape. 

The little point of light leaped and 
spread into a sun, a nova, a shattering 
glare. Terror overcame him. He clawed 
at the comforting darkness as it fled 
past but he could not hold onto it and it 
seemed to him that he could hear the 



small thin shrieking' of his body against 
the void as it was sucked into the devouring brilliance. 

There was a face between him and 
the light, huge and awesome. He cried 
out but no sound came and then it was 
gone, the light, the face, even himself, 
swallowed up in the quiet night. 

Memories — the aloneness, the remembering, the timeless drift. A sound like 
the rustle of far-off surf that boomed 
louder and louder and became a voice 
speaking out of the heavens, saying, 
"Wake up, John Carey ! Wake up !" 



77 



78 



STARTLING STORIES 



And he thought he answered, "But I 
am dead." 
How had he come to die? 

MEMORIES, groping, uncertain, 
coming faster, clearer, clothed in 
vivid color. A girl's face, a girl's red 
mouth saying, "Don't go. Don't go if you 
love me. You'll never come back." 

Men and a ship — a little ship, a frail 
and tiny craft, it seemed, for the long 
way it was going and the high dreams 
it had. Hard-faced iron-handed men, 
braver than angels and more hungry 
than they were brave, hungry for new 
worlds and the unknown things that lay 
beyond the mountains of the Moon, beyond the still canals of Mars, beyond 
the glittering deadly Belt. 

He remembered now the men and the 
ship, how they had gambled their lives 
against glory and lost. "We shot the 
Asteroids," he muttered, in the silence 
of his mind. "Jupiter was there ahead 
of us, a big golden apple almost in our 
hands. I remember how the moons 
looked, swarming like bees around it. I 
remember . . ." 

The meteor — the tearing agony of 
metal, the last glimpse of horror in the 
ship before the air-burst took him with 
it into space, through the riven pilotdome. The brief, bitter knowledge that 
this was death. 

"Dead," he said again. "I'm dead." 
The strange voice answered, "If you 
want to you can live again." 

He thought about that. He thought 
about it for a long time in the darkness. 
To live again — the light and the warmth, 
the hunger and pain and hope, the wanting, the being able to want. He thought 
and he was not sure and then at last he 
whispered, "How? Tell me how!" 

"Open your eyes and come back, back 
where the light is. You were here before, 
don't you remember? Open your eyes, 
John Carey !" 

He did or thought he did and there 
was nothing but mist, heavy darkling 
clouds of it. Far, far away he saw the 
gleam of light beyond him and he tried 
to grope toward it but the mists were 
very thick. 



"I can't," he moaned. "I'm lost." 

Lost forever, in darkness and cold. 

"Come back!" cried the voice strongly. "Come back and live !" 

He heard the sound of a hand striking smartly against flesh. After a while 
he felt it. That little sharp pain somehow managed to bridge a colossal gulf 
and make him aware that he had a body. 

His brain oriented itself with a dizzying lunge. The mists tore away. He 
woke. 

It was a full awakening. The exploding nova resolved itself into a light-tube, 
glowing against a low ceiling of metal. 
The countenance that had loomed so 
hugely above him became the face of a 
man. A lean face, deeply bronzed with 
the unmistakable burn of space, topped 
with red hair and set with two level 
grey eyes that looked straight into 
Carey's and made him feel somehow 
safe and unafraid. 

"Lie still," said the red-haired man. 
"Get your breath. There's no hurry." He 
turned aside and his hands, very strong 
but delicate of touch, busied themselves 
with a vial and a gleaming needle. 

Carey lay still. For the moment he 
had not the strength to do anything else. 
The room was small. It was fitted as a 
laboratory, incredibly compact, and 
many of the objects that his wandering 
gaze passed over were strange to him. 

One of these objects was a small cubical case of semi-translucent metal, resting on a table. The surface nearest 
Carey was fitted with twin lenses and 
a disc, so that it bore an unsettling 
resemblance to a face. Carey thought 
vaguely that it must be some sort of a 
communicator. 

Suddenly he said, "I'm in a ship." 

The red-haired man smiled. "How can 
you tell? We're in free fall." 

"I can tell." Carey tried to struggle 
up. "But there are no ships beyond the 
Belt ! How ..." Then he began to tremble violently. "Listen," he said to the 
stranger. "Listen, I was killed, trying 
to reach Jupiter. A meteor hit us and I 
was blown clear, out into space with no 
armor. I'm dead. I'm a dead man. I . . ." 

"Steady on," said the red-haired man. 



EARTH MEN 

"Easy." He set the needle into a place 
already swabbed on Carey's naked arm. 
Carey flinched. He sobbed a little and 
then the trembling quieted. 

"I was dead," he whispered, again. 

"No," said the red-haired stranger. 
"Not really dead. What we call the 
space-death isn't true death but cold 
shock — an instantaneous stoppage of all 
life processes. There's no time for deterioration or cellular damage, no pos


NO MORE 79 

It was only then that it penetrated 
Carey's stunned mind, the phrase that 
had been used so casually a moment before. 

"You said, 'In my time'," he repeated. 
"How long . . ." He stopped. His mouth 
was dry. He tried again, forcing out the 
words that did not wish to be spoken. 
"How long was I asleep out there?" 

The man who called himself Curt 
Newton hesitated, then asked, "What 




CAPTAIN FUTURE 



sibility of decay. The organism stops 
short. It can, by certain means, be started going again." 

He looked thoughtfully down at Carey 
and added, "Many lives are restored 
that way, lives that would have been 
considered ended in your time." 

Carey said numbly, "Then you found 
me, floating in space, in frozen sleep? 
You — revived me?" 

"Yes. Space law requires that any 
ship-wreckage encountered on radar 
must be investigated. That's how we 
found you." The stranger smiled. "Welcome back to life, Carey. My name is 
Curt Newton." 



year was it when you met disaster,, 
Carey?" 

"It was nineteen ninety-one. It waf* 
June, nineteen ninety-one, when we left 
Earth." 

Newton reached for a calendar pa<;, 
held it up. He did not speak and there 
was pity in his eyes. 

Carey saw the date on it, and at fir.-x 
it was too incredible to touch him. "0); , 
no," he said. "Not all that time, all those 
generations. No, it's not true." 

"It is." 

"But it can't be . . ." His voice trailed! 
off. The numbers on the pad, the awf uli 
sum of years, blurred and darkened be-. 



STARTLING STORIES 



fore him. Once more he began to tremble 
and this time it was for fear of life, not 
of death. "Why did you bring me back?" 
he whispered. "I have no place here. I'm 
still a dead man." 

ABRUPTLY, from beyond the closed 
bulkhead door, there came the 
sound of footsteps. Strange steps, ponderous and clanking, as though someone 
enormously heavy walked in metal boots. 
Curt Newton turned his head sharply. 

"Grag!" he called. "Hold on there. 
Wait!" 

The footsteps hesitated and a voice 
from beyond the door said mockingly, 
"I told you so. What do you want to do, 
frighten the poor chap out of his wits?" 
The voice had a peculiar soft sibilance 
of tone. 

It was answered by a rumbling metallic growl, an utterly unhuman sound, 
that seemed to have words in it Carey 
got up. He clung to the edge of the surgeon's table, fighting the weakness that 
was on him, his eyes fixed on the bulkhead door. 

"Carey," said Curt Newton, "things 
have changed and science has come a 
long way. There are three others aboard 
this strip besides myself. They're not — ■ 
well, not quite human, as men of your 
day understood the term. Even now, in 
our time, they're unique, created by 
techniques far beyond the general 
knowledge. But you must not be afraid 
of them. They're my friends and will be 
yours." 

A chill came over Carey, creeping 
into his bones. He continued to stare at 
the door. What waited behind it, what 
monstrous things — not quite human, 
not quite human. The words repeated 
themselves in his brain, scuttling across 
it like spiders spinning icy webs, tightening until he could barely hear Newton's voice talking on. 

"Robot . . ." Faintly the voice came 
and Carey stared at the door. The drops 
of sweat ran slowly down his face. 
"Robot, human in intelligence, created 
by scientific genius . . ." 

There were sounds behind the door. 
[There were presences not of the flesh. 



Carey's mouth was dry with the taste of 
fear. 

". . . android, human in all respects 
but created also in the laboratory , . ." 

Carey began to move toward the door. 
What dreadful facet of the future had 
he been cast into? What uncanny children of this undreamed-of age were 
lurking there behind that panel? He 
could not bear to know but somehow 
not knowing was worse. Not knowing 
and wondering and thinking . . . 

". . . the brain of a great scientist, 
a human, kept alive for many years in a 
special case . . ." 

Robot, android, living brain. A redhaired man and a date on a calendar. 
A ship where there are no ships, a life 
where there is no living. A dream, 
Carey — a dream you're dreaming, drifting along toith the endless tides, the 
dark night tides beyond the Belt. Open 
the door, Carey. What difference in a 
dream ? 

A human figure, lithe and graceful, 
whose face had the unhappy beauty of 
a faun, green-eyed and mocking. And 
beside it a shape, a towering gigantic 
manlike form built all of gleaming 
metal. A shape that bent toward him, 
reaching out its dreadful arms, glaring 
at him with two round, flashing eyes. 

A harsh, toneless voice spoke close 
behind Carey, saying, "Catch him, Curtis." 

Carey looked for the source of the 
strange voice. The cubical box that he 
had taken for a communicator had risen 
from its shelf, hovering upon tenuous 
beams. And he saw that the surface 
with the twin lenses and the disc was 
indeed a face. 

"No," said Carey. "Don't touch me. 
Don't any of you touch me." 

He made his way back into the little 
laboratory. The room had closed in on 
him. The darkening air pressed against 
him like water. He was conscious that 
his hands were cold, that his feet were 
very heavy, treading on a surface he 
could no longer feel. 

"I tried to soften the shock for him," 
Curt Newton was saying somewhere 
across the universe. 



E ARTH MEN 

And the harsh voice of the cubical 
metal case replied without inflection, 
"Poor fellow, he has many shocks in 
store." 

Carey sat down. He put his face between his cold palms, and the knowledge 
came to him, the truth that he had not 
quite believed before but from which 
now there was no escape. 

He had bridged the gulf of time. He 
had left his own past in the dust of centuries behind him and he stood face to 
face with a future that was beyond his 
knowing. He was brother to Lazarus, 
come forth into an alien world. 



CHAPTER II 
Return from Space 



HE could hear them talking. He did 
not want to hear them. He did 
not want to lift his head and see them 
again. He did not even want to be alive. 
But he could not help hearing. 

Grag's booming voice, the thunderous 
voice of the robot. "I didn't know, when 
I fished him out of that wreckage, that 
he had been floating there so long !" 

The harsh inflexible voice of the metal 
box, of the brain who had once been 
Simon Wright, a scientist of Earth. "A 
long time indeed," said Simon Wright 
and added slowly, "He is old, this man 
— almost as old as space-flight/* 

The soft sibilance of the android, at 
once cruel and compassionate. "It was 
no kindness to bring this one back, Curt. 
He^s as much alone in the world as we 
are." 

There was something in the attitude 
of these three unhuman strangers that 
struck Carey suddenly. It was a strange 
thing, for one who had for all his life 
been merely a man named John Carey, 
of no particular importance to anyone 
but himself. It was awe. And that realization brought another with it — th&c 
John Carey was a creature as queer and 
unreal to these beings of the future a* 
tiify wore to him. 



NO MORE Ql 




GRAG 



Curt Newton said to the android, "I 
think you're wrong, Otho. I think any 
man with guts enough to buck the Belt 
in those old tin skyrockets would rather 
live, even in an unknown time, than 
sleep eternity away." 

Carey did not answer that. He did not 
know the answer. 

"He creates a problem for us, Curtis,** 
said Simon Wright. "And at a time 
when we have a grave problem of our 
own. You understand that." 

"Yes." Curt Newton went and stood 
in front of Carey and spoke his name. 
Carey looked up. 

"I want you to know one thing," said 
Newton. "You're not alone, not without 
friends. You'll stay with us until you're 
oriented. After that — well, we have a 
certain amount of influence and we'll see 
that you get a start on whatever sort 
of life you may choose." 

Still Carey did not answer. 

"Listen,** said Newton. "You were a 
pioneer. Why you were or what you 
wanted out of it I don't know. But whatever it was you were trying to push the 
frontiers back so you could get it. Well, 
you succeeded, you and others like you. 
Even in failure, you succeeded. 

"There are colonies on the farthest 



82 



STARTLING STORIES 



moons. Men have even begun to reach 
out to the worlds of other stars. You 
helped to make all that possible, Carey, 
and you're alive to see it. Isn't that 
enough to make you want to live? Aren't 
you curious to see the civilization you 
helped to build ?" 

Carey smiled faintly. "Psychotherapy," he said. "We had it in my day 
and it wasn't any more subtle. All right, 
Newton. I'll be curious as hell when I 
have time to think about it. Meanwhile 
I'm alive — so I don't really have any 
choice, do I?" 

He got up. Deliberately he forced himself to look at Grag and Otho and 
Simon Wright. 

"All right," he said to them all, to 
no one. "I'll get used to it in time. A 
man can get used to anything if he has 
time." 

"Quite," said the voice of Simon 
Wright. "AH of us have learned the 
truth of that — even Curtis." 

Carey tried in the period that followed. But it was a hard thing to do. 
To his own time-sense the great gap 
between yesterday and today was only 
an instant of sleep. He caught himself 
often thinking of Earth as he knew it, 
of the men and women who would be 
there just as he had left them, of the 
songs and the streets and the faces of 
buildings, the uncountable, small details 
that make up the sum of an epoch. 

It was hard to teach himself that they 
were there no more. But one or another 
of his shipmates was always near him 
and never let things get too bad. So 
gradually, from constant association, 
Grag and Otho and Simon Wright became familiar to Carey and he no longer 
felt that uncanny twinge when he was 
near them. 

Simon remained enigmatic and remote, an intelligence keen and brilliant 
far beyond Carey's power to understand, 
wrapped in his own thoughts, his own 
researches. Knowledge was Simon's 
thirst and his existence and it seemed 
to Carey that, although Simon Wright 
had been a man of Earth before his 
brain was taken from his dying body 
and preserved by the magic of a future 



science, Simon had become the least 
human of them all. 

Grag and Otho were easier. The android was so nearly human that only 
now and again did a nicker of something 
other-worldly in his green eyes remind 
Carey that Otho was not as other men. 
Even then it was impossible to feel any 
horror of him. Carey had known a lot 
of mothers' sons but seldom one that 
he liked as much as the sharp-tongued 
ironic Otho, whose most pointed barbs 
were tempered with pity. 

As for Grag, once Carey had got used 
to his seven-foot clanking bulk and enormous strength, he became fond of the 
great robot, whose only faults were 
over-enthusiasm and a certain lack of 
judgment. It was, however, constantly 
upsetting to Carey to realize that this 
lumbering metal giant had quite as much 
intelligence as he and a good deal more 
knowledge. 

The man Curt Newton, the man many 
called Captain Future, remained paradoxically the most difficult to understand of all the four. It was only bit by 
bit from the others that Carey picked 
up Newton's story — his strange birth 
and stranger upbringing in a lonely laboratory hidden under the surface of the 
Moon, an orphan with no other companions than the three who were called 
the Futuremen. 

NO wonder, Carey thought, that with 
such a background Newton was 
withdrawn and guarded in his approach 
to the ordinary relationships of men. 
He, like his companions — and like Carey 
too in this new incarnation of his — was 
set apart forever from the normal 
world. Carey sensed that the easy casual 
manner of the red-haired man had been 
painfully acquired, that beneath it lay 
a dark and solitary creature, much better not aroused. 

Carey soon discovered something else 
about Curt Newton. He was angry and 
it was no mere passing rage. It was a 
cold black fury that rode him all across 
the spatial gulf that plunged between 
Saturn, whence he had come, and Earth, 
where he was going. And the cause of it 



EARTHMEN 

was a message he had received from a 
man named Ezra Gurney about another 
man named Lowther. 

There was something about a monopoly on a certain kind of fuel, which was 
going to put Lowther in control of all 
shipping to and from the distant starcolonies, which were not much at present but would grow. It seemed that the 
star-ships took on their high-potential 
fuel for the long jump at Pluto, where 
the radioactive ore was mined and refined. 

And now, by devious manipulations 
of hidden stock, Lowther had got control of the refining companies and raised 
the price out of reach. There were ships 
stranded at Pluto and men in an ugly 
mood and Newton was heading fast for 
Earth to see what he could do about it. 

It sounded a dirty enough deal and 
Carey hoped that Newton would bring 
Lowther to time. But this talk of starcolonies and star-ships was beyond him. 
His mind was still thinking of Jupiter 
as the unattained and well-nigh unattainable. Any problems of star-ships or 
the men who flew them were distant and 
unreal. Furthermore he was too deeply 
immured in his own fears and loneliness, in the strangeness of being alive. 

He began to think more and more of 
Earth. He was hungry to see it, to feel 
it under his feet again, to look up into 
a blue sky at the familiar Sun. He had 
been long away from Earth when he fell 
asleep — an eternity, it had seemed, shut 
up in an iron coffin outbound for Jupiter. 

He remembered now how they had 
talked about Earth, crouching within 
the narrow walls that hid them from 
the black negation of space. The voices 
still rang in his ears, the faces were as 
clear as though he had only turned his 
head away for a moment or two. 

Craddock and Szandor, Miles and Delaporte, Gaines, Coletti, Fenner — the redheaded, the black and the fair — the different particular tricks of phrase and 
expression, the kindness and cruelty and 
courage and fear — the wisdom and the 
folly, moulded together into the separate forms of men. And they had talked 
of Earth. 



NO MORE 83 

They had planned what they would do 
when they got back, with the wealth of 
a new world in their hands. They h.id 
talked of the women who would be waiting for them, of the parades and the 
speeches, the fame that would be theirs 
around the globe. They had talked and 
all the time the darkness that was just 
beyond the hull had been listening with 
a silent mirth and John Carey was the 
only one who would ever come back 
again. 

As the ship rushed nearer to the orbit 
of Earth Carey's eagerness increased 
until it was like a fever in him. He talked 
of home as those other men had talked 
and Curt Newton listened with a kind 
of pity in his eyes. 

"Don't expect too much," he said. "It's 
changed — but it's still Earth, not Paradise." 

The forward jets were cut in and the 
ship quivered to the brake-blasts — not 
the anguished uncertain shuddering of 
the ships Carey had known but a controlled lessening of speed. The green 
remembered world came gleaming 
across the forward port and Carey 
stared at it, sitting motionless and absorbed, urging the misty continents into 
shape, watching the oceans spread into 
blueness and the mountains rise and become real. 

Suddenly he was afraid. He covered 
his face with his hands, and said, "I 
can't. I can't walk like a ghost through 
streets I never saw, looking for people 
who have been dead for generations." 

"It won't be easy," said Curt Newton. 
"But you'll have to. Until you do you'll 
be living and thinking in the past." He 
looked at Carey, half smiling. "After all, 
you came into this world a stranger once 
before." 

"What will they say to me?" whispered Carey. "How do people talk to a 
dead man?" 

"As rudely as they do to everyone 
else. And how will they know unless you 
tell them? Come on, Carey, stiffen up. 
Forget the past. Start thinking about 
the future." 

"Future!" said Carey and the word 
had a strange hollow sound to him. 



84 



STARTLING STORIES 



"Give me time. I haven't caught up with 
the present yet." 

He was silent after that. Newton 
asked for and got clearance for a landing. The ship picked up her pattern and 
spiraled in. 

Nothing was clear to Carey. Confused 
vistas reeled and spun beneath him, a 
huge monster of a city, the many-colored 
patchwork of a spaceport, strange and 
unknown, yet with a haunting familiarity, like a language learned in childhood 
and long forgotten. His heart pounded 
fiercely. It was hard to breathe. 

The ship touched ground. And John 
Carey had come home from space. 

He remained as he was, sitting still, 
his fingers sunk deep into the padded 
arms of the recoil-chair. Curt's Newton's 
voice was faint and far away. "Simon 
and I are going to Government Center. 
Grag will stay with the ship. But Otho 
can go along with you if you like." 

"No," said Carey. "No thanks — I . . ." 
There was more he wanted to say but 
he could not form the words. He got up 
and went past the others, seeing them 
only as shadows. The airlock was open. 
He went out. 

THE blaze of a summer sun smote 
hard upon him. He looked up at 
white clouds piling slowly in the sky 
and thought out of some dim coign of 
memory, Later there will be a storm. 
He began to walk across the concrete 
apron, scarred with many flames. 

This was the same spaceport. It had 
to be for there was the city before him 
and behind him was the sea. Here, from 
a little field that had looked so big and 
grand, the Victrix had taken flight for 
Jupiter. Here a girl had said goodbye 
and kissed him with the bitterness of 
tears. 

But it was not the same. The little 
field was swallowed up and gone, 
drowned in the mighty rows of docks. 
Where the administration building had 
stood a white pylon towered up into the 
clouds. The air was filled with the thunderous roar of ships, landing, taking off, 
jets flaming, lean hulls flashing in the 



Great cranes clanked and rumbled. 
Strings of lorries snorted back and 
forth between the freight docks and the 
warehouses and from beyond them 
spoke the anvil voices of the foundries. 
Atomic welders blazed like little suns 
and the huge red tenders rolled ponderously among the ships with their loads 
of fuel. 

Carey walked slowly. He was listening to the music, the titan song of the 
ships and the men who served them. 
Good music to one who had first helped 
to write it long ago. He listened and 
was proud — not just for himself but for 
Gaines and Coletti, Fenner and Miles 
and Szandor, the men of his crew and 
all the other crews who had christened 
this port in their blood and flame. 

And suddenly the song was drowned 
in the chattering voices of women. People surged around him, caught him up 
and carried him on toward a great sleek 
craft of silvery metal, with a name and 
an unknown flag on her bow — Empress 
of Mars. Trim young men in natty uniforms stood by her gangplank. High 
heels clicked against the curving metal 
with a sound as brittle as the voices. 

"Such a wretched cruise the last time ! 
I was simply bored to tears. . . ." 

"Well, Mars isn't what it used to be. 
so overrun with tourists. I went last to 
Ganymede for a change and you have 
no idea. . . ." 

A young girl, giggling — "It's my first 
trip and I'm just thrilled to death. Janet 
said they have a simply heavenly orchestra on this ship!" 

Under the shrill incessant chatter lay 
the heavier intermittent voices of men. 
Rich men, stuffed with the tallow of 
good living, men with big sweating 
bellies sheathed in silk, comparing the 
food and service on the Empress with 
the Morning Star, that flew the luxury 
run to Venus, and the Royal Jove. And 
here and there among them an anxious 
younger man with a red-mouthed woman on his arm, underlings stripped to 
their last nickel for the privilege of 
rubbing shoulders with the elite on a 
trip across space. 

A sickness came over Carey. He felt 



EARTHMEN 

smothered in perfume and smug sophistication. He looked at the trim young 
officers and hated them. 

Over the chatter and the cries an 
annunciator, spoke with firm politeness. 
"Last warning for Empress of Mars 
passengers! The gangways close in six 
minutes. Last warning. . . ." 

Carey stood, a silent unnoticed figure 
in the crowd, thinking of other ships 
and other men who had left Earth long 
ago, and the sickness in him deepened. 
Caught in the press of soft comfortable 
flesh he heard gongs clanging and a 
surge of voices and then the sibilant roar 
that became a purring thunder as a 
glistening fabric of shining metal lifted 
skyward. Then he was swept away in 
the backwash of people from the empty 
dock. 

"She really earned a nice vacation. . . 

". . . and those cruise-ships are so 
much more fun than ordinary spacetrips. They have hostesses and games 
and always something to do!" 

Carey stumbled out of the stream at 
last into a little deserted backwater 
around a tall pillar that stood at the 
edge of the spaceport. 

There was gold lettering on it, only 
a little dingy from the back-blast of 
many ships. Carey saw a name he knew. 

He looked closer. It was a tall pillar 
and he had to look high to see the legend 
that read, TO THE PIONEERS OF 
SPACE. 

Now he saw. Underneath that legend 
were names, and dates. First the names 
of the great trail-blazers. 

Gorham Johnson — Mark Carew — Jan 
Wenzi — 

Wenzi . . . Once a small boy had 
watched with worshipping eyes as a 
frizzled one-armed man stumped toward 
a ridiculous rocket-ship. 

A little farther down, not much. Lane 
Tenner — Etienne Delaporte — William 
Gaines — yes, all the Victrix crew including John Carey, all with the golden stars 
beside them that meant Lost in Space. 

Names — names and men, his friends, 
his shipmates, his rivals. Jim Hardee, 
flie kid who had sat drinking with him 



NO MORE 85 

the night before he hit for Jupiter. 
While he had lain dead in space young 
Hardee had gone on, doing the big 
things he dreamed of. And now, like the 
others, he was only a dingy gold-letter 
name on a forgotten monument. 

The voice of the annunciator pleaded 
monotonously, "Will Pallas passengers 
please report at once to Dock Fortyfour? Will Pallas passengers . . ." 

Old Wenzi and Jim Hardee and young 
Szandor and Red Miles — yes, and he 
himself, bucking the black emptiness 
and the cold death to push the frontiers 
out . . . 

"Attention, please," said the mechanical voice. "The liner Star of Venus will 
land at Dock Fourteen at exactly sixten. Those wishing to greet incoming 
passengers . . ." 

Carey sat down on the steps of the 
monument. Otho found him there, staring at the bright crowds going back and 
forth, listening to the voices and the 
laughter, the swift proud thunder of 
the ships. 

Otho touched his shoulder and after 
a while Carey asked him tonelessly, "Did 
we die for this?" 



CHAPTER III 
Men of Earth 



FOR the better part of two days Curt 
Newton was busy carrying his fight 
against Lowther into one Government 
office after another. And during that 
time, with Otho determinedly sticking 
to him to keep him out of trouble, Carey 
wandered about in the city. 

It was very large. It had always been 
so — the largest city on the world of 
Earth. Now it was no longer merely 
large but monstrous, bloated, towering, 
spreading, gorged with humanity and 
wealth. Yet it seemed less crowded than 
Carey remembered. 

The buildings were taller now, frighteningly tall, and there were covered 
walks of chrome and glassite spanning 



STARTLING STORIES 



the dizzy canyons in between, so that a 
man might go across the city and never 
touch the ground. Traffic ran on many 
levels underneath. The streets were 
quiet and clean and Carey missed the 
brawling taxieabs, the surge and hum 
of crowds. 

He watched the people who passed 
him. The tempo had slowed since the 
days he knew. Men and women strolled 
now, where before they had almost run. 
Their faces were a little different too, 
more relaxed and satisfied. He did not 
think that they were much happier or 
wiser, certainly no more kind. 

Men and women, well fed, well 
dressed, making money, spending it. 
Palaces of entertainment, offering elaborate amusements to suit every taste. 
Travel bureaus displaying their threedimensional living posters, urging people no longer to visit Quaint Brittany 
or the Romantic Caribbean but luring 
them instead with the ancient Martian 
cities and the pleasure-domes of tropical Venus. 

Sh«p windows, full of marvels. Tenuous spider-silks from Venus, necklaces 
of Martian rubies like drops of blood 
to glow against white flesh, jugs of curious wines from the moons of Jupiter, 
the splendid furs of beasts that hunt 
across the frozen polar seas of Neptune. 

We opened the way, Carey thought. 
We died and they grow fat. 

Stone and steel and plastic and rare 
metals to make the giant towers splendid. Soft colors, soft sounds of music 
from garden terraces far above, where 
the sea wind tempered the heat and set 
the fronds of other-worHly shrubs to 
rustling. 

Terraces where people sat feeding on 
delicacies brought across space in fleets 
of special ships, watching languidly the 
musicians and the dancers who were as 
alien as the exotic plants. Everywhere 
was the pervading softness, the silkwrapped cushioned luxury, the certain 
ease of men who have never had to fight. 

"You might as well see it all," said 
Otho. And so Carey visited the places 
of amusement, the parks and the pleasure gardens, and sat upon the perfumed 



terraces, a dark and sombre shadow 
among the butterfly crowds. And often 
the women turned and looked at him as 
though perhaps they saw in his face a 
thing that was lost out of the men they 
knew. 

Every landmark was gone, every 
place he knew was changed. There was 
no single street that he remembered. 
And the names were gone too and the 
faces, gone and utterly forgotten. 

Suddenly Carey glanced up at thje 
overtopping spires that leaned against 
the sky and said, "I hate this place. I'm 
going back to the ship." 

Otho smiled a little wryly and they 
returned to the port. 

Curt Newton came back almost as 
soon as they. Simon was with him and 
a grizzled leathery-faced man in uniform who was introduced to Carey as 
Ezra Gurney. 

Otho studied Newton's face. "I was 
going to ask you how it went," he said, 
"but I see — it didn't go at all." 

Newton shook his head. "No." He 
flung himself down, retreating into a 
brooding silence. Carey saw his hard 
dangerous anger. 

"What happened?" demanded Grag. 
"You don't mean to say they're going to 
let Lowther get away with it?" 

"There doesn't seem to be any way 
they can stop him," said Ezra Gurney. 
He had a hard honest -space-worn look 
about him that Carey liked. He too was 
angry. 

"The trouble is," he explained, "that 
Curt has no proof against Lowther. 
There's a half dozen refining companies 
on Pluto and they've all raised their 
fuel-prices together. Lowther only owns 
one of them outright and in the open. 

"He says and they all say that mining 
and refinery costs have gone up so that 
they have to charge more for the fuel, 
which is legal enough. All right. Now 
we know that Lowther has used dummy 
corporations and juggled stock and so 
on until he actually controls the other 
five companies. But we can't prove it! 

"Curt went to everybody at Government Center. They all said the same 
thing. Such a charge would require hear


EARTHMEN 

ings, committees, investigation, all that 
rubbish — weeks, months, maybe years, 
because Lowther is smart enough and 
rich enough to stall indefinitely and the 
chances of nailing him are mighty slim." 

"And in the meantime," said Curt 
Newton slowly, "the starmen are forced 
either to sell out to Lowther for fuel or 
to stay here in the System while their 
wives and families and the communities 
they've worked so hard to build go without the supplies they need. 

"They'll give in, of course, because 
they have to go back — and Lowther will 
gain a stranglehold on all the trade between the System and the colonies. In 
twenty years he'll be rich enough to buy 
and sell the Sun." 

Grag held out his two great metal 
hands and looked at them, flexing the 
fingers with an ominous small clanking 
of the joints. "I vote," he said, "that we 
pay this Lowther a visit." 

"What form of execution would you 
prefer?" Otho asked him. "Being melted 
down for scrap or converted into a nice 
useful boiler? There's a law against killing people, even for bucket-headed robots." 

"Who said anything about killing?" 
boomed Grag. "He could have an accident, couldn't he?" 

"Preferably a bad one," grunted Ezra. 
"But I'm afraid that approach won't 
do." 

"No," said Curt slowly, "but I think 
Grag has the right idea at that. I think 
we ought to go and talk to Mr. Lowther." He sprang up. "Come on, Carey, 
this will interest you as a commentary 
on the brave new world you helped to 
build!" 

"I think I've seen enough of it," Carey 
said. "I don't want to see any more." 

BUT he went with them. Only Simon 
Wright stayed in the ship. They 
took a car from the spaceport. Except 
that it had wheels and seats it bore 
little resemblance to the cars Carey had 
known. Propulsion units sent it rushing 
smoothly along the underground highways. 

By the time they came out onto the 



NO MORE 87 

great elevated boulevards that led across 
suburb and country the long summer 
dusk was falling. Carey turned and 
looked back. Outlined against the deep 
blue the enormous bulk of the city blazed 
with many-colored light. Even at this 
distance it had an alien look to his eyes. 

The sleek suburban areas fled by. Beyond them the country still pretended 
to be as it had been. But Carey's more 
primitive eyes detected the deception. 
Artful hands had arranged the trees 
and changed the courses of the brooks 
and pruned the wild hedgerows into 
pleasing vistas. 

The car left the highway and proceeded along a private road. Presently, 
upon a slope ahead, Carey saw a graceful structure of metal and glass, shaped 
by a master hand to fit like a huge synthetic jewel into its setting of terraced 
gardens. 

The translucent walls gleamed softly 
and strains of music drifted on the evening air. The gardens were full of fairy 
lights. As they came closer Carey made 
out the flutter of women's skirts among 
the flowers, heard the sounds of laughter. 

"Looks like a party," said Otho. "A 
big one." 

"We'll give him a party," rumbled 
Grag and cracked his metal knuckles. 

They came to the gates, which were 
artistic but highly functional. Curt 
Newton got out. He went to the small 
viewer that was housed at one side and 
pressed the communicator stud. After 
a moment Carey saw him returning to 
the car. 

"Mr. Lowther is engaged and can see 
no one," he quoted and then added, 
"Particularly us." He surveyed the 
gates. "An electronic locking device, 
operated by remote control or with a 
light-key — neither of which helps us. 
Grag, would you care to see what you 
can do about it?" 

Grag's photo-electric eyes gleamed as 
he heaved himself out of the car and 
strode toward the gates. For a minute 
his enormous bulk was motionless, leaning forward a little with his hands on 
the bars, testing the resistance. Then he 



88 STARTLING 

moved. There was a groaning and snapping and a metallic squeal and the gates 
were open. 

The car drove on into the grounds. 
"There was an alarm on the gate, of 
course," said Newton. "They'll be waiting for us and I don't want any trouble. 
We had better get out here and go 'round 
through the gardens." 

The air was heavy with the scent of 
flowers. It was warm and on the terraces 
the white shoulders of women turned 
back the moonbeams. The music ran 
slow and lilting and there was laughter 
under the colored lights. Curt Newton 
walked through the gardens and after 
hhn came Grag and Otho and John 
Carey, who was moving in an unreal 
dream. 

One by one the dancing couples saw 
them and the laughter stopped. The 
swirling skirts were still and the faces 
watched them, not with fear but with 
an amazement, as children might look 
at sombre strangers invading their nursery. The music continued, soft and 
sweet. 

Along the paths between the drooping jasmine and the great pale blooms 
of Venus, across the terraces, through 
a sliding wall wide open to the night, 
and into a pastel room with a vast expanse of mirror-like floor surrounded by 
graceful colonnades — and here too the 
dancers drew back from the intruders. 

Then, from one of the archways, came 
a group of men headed by a tall man no 
older than Curt Newton. He wore a 
dress tunic of black silk and his hair 
was black and his face had a clear 
healthy pallor. Carey thought that it 
was the sort of skin a woman might 
have, shaped smooth over handsome 
bones and set with wide dark eyes. Only 
there was nothing womanish about Lowther's face if by womanish you meant 
weak or pitying or possessing any softness of heart. 

The men with him were of a type 
Carey knew and detested. They were 
the kind who are always somewhere 
around a man like Lowther. 

The two groups came to a halt and 
eyed each other. Lowther said, "If you 



STORIES 

came to say something, say it and get 
out." 

Newton put one hand on Carey's 
shoulder and pointed with the other to 
Lowther. "There he is, Carey — the most 
important man in the Solar System. Oh, 
the System doesn't know it yet but he is. 
And he's modest too. He owns all the 
refineries on Pluto but you'd never know 
it to look at the records." 

He had raised his voice a bit so that 
it could be heard clearly above the music A considerable crowd had collected, 
drawn in from the gardens, and there 
were plenty to hear. 

LOWTHER eame closer to Newton. 
He started to speak and Newton 
went on smoothly, politely, drowning 
him out. "My friend has been away from 
Earth for a long time, Mr. Lowther. I 
wanted him to meet you, so that he 
could see the type of man we produce 
now, the successful man. I thought it 
might teach him a lesson while he's still 
young enough to profit by it. 

"You see where you made your mistake, Carey? You went pioneering, and 
got nothing out of it but hardship and 
danger and sudden death. You should 
have stayed at home like Mr. Lowther 
here, using your wits and letting others 
do the dirty work of opening up new 
worlds. See what you'd have had — a fine 
house, a host of friends, a good steady 
business with no competition? 

"After awhile, with patience and good 
judgment, you'd have owned the shipping-lines to which at first you only sold 
fuel. Doesn't it make you ashamed, 
Carey, to think of how you wasted your 
youth — just as the starmen stranded 
out there on Pluto are wasting theirs?" 

Lowther's face was even whiter than 
before except for two streaks of dull 
red along his cheekbones. "Listen," he 
said, "if you're so worried about the 
starmen, you'd better get word to them 
to watch their step or they'll be in real 
trouble. 

"They're threatening to resort to violence and I'm leaving for Pluto in t?he 
morning to see that my property is protected. I don't know exactly what you're 



EARTHMEN 

trying to do, Newton, but even you can't 
buck the law — and neither can your 
friends." 

Newton's face was tight and dark 
but his voice was soft. "There are laws 
and laws," he said. "Some of them are 
so basic they haven't even been written 
down. Perhaps someday soon we'll have 
a longer talk about laws." 

He turned abruptly and went back 
down the long room with the glassy 
floor and the others went with him. 
Lowther followed them at a distance, 
looking after them as they left the 
grounds. 

In the car, speeding back toward the 
city, Grag said regretfully, "Why didn't 
you let me wring his neck?" 

"He may get it wrung yet out on 
Pluto," answered Curt. "When the starmen there find out that I couldn't do 
anything for them they'll try to do something for themselves." He turned suddenly to Carey. There was a hard reckless glint in his eyes. 

"Carey," he said, "do you want to 
come with us out to Pluto and see a 
fight?" 

Carey shrugged heavily. "Pluto, Antares — what difference does it make 
where I am? Yes, I'll go. I'll go anywhere that isn't Earth." 

He was sick with Earth and opulence 
and the greedy faces of men. The old 
horizons were gone and even Pluto, that 
distant stepchild of the Sun, was the 
seat of monopoly and all the ugly things 
that had plagued mankind since the beginning. But it would be a change from 
Earth. 

Otho said to Curt, "You're not really 
going to egg them on to fight?" He said 
it not with reproof but with hope. 

Curt answered grimly, "No. They'd 
only get themselves killed without accomplishing anything. Lowther was 
right. As of now the law is all on his 
side." 

He was silent and then he said, "No, 
it was another kind of fight I had in 
mind." 

He said nothing more, until they 
reached the spaceport. Then he grinned 
i»t Carey, a grin without much humor 



NO MORE 89 

in it. "I know what you need," he said. 
"Grag, go on back to the ship and keep 
Simon company. Otho and I will help 
Carey drown his sorrows." 

Grag went off. Newton and Otho took 
Carey some distance around the periphery of the port. There was an endless 
number of joints along the fringe, some 
of them fashionable, some catering to 
ordinary spacehands. They entered one 
of the latter. There were a bar and 
booths and tables and Carey thought 
dully that this at least had not changed. 

They sat down. Through the window, 
which looked out on the flash and thunder of the port, Carey could see the rows 
of docks and the long sheds with the 
names on them of this and that line or 
company. One of them said LOWTHER 
MINING CORPORATION and there 
was a sleek ship in its dock with an endless conveyor taking cases of supplies 
up its gangway. 

"Lowther's ship, getting ready to take 
him off to Pluto tomorrow," said Newton harshly. 

Otho raised his glass toward it. "Confusion to it," he said. 

Newton moodily watched the distant 
ship, Carey felt the unfamiliar liquor 
explode in him like liquid fire. Otho 
signaled and presently there was another glass in Carey's hand. 

He was in no mood to refuse it. He 
had been a long, long time in space, his 
awakening had been hard, his homecoming bitter. The future was a cold 
and formless presence, crouched behind 
a dark curtain. 

Carey drank. 

There was an interval wherein he 
knew that he talked but was not sure 
what he said. Then he found himself in 
cool night air and Otho's arm was helping him into a ship. 

Even through his haze, Carey knew 
Simon Wright's toneless voice by now. 
"Where is Curtis?" it demanded. 

"He'll be along," Otho said easily. 
"This way, Carey — you need sleep." 

It was later — how much later he could 
not guess — when Carey half-roused to 
voices. Simon's inflectionless voice and 
Curt's. 



M STARTLING 

" — and you won't tell me what you've 
been up to?" Simon was saying. 

"There's nothing to tell, Simon. We 
got nowhere with Lowther so we came 
back. Now we've got to go out to Pluto 
and see if we can stop him there." 

"Curtis, I know you and I know that 
you have done something. Well, we shall 
see. But one thing I am sure of and that 
is that someday your anger will outrun 
your wisdom and bring you to disaster. 

Carey drifted into sleep again. He 
did not even rouse to the shock of takeoff. When he woke, the ship was on its 
way to Pluto. 



CHAPTER IV 
Earthmen No More 



THEY made the long sweeping curve 
to escape the pull of Neptune and 
ranged in toward the dim speck that 
was Pluto. The jumping-off place of the 
Solar System, with nothing beyond it 
but interstellar space, riding its dark 
cold orbit around a Sun so distant that 
it seemed no greater than the other 
stars. 

Yet even here, if wealth was hidden 
away, man would find it. Carey thought 
that undoubtedly a few shrewd souls 
would have set up concessions for mining coal in Hell. 

He had watched all the way out from 
Earth but with only a flicker of the excitement he would once have known. He 
was interested, of course, because it was 
his first trip beyond the orbit of Jupiter. 
But the thrill was gone. People talked of 
going out to Saturn or Uranus now as 
they had once talked of going out to 
California. It gave Carey, somehow, a 
feeling of having been cheated. In his 
day going to Mars had been a big thing 
and fraught with danger. 

From a featureless fleck of reflected 
light almost too faint to be seen Pluto 
grew into a recognizable world — a dark 
world with black wild mountains shooting up against the stars and eerie seas 



STORIES 

of ice. There was something so cruel 
and ghostlike in the look of it that Carey 
could not repress a shudder. 

It seemed rather like an invader from 
outer space than a member of the familiar System, the more so since in bulk 
and mass and composition it bore a 
ghastly resemblance to Earth as though 
alien demons might have made it as a 
joke. 

They were a little ahead of Lowther. 
They had not had much start on him but 
they had a faster ship. 

"We'll have a little time," said Curt. 
"Even a few hours might be enough to 
talk some sense into Burke and the 
others." 

Burke, Carey gathered, was captain 
of one of the two star-ships fighting the 
battle over fuel, was more or less the 
leader of both crews. 

"They counted on help from the Government," said Otho. "When they find 
out what's happened they're going to be 
hard to hold." 

"We've got to hold them," Curt answered grimly. "They'll blow their only 
chance if they start fighting." 

Simon said nothing but his lens-like 
eyes followed Curt intently. The forward jets began to thunder and the 
Comet, still curving, entered its long arc 
of deceleration. 

As they swept closer Carey saw that 
the frozen plains were pocked with 
craters, and that some of the mountainpeaks had been shattered by caroming 
meteors. The lunar desolation of the 
world was hideous. Carey thought what 
it must be like to live and work here. 

"The refinery men get relief at regular intervals," Curt told him. "And 
there are a couple of small domed cities 
around on the other side." 

Carey nodded. "Even so Pluto seems 
a stiff place for them." 

"It is," said Curt. "You'll see." 

The televisor buzzed. They had been 
coming in on the automatic beam but 
now somebody wanted to talk to them. 
Curt opened the switch. 

A man's face appeared on the little 
screen. It wore the expression of one 
who has been handed a hot wire and 



EARTHMEN 
doesn't know how to let go of it. "Lowther Mines speaking," it said. "Identify 
yourself." 

Newton did and the man's face grew 
more unhappy. "We can't very well stop 
you from landing," he said. "But keep 
your distance from the domes — no closer 
than a hundred yards. There's a charged 
barrier." He added, "We're well armed." 

The screen went dark. Curt shook his 
head. "They're all set for trouble. Let's 
hope it hasn't already started." 

Curt set the Comet down at last, on 
the edge of a vast white plain where it 
struck against a mountain wall. Carey 
saw two great dark hulls looming near 
them with only their mooring lights 
showing. Well over a hundred yards 
away, sunk into the living rock of the 
cliffs so that only the outer bulwarks 
showed, was a series of steel-and-concrete domes. 

Northward along the plain, in a sector marked off by beacons to warn away 
incoming ships, were other domes. Here 
there were rifts and gouges in the barren rock of Pluto, hulks of strange machinery and structures of various sorts 
whose uses Carey could not be sure of. 

Occasional lights gleamed but nothing moved. The diggers and the orecarriers were still and no clouds of vapor came from the buried stacks of the 
refineries. 

"They're shut down tight," said Curt. 
"Regular state of siege." He looked at 
the others. "Don't forget what our 
friend said about the barrier." 

They put on protective coveralls — 
except for Grag and Simon, who needed 
no such protection. Curt had handed 
Carey one of the suits. "You've come all 
the way out and you might as well see 
the fun," he said. 

Then they went out into the black 
Plutonian night toward the star-ships. 
It was intensely dark, colder than anything Carey remembered except that 
one split-second touch of open space. 

Carey stared at the distant mockery 
of a Sun, overcome with tho feeling that 
he was indeed on the outer edge of the 
universe. He was so occupied by his 
sensations that he was taken completely 



NO MORE 91 

by surprise when men rose suddenly 
out of the hollows of the ice and closed 
around them. 

A torchbeam flashed out and struck 
Curt full in the face. He said, "Burke?" 
and from beyond the light a voice grunted, "Okay, relax. It's him." 

"What's the idea?" Curt demanded. 

"Well," said Burke, "we picked up 
your call but we wanted to be sure it 
really was you and not one of Lowther's 
smart tricks." 

"Or," said Curt, "did you hope maybe 
it was Lowther himself, trying to get 
behind the barrier before you knew who 
he was?" He glanced around at the 
shadow-shapes of the men, who were 
numerous and armed. 

"Maybe," said Burke. He switched 
the beam around the Futuremen and 
onto Carey. "Who's this?" 

"He's not Lowther either. His name 
is Carey and he's a friend of mine." 

Burke nodded briefly. His attention 
returned to Newton. "What's the news? 
What did they say on Earth?" 

"Let's go on to your ship," said Curt. 
"I'll tell you about it there." 

Burke and the others must have 
known from the way he said it what 
the answer was going to be, But they 
turned silently and went back across 
the ice with the Futuremen and Carey 
into their ship. 

They had the port shutters down but 
there was light inside. It felt very warm 
to Carey after the spatial chill. They 
stripped off their heavy garments and 
went aft into the main cabin, sorting 
themselves out so that the officers of 
both star-ships sat down around the 
battered table and the crews crowded 
where they could in the passageways to 
listen. 

CAREY stood unnoticed in a corner 
of the cabin. He could see these 
starmen now. They had large scarred 
hands and faces burned dark as old 
leather. Their uniform jumpers were 
worn and their boots were shabby and 
they wore their greasy caps in a certain 
way that Carey remembered. He saw 
the sort of eyes they had too — and those 



92 



STARTLING STORIES 



he remembered also. 

Burke leaned forward across the 
table. He had an oblong face that was 
mostly bone and sinew like the rest of 
him and a hungry look around the 
mouth. "All right," he said. "Now tell 
us." 

Curt Newton told them and as he 
talked Carey watched the starmen. An 
eerie feeling crept over him that he had 
known these men before. He had served 
with them in the little ships that fought 
their way along the planetary roads that 
seemed then so long and hard. It was 
strange to see these men again, to know 
that they still lived. He could almost 
have called them by name except that 
their faces had altered a bit and he could 
not be sure. 

Burke was talking. "If they won't do 
anything we'll have to do it ourselves. 
And we will ! I'm not going to sell our 
ship to that pirate for a load of fuel." 

Curt said, "The law — * 

"To blazes with the law! When it 
starts protecting thieves instead of honest men it's time to forget the law." 

There was no cheering or loud talk. 
There was only a harsh mutter of assent. 

"Listen," Curt said. "You can't smash 
into the domes and take the fuel. You 
know what they've got ready for you." 

"We don't have to smash in," said 
Burke. "Lowther's on his way here. We 
intercepted his message saying so. Well, 
he can't land behind the barrier. There 
isn't room." 

Curt nodded, "The same thing you 
pulled with me. Get Lowther in your 
hands . . ." 

"And kill him, if we have to," Burke 
finished quietly. "But we'll get our fuel." 

For the first time Simon spoke. 'That 
is murder." 

Burke shrugged. "They'll have to come 
a long way to catch us." He added in a 
sudden fury, "Murder, is it? We've got 
our wives and families out there ! They 
need the medicines, the tools, the seeds. 
What if they die for want of them ? Isn't 
that murder too?" 

Simon said, "If you kill Lowther you 
can never come back for more." 

Curt had got to his feet. He was about 



to speak. Then Carey heard a voice 
clamoring over the annunciator, crying, 
"Radar room! We've just picked up 
Lowther's ship! He's still in free fall 
but he's coming!" 

Carey saw the fierce excitement that 
took the starmen. There was a sudden 
wolfish shouting, a ringing of boots on 
the deck-plates. Burke was yelling orders. The men in the passageways began 
to move. 

Burke faced Curt Newton. "Well?" 

Curt said, "Hold your men back." 

There was a tenseness about him now. 
It seemed to Carey that he was listening 
for something. "Hold them back!" 

Burke's face hardened. "I couldn't if 
I wanted to." He added slowly and meaningly, "They'll trample anybody that 
gets in their way." 

He turned his back on Newton then 
and for a time nothing more was said 
or done. They listened to the voice of 
the radar man, calling out the position 
of Lowther's ship. The voice became 
more and more puzzled. 

Simon's lens-like eyes were fixed intently on Curt Newton. 

"He's still in free fall," said the radar 
man. "He hasn't started his curve yet 
and the indicators don't show any rockets." 

Burke put his mouth close to the 
speaker-grid. "Communications," h e 
said. "Are you getting anything from 
Lowther's ship?" 

The answer came back, "No. The 
Company station is calling Lowther but 
he doesn't answer. It's like he hasn't 
any power." 

"Still no rockets," said the radar man. 
"I can't figure this one. He's way past 
his point of approach and going wide." 

"Still no signals," put in Communications. "He doesn't answer." 

"Going wide — " The voice of the radar 
man reached a tight pitch of excitement. 
"He's lost his landing-curve! He's heading right out into space with no rockets!" 

For some odd reason Curt Newton 
seemed to relax. But Burke and the 
other officers stared at each other with 
dawning comprehension and then with 



EARTHMEN 

a joy that was more savage than their 
anger. 

"He's out of fuel," said Burke. "Nothing else would kill both his rockets and 
communications. He's out of fuel and 
heading right out into the stars in free 
fall with no power." 

He began to walk back and forth with 
short steps as though he could not bear 
to be still. His hands gripped fiercely at 
the air. "We don't have to kill him now. 
It's done and not a finger laid on him. 
And it's better — better! He'll learn before he dies. He'll learn what it means 
to be between the stars with no fuel !" 

Curt Newton turned sharply toward 
the door. 

Simon glided before him. "Curtis," he 
said, "this is your doing." 

Curt said quietly, "Get out of my way, 
Simon. I'm going after him." 

Burke heard. So did the others. Carey 
saw them move toward Newton. 

"What do you mean — going after 
him?" cried Burke. 

"There are other men in that ship 
besides Lowther. There's no reason why 
they should die." 

"Oh no," said Burke softly. "You're 
not going to bring him back." 

Carey saw them closing in around 
Newton and he pushed in to stand with 
Otho beside the red-haired man. 

"Listen," said Newton. "I've fought 
for you. I'm still fighting for you. Are 
you going to trust me or aren't you ?" 

Burke's glance wavered before his. 
But he said, "It don't make sense to 
bring him back." 

"Let him go," said Simon Wright 
slowly. "He has done this thing for you. 
Now let him finish it." 

UNCERTAINLY, reluctantly, Burke 
stepped aside and Curt Newton 
went out of the star-ship with Carey 
and Otho and Simon Wright. 

Not until the Comet was rising up 
from Pluto on a jet of flame, rushing 
out into the vast darkness where Lowther's helpless ship was gone, did Simon 
speak again. He asked tonelessly, "How 
did you do it, Curtis?" 
Newton shrugged but would not meet 



NO MORE 93 

his gaze. "There's a certain chemical, 
you know, a pinch of which can kill a 
whole tank of ship-fuel. An anti-catalytic. Well, that night before we left 
Earth, I slipped into Lowther's ship and 
used it to kill his Number Six, Seven 
and Eight fuel-tanks." 

He shrugged again. "One to Five 
would take him out around Neptune, 
I knew. But then he'd run out and 
couldn't curve in toward Pluto." 

"But why?" Carey asked puzzedly. 
"Why do it and then save him ?" 

Simon said, "I can guess why. But I 
tell you, Curtis, even if you succeed it 
was harebrained. Once in the past your 
rashness made outlaws of us four. It 
could happen again." 

No more was said until Curt Newton's masterful piloting brought the 
Comet at last alongside the dark silent 
ship that was steadily falling toward 
infinity. The emergency locks were 
coupled together with magnetic grapples. Curt and Otho were armed and 
Grag stood behind them like an iron 
colossus, guarding the narrow passage. 

The locks were opened and Curt stood 
facing Lowther. Watching from the 
background Carey caught a glimpse of 
Lowther's face, ugly with fear, with 
hatred. 

"I might have known it would be 
you," he said to Curt Newton. "You 
caused our fuel to go dead. How you did 
it I don't know but — " 

"You can't prove that," said Newton. 
He spoke to the men who were crowding behind Lowther. "Take i easy," he 
told them. "You're in no danger." 

A ray of hope crept into Lowther's 
eyes. "You're going to take us back?" 

"Well," said Newton, "I can't tow 
you for my stern-grapples aren't working. And my ship is small. I could take 
off your officers and crew but I'm afraid 
there wouldn't be any room for you." 

Lowther thought about that. Carey 
could see it in his face — the visualization 
of his ship plunging on and on into the 
great deeps with him alone in it. 

"You couldn't do that," he whispered. 

"I wouldn't have any choice," said 
Newton. 



M 



STARTLING STORIES 



Carey saw Lowther's face whiten and 
crumble until it was hardly human. 
Then Newton said, "However, I might 
sell you fuel to get back to Pluto." 

Shrewd and biting even through the 
terror Lowther's eyes fastened on him. 
"Now we're getting to it," he muttered. 
"All right, what's the price?" 

"As you know," said Curt, "fuel is 
very high these days. But I'm not out 
for profit. You sign over all rights in 
all your Pluto mines and refineries to a 
Government foundation, for the furtherance of travel and exploration 
among the stars. And I'll let you have 
a bunker full." 

Something like a smile touched Lowther's mouth. He smothered it at once, 
beginning to protest and threaten, but 
Curt shook his head. "Oh, no," he said. 
"There will be no repudiation of this 
deal later on when you're safe on Pluto. 
You're going to make out a full confession of your activities in gaining control 
of the five other companies. It will be 
kept in a safe place. And just to make 
doubly, sure . . ." 

Here he pointed to a fat-joweled little 
man behind Lowther's shoulder — a man 
whom Carey recognized as one of the 
group who had been with Lowther that 
other time on Earth. 

"... to make doubly sure," Curt was 
saying, "you will go into another cabin 
and write out a separate confession. As 
Lowther's secretary you know every 
angle of that deal because you helped 
him. And if the two confessions don't 
match I will know that someone is lying 
— and that will be two people there 
won't be room for in my ship." 

He turned again to Lowther and 
waited. Three different times Carey saw 
Lowther start to speak, and give it up. 
At last he made a gesture of defeat and 
Curt motioned him into the Comet. The 
secretary whimpered once and disapipeared. 



Less than an hour later, Curt Newton 
had the signed irrevocable papers and 
Lowther had his fuel. 



Time had passed. The two great ships 
on the white plain of Pluto were readying for take-off. Rock and ice quivered 
to the deep hum of great generators 
running on test. Men were feverishly 
busy around the gangways. 

Carey came hastening across the ice 
to where Newton and the Futuremen 
were watching. And as he ran he felt 
buoyantly and fully alive for the first 
time since his strange awakening. 

"I'm going with them!" he cried. "I 
talked to Burke. He signed me on and 
I'm going with them — out to the stars !" 

Otho laughed and said to Newton, 
"You were right about him." 

Suddenly Carey understood. He said, 
"That's why you brought me out here 
with you? You knew!" 

The red-haired man nodded. "I knew 
that only out on the edge, out on the 
frontier, would you find your own kind 
again." 

Newton paused and added, "You're 
not the only one, Carey. I've seen it 
happen over and over again to spacemen 
in my own time. They go out young and 
eager, dreaming and talking of how 
someday they'll come back to Earth 
with wealth and glory and live there 
happy the rest of their lives. And when 
they come back they find they can't do 
it, they find they're Earthmen no more." 

"Earthmen no more," Carey repeated, wonderingly. "Why, yes. That was 
it, of course. It wasn't Earth that 
changed so much. It was me." 

From the distance, amplified by an 
annunciator loudspeaker, roared Burke's 
voice. "Time to lift, starmen !" 

And Carey, slipping and hurrying, 
went back across the frozen plain, toward the ships and stars that waited. 



NEXT ISSUE 

BIRTHPLACE OF CREATION ', 

Another Captain Future Novelet by EDMOND HAMILTON 



Then Fly Our 
GREETINGS 

by 

MARGARET ST. CLAIR 



Science discovers 
the secret of 
mutual repuision/ 




KYLE sat in a pool of light. The rest 
of the dim room glittered with 
gold braid. He felt a little hysterical. He 
said, "I'm sorry, gentlemen, but I don't 
see the bearing of your questions. I 
don't believe it could possibly be used 
as a weapon." 

"Never mind that," the cool voice 
said. Kyle could not see any of their 



le plunged down 
the stair, jumping 
the things of 
the landings 

faces distinctly. "That is our problem, 
not yours. But can we take it that the 
description here" — he tapped the copy of 
the March issue of Scientia Nova, which 
lay before him on the long table — "is 
substantially correct?" 

"Yes, sir. As far as it goes." 

"I must say I'm disappointed, gentlemen," an older voice broke in. "I had 



9« STARTLING 

understood the effect was to make them 
fight. They don't fight?" 

Kyle was not sure who had spoken. 
He turned to face the direction from 
which he thought the voice had come. 
"No, sir. I don't think it would be possible to make the animals fight. You see, 
in order to fight they'd have to come 
into contact and that's just what they 
don't want to do. 

"The effect is not to cause hostility 
but a strong, really a very strong mutual 
repulsion. They behave like — like bodies 
with the same electrical charge." 

"A moment ago you said the account 
in the magazine was correct as far as 
it went," said the cool voice. "Do you 
mean that you have made additional 
experiments since? Have you tried 
your invention on the higher animals?" 

"It's not an invention — I beg your 
pardon, sir. But I myself have as yet no 
clear idea how the effects are produced. 
Yes? I have made a number of experiments with mammals, including three 
rhesus monkeys." 

A ripple of excitement ran along the 
shadowy table. "And what was the 
result?" the cool voice asked. 

"I got no result at all with the lower 
frequencies, the frequencies to which 
the lizards had responded. Higher frequencies, had the usual effect. I don't 
want to generalize without more data 
but it looks as if there might be a relationship between the frequencies to 
which an animal would respond and the 
degree of its cortical development." 

Somebody cleared his throat. The 
elderly voice said, "You mean you got 
the monkeys to fight?" 

"No, sir, they didn't fight. What they 
did was break open the cage. I still don't 
know how they managed it — it was reinforced steel mesh. One of the monkeys 
stayed in the cage. I found another at 
the end of the laboratory, as far from 
the cage as she could get 

"The third monkey, the one we called 
Rita, got out of the lab somehow. She 
must have hurt herself doing it — there 
was considerable bleeding. I don't know 
where she went. I haven't been able 
to locate her yet" 



STORIES 

ALOW-PITCHED hum of talk broke 
out Kyle, shutting his eyes 
against the flood of light that fell 
around his chair— the only bright light 
in the big room — thought he could make 
out a word now and then. 

"The public . . . opinion ... no opposition . . . humane." He thought he 
heard the last word over and over again. 

A voice Kyle had not heard before, 
a voice with great authority, said, "Can 
Mr. Kyle tell us whether this mutual 
repulsion is permanent?" 

Kyle opened his eyes, blinking. "Until 
two days ago, sir," he said, "I should 
not have been able to answer the question. But on Thursday I observed that 
the phase of repulsion had been succeeded in the guinea pigs by an antiphase in which the social instincts were 
considerably exaggerated. When one of 
them was taken away from the group it 
showed marked distress and attempted 
to bite." 

"Most interesting," said the authoritative voice. "That removes the final 
objection, to my mind." 

"Of course," said Kyle, forgetting his 
instructions, which had been to speak 
only when he was addressed, "I can't 
say how long this anti-phase may last 
or what might succeed it." 

Several people cleared their throats. 
The cool voice said, "You may go now, 
Mr. Kyle." 

Kyle got to his feet He was stiff 
from nervous tension and fatigue. As 
he approached the door the agents who 
had brought him to the Nonagon fell in 
on either side of him. 

When they were outside the door the 
taller agent said, "You're to go with us, 
Kyle. We'll take you to your new lab." 



She loved them, Vinnie thought, she 
just loved all of them. How right Father 
Glorious had been ! Love was the golden 
key that unlocked the heart of each and 
every one of God's creatures. 

What had the white lady on the second 
floor in millinery said this morning? 
Something about how Vinnie was the 
little girl with the big friendly smile. 



THEN FLY OUR GREETINGS 



97 



That was a nice thing to think about. 
If you loved people they'd never hurt 
you. It just went to show. 

"Watch your step, please watch your 
step," Vinnie said, opening the elevator 
door with her thin brown hand. She 
tried to put the love abounding Father 
Glorious was always talking about into 
her voice. 

Her back did hurt but you oughtn't 
to let material things bother you — 
Father said so. Besides, it was closing 
time for the store. She'd only have to 
make one or two more trips today. 
"Watch your step," Vinnie sang, "please 
watch your step!" 

She closed the door and started back 
to the third floor for more passengers. 



car, as far from each other as they could 
get. Was something going to happen, 
something terrible — an earthquake, a 
hurricane ? 

The elevator reached the mezzanine. 
Vinnie opened the door. "Watch your 
step, please," she said, her voice coming 
out higher than she had intended it. 
"Please wa — " her voice broke off. 

She felt a sensation so strong that 
it was translated into an emotion instantly. It was intenser than anything 
she had yet experienced in her eighteen 
years. For a moment she was a jelly of 
confusion and bewilderment. Who was 
— what— what? Her mind swayed like 
a balancing toy. Then it righted itself. 

"Get out," she said to her passengers. 



^Weapons of Destruction' 




ITS 6 jofe bet that every one of us alive at present Is pondering the in■*• sane search for more "efficient" weapons with which too many of our 
ablest creative brains are occupied at present. Since Hiroshima, the vision 
of a lethally volatile peach-colored mushroom-shaped cloud has overshadowed a great many billions of waking hours — and perhaps as many after dark. 

But there are other, even deadlier, possibilities. Mrs. St. Clair here In 
"Then Fly Our Greeting!," presents one that is no more improbable than 
the potential of hundreds of projects now operative behind the guarded 
doors of laboratories, not only in the United States, but virtually in every 
nation of the so-calred "civilized" world. 



Nobody was going up, but plenty were 
coming down. They crowded into the 
elevator, pushing, talking, laughing, 
complaining. One of the little girls began to cry. Vinnie tried to radiate loveabounding out to her. 

She opened the cage on second to take 
on two more passengers. "Please step 
back in the car," Vinnie said. 

As the cage moved slowly downward 
from second to mezzanine Vinnie felt 
a sudden stab of pain in the back of her 
head. For a moment it sickened her. 
Her hands shook on the car's controls. 
She looked around her, hoping nobody 
had noticed it. She'd get fired if she 
took sick. 

How white everybody was, a bleached 
fish-belly white! They looked like they 
were scared. And quiet — there wasn't 
a whisper in the car. Even the children 
were still. They all seemed to have 
pushed back against the walls of the 



"Get out, all of you. You just get right 
on out." She made wide gestures with 
her hands. 

They had begun to move, seeing the 
open door, before she spoke to them. 
They poured over the elevator sill, rubbing against the edge of the door in 
their reciprocal _aversion, and scattered 
through the mezzanine. As their distance from each other increased they 
began to run. 

VINNIE watched them incredulously. 
What was the matter with them 5 
with her ? Why had she spoken to them 
like that? She couldn't help but be fired 
when she'd talked to white folks like 
that. 

She sank back against the side of the 
elevator car, weeping. It was hard to 
get a job these days. She must be crazy. 
What had happened? Her head ached so. 

She pressed her hands against her 



96 STARTLING 
face and cried harder. Yes, crazy. It 
was terrible, terrible. What had come 
over her? But underneath her confusion 
and distress there was an indestructible 
kernel of another emotion. It was wonderful, it was like the peace of God 
Father Glorious was always talking 
about, not to have anybody near her. 
It was wonderful to be alone in the 
elevator car. 

***** 

The baby had begun to cry. Tanya 
listened for a moment and then decided 
that it must be time to feed him. Where 
had she left the mask the nurse had 
given her? 

She found it in a cupboard and looked 
at it doubtfully. It was dirty. Perhaps 
she ought to wash it. But the baby had a 
cold anyhow. What was the use of wearing it? 

She approached the crib, unbuttoning 
her blouse. 

She picked the baby up. His crying 
hushed. 

"Little apple," she said to him, smiling. "Mama's little man." 

Tanya had no warning as Vinnie had 
had. She felt no premonitory stab of 
pain in the head, nothing. The confusion 
burst upon her unheralded. 

For an instant she stood rooted beside the cradle. The child had begun to 
scream at the top of his lungs, arching 
his small body away from her desperately. "Hush," she tried to say. "Hush, 
little blossom," but her lips refused to 
shape the words. 

She wanted to scream, she wanted to 
jump through the window, she wanted 
to take a knife and kill herself. Still she 
remained beside the cradle, holding the 
shrieking child. Instinct, education, 
physiology, were warring with the new 
force in her. Her face was beaded with 
sweat. 

Abruptly she dropped the child. He 
fell back on the pillows of the crib with 
a thump that made him stop crying for 
a second. Tanya looked down at him, 
moaning and wringing her hands. Then 
she began to back away from him. When 
she reached the door of the flat she 
turned and ran through it. 



STORIES 

***** 

He kissed the tip of each finger, he 
put a cluster of kisses in the soft flesh 
of the palm. He encircled the ring 
finger, wearing the new gold wedding 
ring, with a chain of tiny kisses. He 
said, "Tu m'aimes?" 

Her eyes were shining. She laid her 
right hand softly against his cheek. 
"Francois, tu le sais . . ." 

Their lips met. Presently he said, 
"Take off your jacket, cherie. I find it 
an embarrassment." 

She laughed. She began to unbutton 
the high-collared close-fitting jacket of 
dove colored cloth, smiling at him teasingly. She had not reached the fourth 
button before he took her once more 
in his arms. 

Abruptly they drew away from each 
other. Her jaw dropped. She put out 
her hand toward him and then let it 
fall. He said, "I — what — Marie!" 

She licked her lips. He had turned 
very pale. With a convulsive effort he 
touched her shoulder with one fingertip. She jerked away from the contact 
as if his hand had been red hot. 

They stood staring at each other. 
Her hands pressed against her temples 
desperately. He said in a croak, "I don't 
understand. You are still so beautiful." 

She made no answer. For a moment 
longer they faced each other. Then she 
turned and ran into the bathroom. He 
heard the door click as she locked it 
behind her. Then he too ran. 

***** 

The new recruits were a very promising lot, Sergeant Ma thought. They had 
the short stocky well-set-up build he 
liked to see and they were willing. Eager 
for education too — they'd beamed all 
over their faces when he told them about 
the plan for the new learning. They'd 
soon master the thousand signs. 

"Number off!" he barked at them as 
they formed up in a wavering line. 
They counted to twenty but the next 
man didn't know what came after it. 
Ma had expected the difficulty. He supplied the ensuing numbers himself. 
They'd soon learn. Yesterday they had 



THEN FLY OUR GREETINGS 



99 



only got to seventeen. 

"Right dress!" he said. Haltingly they 
obeyed. Yes, they were a sharp lot. 

The drill continued. "At ease," Ma 
said finally. Gratefully they relaxed. Ma 
began to lecture them. 

"The first duty of a soldier," he said 
powerfully, "is obedience. The sage tells 
us that 'the excellence of things is their 
undoing' but in a people's army excellence . . ." 

He finished his talk, saying, "That is 
why drill is so important. From it we 
learn obedience. Shoulder arms! Form 
fours !" 

With a good deal of jerky trotting the 
recruits moved into place. Their faces 
were intent and serious. His talk had 
done them good. They were trying 
harder than yesterday. "Forward 
march!" Ma shouted at them. 

LAST week the drill ground had been 
a sea of mud. It would be a sea of 
mud again with the next rain. It was 
dry now. Each time the recruits' feet 
came down on the dry earth dust arose. 
Ma began to sneeze. 

He pressed his finger to his upper 
lip to stop the sneezing. Narrowing his 
eyes he peered through the dust fog at 
the men. The bones of his face ached. 

"Column right!" Ma yelled at the 
soldiers. The column hesitated, made the 
turn. Then, to Ma's stupefaction, the 
men began to run. 

They spread out from each other in 
a fan-shape. They dropped their guns 
in the dust as they ran. One man stumbled and fell, then another. Those behind swerved away from them automatically, without touching them. Even 
in the midst of Ma's general astonishment, this blind avoidance appeared to 
him a remarkable thing. 

The last of the fugitives was disappearing. "Dismissed!" Ma shouted 
after him, in a desperate attempt to 
regularize an unregularizable situation. 
There was no sign that he had been 
heard. 

The dust was beginning to settle. Ma 
looked up wildly at the sky as if he expected to find some clue in it to what 



had happened. The blue serene depths 
were empty. There was not even a plane. 

Had he dreamed it? No, there were 
discarded rifles all over the drill ground. 
It had happened. Ma shuddered. What 
would happen next? Anything — anything could happen now. 



The military mind, Kyle thought as 
he tried to stop his nervous shivering, 
the military mind tended to be an imcompatible mixture of hidebound conservatism and Buck Rogers foolishness. 
It was like hitching a jet plane to an 
oxcart. And you never knew which 
would predominate. 

The basic aim behind the research 
task they had set him had been laudable. 
To produce a truly humane weapon — 
yes, indeed. It was for this that he had 
submitted to the questioning at the end 
of each day's work, questioning which 
made him feel like an aphid being 
milked by ants. He'd tried hard and, besides, the problem had been interesting. 
So it was partly his fault. 

He looked around the laboratory. The 
animals in the cages slept, ate or bickered unconcernedly. The rats in the corner were mating. It wasn't affecting 
them, that was clear. 

If only the people over Kyle had 
waited, waited until he'd had time to 
test and check! But they'd been in a 
hurry and they hadn't had imagination 
enough — perhaps no one could have had 
— to foresee what would happen. They'd 
come up with this. 

Once more Kyle tried to turn on the 
radio. It was no use. His physiological 
aversion to getting near an electrical 
device was still too strong to be controlled. He couldn't make himself turn 
the switch. It probably wouldn't have 
been any use, anyhow. If other people 
were affected by electrical devices as he 
was nothing could be coming over the 
radio. 

He couldn't stop shaking. A drink 
might help him. He got a flask of absolute alcohol from a cupboard, poured 
two tablespoons into a glass and filled 
the glass with water to the brim. When 



100 STARTLING 

he took the glass from his lips it was 
empty. His body had wanted that drink. 

The physiological craving for alcohol, 
the aversion to electricity, might be 
significant. There was something of 
more immediate consequence though — 
the weak water pressure he'd noticed 
when he was filling the glass. He got 
all the empty carboys he could find and 
filled them. By the time the last was 
corked no more water was coming from 
the tap. 

Kyle felt better. He had almost 
stopped shaking. He looked at his watch, 
frowned, listened to it. No, it was still 
going. It was really only three hours 
since Merilee, one of his assistants, had 
pressed her hands to her head and then 
run out of the lab. The other two assistants had been out on errands. They 
had not come back. 

"Hadn't come back" was too melodramatic. No doubt they were still reasonably safe and sound, provided the 
guard in the corridor with the BAR 
hadn't shot them. But it had been a long 
time since Kyle had heard a shot. 

Meanwhile the question was — could 
he sit this one out? He had a good deal 
of water and though the only conventional food in the laboratory was half of 
the box of soda crackers Merilee had 
been chewing on at noon, there were the 
cages of lab animals. One could, Kyle 
supposed, eat white rats in a pinch. 

If he sat tight he might be able to get 
along until the anti-phase set in. The 
rhesus monkeys had exhibited a strongly marked anti-phase. Human beings 
could be expected to do so too. But while 
he was engaged in sitting tight what 
would be happening to everyone? 

The extent of the catastrophe was extraordinarily hard to realize. Always 
before, in the worst of human plights, 
little nodes of cooperation and unity had 
continued to exist. Kyle found that, 
while he could visualize the disjunction 
which was taking place immediately 
around him well enough, as soon as he 
tried to apply the principle on a wide 
scale his mind slipped back into its 
habitual expectation of organization and 
mutual action. 



STORIES 

AND yet it was in the highest degree 
unlikely, it was surely impossible, 
that what was happening in Washington 
was an isolated case. The military had 
been aiming at a particular target area. 
The projector had been over-powered 
(Kyle had tried to point out this danger 
the last time he had been up before the 
Staff). The backlash from the projector had enveloped Washington. Probably 
most of the rest of the globe had suffered first. 

It had sounded like a humane weapon. 
Military opposition could not exist when 
human beings were unable to tolerate 
one another's proximity. But — Kyle 
mixed himself another drink of stockroom alcohol and downed it avidly — the 
effects of the new weapon would probably turn out to be more dreadful than 
the plagues of the Middle Ages. 

The plague fear had sent human 
beings fleeing wildly from one another 
but even in their panic they had acted 
by twos and threes. Affection, fidelity, 
self-interest, had bound them to each 
other. Now every man fled from every 
other man. 

Instinctive self-preservation motivated their repulsion. Kyle had made 
the experiment of forcibly placing lab 
animals near one another after he had 
used his small projector on them. They 
had, in every case, died. And when he 
had dissected them he had found that 
gross changes had taken place in the 
brain itself, lesions that had been caused 
by this proximity. 

No, he couldn't sit this one out. It was 
too much his fault. Though the thought 
of approaching one of his fellow men 
filled him with sickening apprehension 
Kyle found his social instinct was aa 
strong as ever. Curious — it was unlikely he could help very much. But he 
was under an obligation to try what he 
could do. 

Cautiously he opened the lab dooi. 
There was an immediate rattle of 
bullets against it. Kyle slammed the 
door, sweating. The BAR man was still 
out in the hall. 

Kyle felt no animus against him. If 
he himself had had a gun he'd certainly 



THEN FLY OUR GREETINGS 



101 



have shot at anyone who tried to come 
near him. But the presence of the BAR 
man meant that Kyle would have to get 
out through the window and he had 
always had a poor head for heights. 
Fortunately he was only on the fourth 
floor. 

He started toward the opening, hesitated. On impulse he went to one of the 
cabinets and got a case of dissecting 
scalpels and lancets from it. It was 
getting too dark for him to read the 
labels on bottles but he sniffed at several 
until he found what he wanted, a flask 
with the pleasant odor of chloroform. 
He put the scalpels and the bottle in 
opposite pockets. Carefully he let himself down over the window sill. 

The Nonagon building was generally 
admitted to be a first class eyesore. But 
now Kyle blessed the anonymous architect who had covered its surface with 
knops, festoons, ribbons, gargoyles and 
acanthus leaves cast in concrete. There 
were plenty of hand and foot holds and 
if he kept his mind strictly on descending, his acrophobia could be controlled. 
Once or twice he felt the terrible constriction and sense of heat in his skull 
that told him other human beings were 
near. 

When he was about twenty feet from 
the ground the concrete festooning gave 
out. Feel about below him as he would, 
his feet met nothing but a perpendicular 
granite surface. He'd have to drop. 

He made himself relax for the fall. 
But when he picked himself up he found 
that his left ankle had been badly 
wrenched. When he tried to stand on it 
the pain was so intense it made him 
faint. He got out a scalpel and cut his 
vest into strips with it. Then he bandaged his ankle with the cloth. When he 
was done he could stand on the foot 
without too much pain. 

The moon was coming up. Kyle wasn't 
supposed to know where the projector 
building was but secrets do leak out. It 
was a long way to walk but he couldn't 
bring himself to try to start a car. 
Shaking and sweating he began to hobble along. 

He had walked for perhaps a quarter 



of a mile, detouring when he sensed 
someone near him, when he heard the 
nasty pock-pock of bullets up ahead. 

It was a man with a tommy-gun. 
There were two bodies on the pavement in front of him. His gun was in 
shadow but he seemed to be shooting 
in through an open window. No doubt 
there was somebody inside, somebody 
whose mere existence was an intolerable affliction for the man with the gun. 

Kyle bit his lip. He could detour but 
the man with the gun would probably 
start shooting at him anyway. Also a 
gun would be very useful to Kyle. Was 
it possible that the gunner was so occupied for the nonce with extermination 
that Kyle could get reasonably close 
without being noticed? If he moved 
quickly? He would try. 

The gunner spun about, still spurting 
bullets, just as Kyle threw the bottle 
with the chloroform. 

THE bottle broke on the pavement. 
Kyle pressed back against the side 
wall as tightly as he could. The gunner 
could not see him, of course, but he 
would have a very accurate notion of 
where he was. Bullets began to pock 
and jar against the stone cornice. 

The burst flagged, renewed itself, 
flagged again. Kyle stuck his head 
around the corner. The gunner was 
sinking drunkenly on one knee. He fired 
a last burst and collapsed. Kyle could 
smell the fumes of the chloroform from 
where he stood. 

The pain in Kyle's skull was terrible. 
Apparently even an unconscious man 
was still a potential source of brain 
damage. While Kyle was stripping the 
gunner of gun and ammunition, he wondered whether he would ever be able to 
think normally again. 

After he had carried his booty to a 
safe distance he had to rest for what 
seemed a long time. He collected himself at last and started hobbling toward 
the projector building once more. 

The projector was housed in a small 
two-story building that had once been 
a local sub-station power house in a 
residential district. In various devious 



102 STARTLING 

ways the department of defense had 
acquired title to the ex-sub station and 
the buildings which stood near it. 

These buildings had been boarding 
houses before they changed ownership 
and they continued to pass as boarding 
houses after the department of defense 
acquired them. But a rather strictly 
selected group of "boarders" lived in 
them. 

If Kyle had got to the projector building three hours, even two hours, earlier 
he would have found himself in the 
midst of a bitter small-scale version of 
modern warfare. The men on whom the 
task of guarding the projector had devolved had managed, since they were 
specially selected personnel, to endure 
each other's proximity for almost forty 
seconds before they began shooting. 

In their frenzy of extermination they 
had also used their grenades and flame 
throwers. But by now everything was 
quiet and nothing moved in the street. 
Kyle found that the bodies bothered 
him very little, even in a sentimental 
way. 

He stood before the darkened building while a wind whipped lightly at his 
trouser legs, and tried to think. He had 
been told that the projector had its own 
power source and was in no way dependent on city installation. 

The projector was certainly not functioning now or he would never have 
been able to get so near it. That was 
natural enough — he had found with his 
small projector that a twenty-second 
exposure had quite as much effect as one 
of several minutes. No doubt the big 
installation had been switched off immediately when the minimum period 
was over. 

What was it he had wanted to do? 
Oh, yes. This week — last week — some 
time recently, at any rate (there seemed 
to be a permanent confusion inside his 
skull) — he had found that a certain 
sequence of frequencies from the projector tended to undo the "polarization" 
effect on the nerve cells. 

At least he had observed such a reversion to normality in one of the rhesus 
monkeys, and microscopic examination 



STORIES 

of the animal's brain had confirmed the 
observation. It wasn't much to go on, 
certainly. Kyle would have liked to make 
many more tests. But there wasn't time 
to make careful tests now. He'd have to 
try to see what he could do. 

He went up to the door. To his surprise it opened easily. He stood blinking for a moment, seeking to accustom 
himself to the sudden darkness after 
the moonlight of the street outside. 
Presently he saw that the interior was 
not quite dark — there was a very dim 
blue glow up ahead. Almost simultaneously with his perception of the light he 
realized that there was a man in the 
building. 

A bullet spat past his cheek. Kyle 
felt a certain surprise at the inaccuracy 
of the shooting. Then he saw the man's 
faint silhouette against the light and 
understood. The man had been wounded 
in the right shoulder. He was shooting 
with his left hand. 

Kyle was thinking as clearly as he 
could. He himself didn't want to shoot 
if it could be avoided. He might miss 
and damage the projector. 

He yelled, "Come out! I won't hurt 
you ! I want to — try to — fix things up ! 
I'm going to — stop — this mess !" 

There was a second's silence, and then 
a new rattle of bullets from his opponent's gun. Above the noise Kyle heard 
the man screaming something that 
sounded like, "You spy! You Goddamned spy!" 

IT couldn't be avoided, Kyle perceived. 
Now that he had to act he felt a vast 
remote calm, like that which comes at 
certain stages of drunkenness. With a 
sensation of almost godlike detatchment 
he took careful aim. He would hit the 
man in the heart. 

He fired six shots. His opponent was 
screaming in a scratchy high-pitched 
voice. Each bullet went into his body 
with what seemed almost a petulant 
thud. There was a sudden bursting 
silence as the man went backward with 
the impact. Kyle lowered his gun and 
waited frozenly. 

The man by the projector clawed him


THEN FLY OUR GREETINGS 



103 



self into a kneeling position. He fired 
one last shot, not at Kyle. The slug went 
into the projector with a jangling crash 

of glass. 

There was a noiseless flash of light, 
not very intense. Then even the dim 
glow went out. 

Kyle groped his way through the 
choking darkness to the projector. He 
lit matches and examined it. The damage 
was serious. Two of the big tubes were 
glinting bits of glass on the pavement 
and the wiring had shorted in three 
places as least. 

Was it hopeless? Not under ordinary 
conditions. The big tubes were special 
jobs but more could have been made in 
a week or two. The technicians who had 
installed the wiring could have repaired 
it. But the man whom Kyle had just 
shot was perhaps the last of the technicians, and the cooperative labor which 
had shaped the tubes was now unthinkable. 

Unthinkable — hopeless — irreparable. 
The words seemed to flit about in the 
darkness of the building endlessly, like 
pairs of leathery wings. Kyle lit match 
after match, hoping to find something 
he could do for the projector, some repair, however useless, that he could 
make. There was nothing — he could not 
find anything. 

Hopeless. The last match burned to 
his fingers. Hopeless — irreparable — 
unthinkable. Standing there in the darkness, weary, spent and dazed, Kyle began to weep. 

***** 

The water in the carboy was foul, had 
been foul for days. It would hardly go 
through the filter paper any longer. 
There was only about an inch of it left. 

He, wasn't hungry. That was odd. He 
hadn't been hungry since the first repulsion phase. Perhaps the alcohol he 
had drunk — it was all gone now — had 
helped. 

Whatever the reason Kyle had no 
desire for food though he had lost a good 
deal of weight. But he wanted a bath, 
he wanted to be immersed to the chin 
in water, generous ungrudging water, 
and let it soak in through his pores. He 



wanted gallons and gallons of water to 
drink. 

He'd go down to the river tonight 
with the carboys, he decided. As the 
phases alternated human beings found 
that the distance at which they could 
tolerate each other continually increased. But he still had his gun and 
two clips of bullets for it. He would try. 

He poured the water that had seeped 
through the filter paper into a glass and 
sipped at it. It took all of his self-control to keep from gulping it. He tipped 
the glass vertically to get the last precious drop. When he put it down reluctantly he felt the tightness and peculiar 
empty feeling in his brain that told him 
a new anti-phase was setting in. 

He hoped not. How many anti-phases 
would this be now, the third or the 
fourth? He tried to count though the 
events of the last month — months — 
whatever it was — were a meaningless 
jumble. It was the fourth — no, this must 
be anti-phase three. 

He remembered the first anti-phase 
pretty well. He had been sitting in the 
lab sipping what was nearly the last of 
the alcohol when he'd become aware of 
a peace, almost a harmony, in his brain. 
It made him feel good. He thought for 
a moment that the treatment he had 
managed to give himself with the small 
projector, battery powered, had been a 
success. 

The feeling had got stronger, turned 
into a hunger, a necessity. He hadn't 
tried to fight it when he realized it was 
the anti-phase. He had been glad because he had hoped the new phase might 
mean the beginning of a return to normality. 

As if driven by some instinct they had 
met in the clear area where the Nonagon had parked its car. Most of the 
cars were still there, dust-filmed, rainspotted, here and there a little touched 
with rust. There had been perhaps five 
hundred of the survivors. How they had 
clung together in their new-found amity, 
their aching need ! 

Kyle remembered most vividly from 
that anti-phase the woman with the 
silver fox stole and how she had clung 



104 



STARTLING STORIES 



to the fat Negro woman next to her. "I 
love you !" she had cried, her face 
shining, "Oh, I love you ! You're wonderful." And the Negress beaming with 
reciprocal affection, had answered, "Me 
too! Yessum, me too!" 

That phase had ended. 

After it there had come the new repulsion — more severe — the new antiphase, the new repulsion. And now the 
new anti-phase. How he hated it ! 

Kyle could not resist it. He ran past 
the swollen bodies in the hall, down the 
stair, jumping over the things on the 
landings. He plunged down the last 
flight two, three steps at a time. Hurry, 
hurry, hurry, his brain said, hurry — 
you love them so. 

THEY were clustered together like 
bats in a cavern, like bees in the 
wintertime. If it were possible to use 
this phase somehow, he thought as he 
plastered himself wildly against the 
quivering mass, use it to rebuild all that 
has been destroyed, to put a stop — at 
least — to what was still going on. Use 
it! But how? 

They ached to get closer to each other, 
to be interpenetrated with each other's 
beings. They were straining and grunting in their communal embrace. Those 
at the center of the mass, Kyle thought, 
must be half crushed and stifled. But 
there were fewer than there had been in 
the last anti-phase. In the shaking cluster last time there must have been at 
least two hundred people. Now there 
might be eighty left. 

The face of the man on Kyle's left 
was familiar. He might have known him 
once. Kyle said — not really wanting to 
speak, feeling as if the words had been 
extracted with forceps from his brain 
— "Isn't it wonderful being all together 
again? Now we're more than we were 
separately. We're the group." 

The man opened his eyes and looked 
at Kyle. He had a sad lined middle-aged 
face. He said, "You know, this isn't like 
the other phases. Something new is happening. Don't you feel it? We're really 
going to become just one person this 
time, ali of us, just one. 



"Maybe if we try hard, that one new 
person can fix things. He'd be wiser than 
any of us separately, wouldn't he? I 
can't stand much more of this." 

The words filled Kyle with desperate 
energy. He said, "Yes, yes, let's try. I'm 
sure you're right. We'll try. Tell the 
person next to you !" 

The news went buzzing around the 
cluster, struck inward. They all heard 
it, they all agreed. The moments lingered, the strain increased. The man 
next to Kyle said at last, "Do you feel 
it? At the back of your skull — new 
circuits, a new type of consciousness?" 

Kyle licked his lips. He wanted to 
reply. It had seemed to him as the straining moments passed that new regions, 
new dimensions, were opening strangely in his brain. Or was it space itself 
that divided in a panorama of planes 
which echoed one another to infinity? 

It was as if explorers touched the dark 
continents within his skull and established cities there. And from the blank 
headlands now touched with light, from 
the tributary cities, something was flowing out toward the others and uniting 
with them. 

Kyle had a sudden vision of a creature vaster than one of the Anakim. It 
stood on earth, laughing, and stretched 
its fingers out toward Saturn. The thin 
winds of heaven rustled through the 
flames of its hair. It was wiser, stronger, 
more joyous than humanity. 

Was this new entity what the sad 
man had meant? Oh, it must be so. 
Surely this creation, so much greater 
than the sum of its creators, would yet 
obey them, could be impressed to do 
their will. 

The minds of those in the group were 
flowing together to make something unheard of, their wills had coalesced. And 
what they were making would be able 
to solve with almost godlike ease what 
they had in their miserable isolation 
found insoluble. 

The sad man's question no longer 
needed answering. Kyle felt his 
identity leaving him and for a moment 
he was terrified. Who was he, what 
would he become? He struggled. Then 



THEN FLY OUR GREETINGS 



105 



he was caught up into a blazing unity. 
His last conscious awareness was of a 
prospect of gigantic delight. 

* * * * • 

Who was Kyle? As member after 
member of the group fell away, dying 
of exhaustion, hunger, exposure, thirst, 
the question could be asked. Who was 
Kyle? 

He looked about him numbly. The air 
was thin and cold. His body seemed 
strange to him. 

At the back of his dim half-burnedout brain there was a recollection of 
titanic splendors, of inhuman experience. He seemed to remember exertions beyond the scope of imagination, 
an urge which had shaken someone 
vaster than himself, a great, an incredible enterprise. Who was Kyle? 

HE was standing in the midst of a 
huge plain, at the foot of a towering monolith. Without comprehension 
his eyes followed the shaft up, up, up, 
to where it seemed to split the sky. Who 
could have reared such a shaft? Far off 
on the flat horizon another towered into 
the heavens and at the very limit of 
visibility he saw still another. 

It was cold, so cold. Kyle shivered 
uncontrollably. There was no warmth m 
the dim yellow sun. 

Once more his eyes went up the shaft 
of the monolith. He looked at it blankly, 
slack-lipped. And slowly, little by little, 
that part of his brain which had not 
been destroyed began to understand. The 
monoliths . . . 

There had been an anti-phase. But 
this time humanity had been welded together indissolubly. They could not flee 
from each other. They had not even 



wanted to. The repulsion had taken a 
new direction, been transferred. Group 
after group over the face of the globe, 
their minds had flowed into each other's 
to become fused in a super-mind. And 
that mind, compelled by the wills that 
composed it, had built. 

The human beings who composed it 
had been the cells of its tangible body. 
It had used them mercilessly. Sleepless, 
tireless, mindless, they had labored. 
They were expendable — they had been 
expended. 

It was they who had reared the 
monoliths. 

But to what purpose? Kyle found that 
he was very tired. He was so tired that 
the cold no longer seemed bitter to him. 
Sighing with fatigue he stretched out 
on the ground beside the monolith. How 
dim the sun was ! He could look up at it 
open-eyed. 

That, he supposed, was why they had 
built the monoliths. So they could leave 
the sun. The sun was dim because they 
were far from it. That must have been 
the effect of the last anti-phase, the last 
repulsion — an impulse to build the power towers that would drive Earth away 
from the other planets and its home star, 
the sun. 

Now he was so tired that it didn't 
matter — now Earth was flying outward 
from its place in the solar system. On 
and on in that last gigantic repulsion, 
into the empty interstellar dark. 

It would get colder on Earth, everything was finished. The seas would 
freeze and then, at last, the air. It was 
all over. It wasn't important. He sighed 
and shivered. What mattered, the vital 
thing, was the answer to the enigma 
that still vexed him. Who — who was 
Kyle? 



Read OVERLORDS OF MAXUS, an Amazing Novel 
of Space Adventure by JACK VANCE in the 
February Issue of Our Companion Magazine — 

THRILLING WONDER STORIES 

NOW ON SALE — 25c AT ALL STANDS! 




THE TWO SHADOWS 



A Novelet by WILLIAM F. TEMPLE 



A poet, a pragamafist and a 
girl — they were all 
that was left of humanity 
after Earth became a 
second Sun — and Mars was 
far from the 
Garden of Edenl 



CT*HE idea that the world may someday 
J- and quite literally be blown up is 
scarcely a new one. Most of the ancient religions had it. However, of recent years, 
the doomsday legend has taken on new form 
and entirely new impact. For, according to 
the sundry tenets of yore, it was the Gods 
who led the world to its final ruin through 
their own folly — usually a result of meddling in mortal conflicts. 

Noivadays the vision of world's end is all 
too clear — and man himself is the agent. 
Having abandoned the super folJe of Olympus 
and Valhalla, we have only ourselves to 
blame. 

However, ling ering as stu bbornly as 
man's belief in an individual life-afterdeath is an insistent thread of hope that 



such destruction will not be complete — that 
somewhere, on or under Earth or perhaps 
upon one of the planets, some humans will 
somehow survive to create a more equable 
cosmos for themselves. Mr. Temple in this 
story gives vivid presentation to how such 
survival might be accomplished. — THE 
EDITOR. 

CHAPTER I 

Survivors 

O, BLESSED Necessity!" cried Leonardo da Vinci, in his day, knowing that it was the prime incentive. Man 
had to be driven to work his best mira


106 



cles. Creditors at one's heels were a 
sharper spur to the artist than his own 
inspiration. 

The first voyage from Earth to Mars 
was certainly not the fruit of a hunger 
for knowledge — or of technicians in love 
with their work — or even of pride seeking power upon which to fatten. 

It sprang from the starkest of all necessities — preservation of the species. 

A divided Earth, struggling with a 
divided mind to preserve itself, had 
fallen into the desperate error of preventive war. The disease germs, as thick 
as clouds in the atmosphere, were prov


ing to be the conquerors of both sides. 
Earth, quivering under the impacts of 
countless atomic missiles, many darted 
into its side by its own satellite and human colony, flung out a seed. 

The seed was styled the Nuova Vita 
— as a sign that the Earth really knew 
better than it had behaved — and it was 
a rocket-ship five times the size of the 
Lunar vessels. It had both atomic and 
chemical drives. It had come straight 
off the drawing board. Its size and power were unprecedented. There was no 
time for real tests. In effect it was a 
tissue of theory, launched naked into 



197 



108 STARTLING 

cold space, carrying twenty-six souls 
and the hope of the human race — at 
least the Anglo-American part of that 
race. 

The gamble, it seemed, had come off. 
The seed missed the stony places — it 
was landing on the comparatively fertile soil of Mars. It was a thousand feet 
above that soil, sitting on its tail of 
braking chemical jets, descending with 
beautifully slow deliberation. 

The pilot said happily, "We've done 
it!" 

Fate never likes to be anticipated. A 
second later came a great light and a 
great heat. The habitually almost motionless atmosphere of Mars was 
scorched and stung into agitation. The 
heated air expanded almost like an explosion, tearing the concentrated gasjets of the ship into long tenuous 
streamers. 

The Nuova Vita tilted irrevocably off 
balance. It became a bone of contention 
between gravity and the upstreaming 
air. Its majesty had departed. It was 
a straw tossed by forces it had lately 
controlled. 

They tossed it into a grassy area two 
Earth-miles from an ice-blue channel. 
But the soil was thin. There was hard 
rock beneath it and the rock broke the 
back of the Nuova Vita. It broke the 
backs of many of the little humans within and others died through the sheer 
concussion. 

The wind howled over the wreck, under the sun — and under the small newborn companion to the sun. 

THOMAS JEFFERSON JOHNS ran 
for his life among the firs. Luckily, 
the snow hadn't come yet but the bitter wind, driving against his face, 
was the herald of it. There was plenty 
of snow on the saw-edged peaks of the 
Rockies distant behind him. 

Unhappily, not so far behind him, 
came the grizzly bear. 

He looked back fearfully over his 
shoulder to see who was gaining. He 
never saw because he ran his head 
against a branch and was knocked off 
his feet. Flat on his back he went and 



STORIES 

the ground seemed to be rocking like a 
boat beneath him. One side of his head 
felt as though it were bursting open. 
Much more of this and he would be 
sick. 

The great head of the grizzly, with 
its small eyes and licking red tongue, 
loomed over him. He felt too ill to care 
now. The beast put its paws on his 
shoulders, began to shake him. 

"Don't, don't — you're hurting my 
head !" John cried foolishly. 

The bear seemed to go misty at the 
edges, become a mere dark form that 
was shaking him. Then it stopped and 
was still and he lay back, his eyes gradually refocusing it. 

It wasn't a bear now. It was a big 
dark man with an olive skin and contemptuous brown eyes — John Malatesta, 

Malatesta! The real world returned 
to him now. Malatesta, Schultz, Martin, Haywood, Liza, Pinky, Kilpatrick, 
Danby, Foster. . . . 

There had been twenty-six of them 
including himself. The big business 
man, the chemist, the engineer, the agriculturist, the physician, the geologist, 
the cook, the bacteriologist, the artist 
— and the rest. All hand-picked, albeit 
hastily, by a harassed Government for 
their qualifications to start a new 
growth of mankind and yet preserve 
some of the knowledge and culture 
from the main stem which was dying. 

He, Johns, had been picked, not merely because of his fame as a poet or be 
cause he was a Nobel Prize winner for 
literature but because also he had once 
been a teacher and a noteworthy educationalist. 

How far Malatesta had been picked 
and how far he had pulled strings to 
force his election into the chosen few 
was not known to anyone on the ship 
but Malatesta himself. He had qualifications, of course. He was the chief of 
a huge organization in the States. With 
his organizing ability went toughness 
of mind and body and immense drive. 
He was the man to get things done. 
The only drawback was — the things had 
to be done his way. 



THE TWO 

Still, he wag in a minority and could 
be curbed. There were other tough people on the ship, particularly Judge Hackman. 

Johns struggled to sit up. There was 
a thin cold wind blowing. 

"That's better," said Malatesta. "But 
take it easy. There's no hurry. We've 
got all the time there is." 

Johns held his aching head — very 
lightly because it was. painful to touch. 

"What hit me?" 

"Mars. Want to hit it back?" 

Johns shook his head and wished he 
hadn't. More carefully he turned it to 
look around. Again he wished he hadn't. 

This crazy tangle of broken alloy, 
with sharp swords of steel bristling 
from it, had been the main cabin. Once, 
he had seen a car wreck in which the 
two vehicles had met head on at the aggregate speed of a hundred and twenty 
miles an hour. This was worse, and 
bigger and there were a lot more bodies 
— and parts of bodies. 

"Oh," he said and suddenly the nausea he had dreamed of returned and was 
made actual. 

Gasping for breath afterwards, he 
turned red wet eyes on Malatesta. 

"Tender stomach, eh?" said Malatesta with cynical amusement. "Ill 
break it to you gently, son. You and 
me are the only two left alive. And I'm 
not too sure about you." 

Johns could only stare at him. Schultz, 
Martin, Haywood, Liza, Pinky, Kilpatrick, Danby, Foster. . . . All those who 
had become his friends, sharing this 
unparalleled adventure — carrying the 
torch for humanity together — full of 
a sense of nobility and responsibility 
— kindly and tolerant, indeed loving toward one another because they had a 
common aim in life, a great aim, and 
were there to help each other toward 
it. 

All killed on the march by one senseless blow? Their aspirations mocked 
by fate and thrown on this ghastly 
scrapheap ? 

All — except himself and Malatesta, 
the one man he had regarded with antipathy and avoided? 



SHADOWS 109 

He laid his head on his arm and 
cried, like a child who has suddenly discovered that the entire family has gone 
out and left him alone in the house — 
except for the big rough dog he dislikes and fears. 

"Good," said Malatesta. "Keep it up. 
We're short of water. The tank got 
busted and it's all gone into the ground." 

PRESENTLY Johns looked up and 
found he was alone except for — 
He got dizzily to his feet and scrambled out of that horrible place and away 
from the broken ship. It was surprisingly easy. He seemed to nutter in long 
jumps like a goose. Of course, the lesser 
gravitation . . . 

This was Mars — just a lot of thin 
sick-looking grass, spreading in all directions. The sky was a very dark "blue, 
almost black overhead, where faint 
stars twinkled. There was a singing 
in his ears which he had noticed at high 
altitudes in the Rockies. It came from 
the low air density. 

Then he noticed that springing at 
thirty degrees from each other, from 
his feet across the grass, were two 
shadows, one fainter than the other. 
And despite the chill breeze there was 
warmth on the back of his neck. 

He turned. There were two suns 
hanging in the sky, bright and white. 
Both were considerably smaller than 
the Sun he had known on Earth and 
one of them was appreciably smaller 
than the other. 

He was no astronomer but he realized there was something definitely out 
of order here. However, before he could 
think about it much, Malatesta came up 
in long floating strides from somewhere 
along the great length of wreckage. 

"Since you're up," he said, "you can 
give me a hand with things. Well, what 
do you think .of Mars ?" 

Johns gestured toward the two suns. 
"I don't get that." 

Malatesta said, "Perhaps you're not 
quite awake yet. It's obvious enough. 
I told you — you and me are the only two 
left alive — anywhere" 

Johns grappled with his incredulity. 



110 STARTLIN 

"You mean?" 

"I mean that smaller sun up there is 
the Earth we left three months ago. I 
don't know who threw the bomb that 
started the chain reaction or whether 
it was too many bombs at once. I don't 
even know who won the war. I guess we 
did — we're the only survivors." 

Johns gave a long sigh. The immense 
tragedy of it seemed to come pressing 
down from the sky onto his shoulders. 
He felt like Dante gazing into the Inferno — abandoned by Virgil, left utterly alone, not knowing the way out. 
He was the last of his kind. Malatesta 
didn't count. Malatesta was an insensitive ape. 

He felt the tears trying to come 
again and he fought to keep them back. 
Malatesta would sneer. Then he thought, 
"What the hell do I care what he thinks? 
Why should I accept his judgment on 
what is right behavior? He's no more 
than a half-educated hoodlum." 

Nevertheless he turned his face away 
and bowed his head, lest Malatesta 
should see. 

"What are you doing — composing an 
epic poem about it?" said Malatesta sarcastically. "You're wasting your time. 
There's no one left to read it — except 
me. And I'm tone-deaf. Snap out of 
it. We're going to live. Therefore, we 
shall want living quarters. Come back 
to the wreck and help me." 



CHAPTER II 

The Curio 



ALATESTA'S idea of being 
helped meant that when he said, 
"Carry that outside" or "Bring that 
here" Johns was to do it immediately 
and alone. Whenever Johns found a 
thing too heavy to lift Malatesta would, 
grumbling and impatient, take one end 
of it with a vigor which made it plain 
that he could have carried the whole 
thing himself without effort. 

But it was mainly by Johns' labor 



STORIES 

that the rough shack, with its table, 
chairs and couches, was built from suitable portions of the wreckage. 

"Right," said Malatesta, surveying it. 
"That's good enough for now. It'll keep 
this damned wind off anyway. Now 
for a meal. It's lucky the cook's galley 
wasn't too badly burnt — even though 
the atomic heaters are no good. The 
whole system is smashed. 

"But the food-store and the refrigerator vault stood up to it. There's 
plenty of grub in them. Go get a couple 
of loaves, a can of beef, some butter 
and cheese and crackers — we'll find 
ways of cooking some other time. Here 
are the keys." 

"What about doing a bit of work 
yourself?" Johns broke in angrily. "Do 
you think I'm the maid-of -all-work here? 
I've done enough — far more than my 
share. You go and get the food." 

Malatesta looked at him searchingly. He tossed the little bunch of keys 
in the air, caught it on its slow descent. 

"Right," he said again. "If that's 
the way you want it." 

"It's only fair — " began Johns in a 
high protesting voice but Malatesta 
turned on his heel and went. 

He returned presently with the food 
and made a pile of sandwiches on the 
table. He drew up the couch alongside, 
lay back on it comfortably and reached 
for the top sandwich. Johns watched 
him eat two, then put his hand out tentatively for the third. 

"Hands off!" snapped Malatesta. "No 
work, no eat. That's how it is. That's 
how it's going to be. That's how it always was — I didn't run a soup kitchen, 
you know. My workers had to work for 
their grub." 

Johns stared at him. Then he said 
with quiet acidity, "You're wrong with 
both your facts and your analogy. Firstly, I have worked — hard. Secondly, I'm 
not one of your employees. On that 
ship we all had equal standing. Half 
that food is mine." 

"No it isn't," said Malatesta with his 
mouth full. "You're wrong with your 
facts. We all had equal standing on the 
ship — yes. There were twenty-six of us. 



M 



THE TWO 

That makes your share of the food one 
twenty-sixth, not a half. The second 
thing to understand is — we're not on the 
ship now." 

"That's a childish kind of sophistry. 
The others are dead. They have no 
use for food." 

"How do you know? Did you ask 
them? No — you just want to take it 
because they're helpless to stop you. 
That's all right. I agree with your 
philosophy and I'll underwrite it. I take 
the food, not only because they're helpless to stop me but because you are 
also." 

"I see, Malatesta," said Johns, deliberately. "Might is right with you, 
eh?" 

"You've got it, son." Malatesta helped 
himself to another sandwich. "That's 
what I believe because it's the truth." 

"It isn't," flashed Johns. "You know 
it isn't. That's what you believe but 
only because it suits you to." 

"Everybody believes what they'd like 
to believe. You only believe in a system of equal shares for all because 
you're weak — too weak to fight for 
your share. So you invent this thing you 
call social justice to get your share for 
you, so that you don't starve. You believe in social justice because it suits 
you to. I'll take the survival of the 
fittest — that suits me." 

"Then I take it that you intend to 
starve me to death ?" 

"Mr. Johns, you take a very pessimistic view of things. The food is yours 
— all of it — if you can take it from me. 
Of course, I could break your neck with 
one hand — that's a risk you'd have to 
take. Or you could kill me if you could 
think of a method. Again you'd be at 
a slight disadvantage. I have this, you 
see — and you haven't." 

HE pulled an old-fashioned automatic pistol from his pocket and held 
it balanced on his palm. 

"A curio," he said, "but lethal. It was 
my grandfather's. He was an Italian 
who went over to the States to set up 
business — in nineteen twenty-four, it 
was. He ran a gang of bootleggers and 



SHADOWS 111 

made a pile. When Prohibition was repealed he went into legitimate business. It became the family business. I 
owe much to him." 

"Including your ideas on morality, no 
doubt, you filthy hoodlum." 

Malatesta was off the couch in a 
bound. The pistol butt caught Johns on 
the bridge of his nose. He went over 
backward with a yelp of surprise and 
pain. The blood ran thickly from his 
nostrils. He blew and spluttered. 

"Oh, stop squawking," said Malatesta. "That was only a love tap. I doubt 
if it's even broken your nose-bone. Regard it as a warning. I don't resent your 
insult as such — they're just words. 
What I don't like and won't have is your 
acting as though you're superior to me. 
You're not in any way. 

"People learn from life, my friend, 
not from books. Experience is the only 
teacher — maybe you think you are. 
You've taught a lot of kids a lot of 
nonsense in your time. But you've nothing to teach me. You don't know anything. You don't even know that your 
college education and Nobel Prize don't 
qualify you as a superman — or even as 
a man." 

Johns was holding a bloody handkerchief to his nose. His head still hurt 
from the landing crash and now it hurt 
in another place. But the worse hurt 
was to his sense of dignity. He had 
been caught by surprise and yelped 
likeHe had yelped like one of his own 
pupils many years ago. Somehow, he 
always remembered coming up silently 
that day behind young Perkins, who was 
absorbed in a comic when he should 
have been absorbed in Euclid. He remembered the joyous little spasm of 
power-feeling as he twisted the boy's 
ear and puller his head around — to face 
his master. 

He had been the master then. 
It wasn't nearly so good being the pupil. He resented it fiercely. He hated 
Malatesta. If there was a way to kill 
him he would — 

No, he mustn't think that. That was 
giving way to blind passion. He was 



112 STARTLING 

above that now. One could never be a 
master if one couldn't control his own 
passions. He that ruleth his spirit is 
better than he that taketh a city. 

Detachedly he wondered if young 
Perkins had felt like killing him on 
that far-off day. 

He must control himself with this 
roughneck. He must feel himself superior but not make a parade of it. But 
he must never, never allow himself to 
feel inferior, certainly never act as one. 

"You want to earn a cup of coffee?" 
asked Malatesta suddenly. 

Johns, still holding his handkerchief 
to his nose, nodded. He would not trust 
himself to say anything. He might be 
too sarcastic. 

"Right. Take that bucket. There's a 
water channel about two miles off in 
that direction. I saw it just before the 
smash. Bring back the bucket full and 
you can have your coffee and — I'll be 
generous — a couple of sandwiches." 

Johns picked up the bucket and went 
off slowly over the long thin grass, his 
two shadows moving ahead of him. 

This first sally into unexplored Mars 
should have been a great moment. Instead it presented itself as a wearisome task. It was Malatesta's fault, of 
course — his brutal materialism was 
death to all poetry and wonder and 
beauty. He poisoned romance. He belittled the really big things of life and 
magnified the pin-pricks. He'd have to 
be careful not to adopt his stunted 
values. 

Damn his nose — would it never stop 
bleeding? His handkerchief was like a 
red flag. His face seemed to be little but 
a throbbing proboscis. He had never 
been struck before in his life. It seemed 
to have knocked his sense of values spinning. 

IT was all wrong. He should be overwhelmed by the tragedy of the 
sudden end of homo sapiens. But he had 
seen that coming for too long. It had 
happened at last, that was all. 

He felt a certain sense of loss but it 
was for the Acropolis, for the Uffizi Galleries, the Louvre, the Sistine Chapel, 



STORIES 

the Taj Mahal — not for the lately living 
people of Earth. The hills that Shakespeare had walked on around Stratfordon-Avon, the City of London, redolent 
with history . . . 

He had had no living relatives. As for 
the rest of his fellows, he had known 
few, respected fewer, loved none. None 
except his traveling companions on the 
Nuova Vita. That had been his real 
world. That was where he belonged, 
where he had found himself at last, 
among the elite. The loss of those people was a far greater tragedy than the 
loss of Earth. 

The voice of one of the elite bellowed 
after him. "What are you trying to do 
— walk backwards? I want that coffee 
today. Get a move on." 

Johns made a noise between a groan 
and a grow). "Shut up, you slimy thug !" 
he hissed in sick hatred. But he knew 
that Malatesta was too far away to hear 
him. Nevertheless he quickened his 
pace. 

His handkerchief had become a sodden useless ball. Irritably he threw it 
to the ground. It alit on what had 
seemed to be a small gray stone halfhidden in the grass. The stone came 
alive with a leap and bounded off like 
a rabbit, giving a back kick with its rear 
legs. It was like an earless rabbit with 
the smooth gray skin of a mouse. 

He watched it until it had vanished 
in the distance. So there was animal 
life on Mars after all. An irrational hope 
sprang within him. Were there somewhere intelligent Martians who could 
paint and sculpt and build, make music 
and write, think and discuss? 

The great telescopes on the Moon, 
their magnification unhampered by any 
blurring atmosphere, had raked the 
planet for signs of intelligent life and 
seen none. Empty deserts of red dust, 
yes, and vast green plains. But not a 
town anywhere. 

Most of the mapped canals were there 
but it seemed that the regularity of 
them had been an optical illusion. They 
were no straighter than any river. Thert 
was no more plan to them than to the 
Grand Canyon. So people had dropped 



THE TWO 

the description "canals" and called them 
what Schiaparelli had really called 
them — channels. 

Ahead of him now he could see the 
line across the broad strip of green 
that was one of these channels. Despite 
the lift given by the lesser gravity it 
seemed an age before he reached it. 

There wasn't much to it then. The 
grass was longer and greener at its 
banks and that was about all. Compared 
with some of the other channels it was 
but a thread — fifty feet across. The 
water was pale blue, clear and cold. He 
could see where the soil ended and the 
rock-bed began. There was moss on 
the rocks at the bottom and he could 
have sworn that he saw one green 
rock move — a crustacean, surely. 

The banks were just earth and rock 
— without trace of any Martian engineering. The water seemed to have worn 
its own channel. He tried to put the silly hope out of his head. 

He drank, then washed the blood 
from his face. His nose had stopped giving but not hurting. He filled the bucket 
and took a last look around. The channel went waveringly from horizon to 
horizon. The other bank looked the 
same as the one he was standing on. 

The long grass waved silently in the 
wind. There was nothing else to see. He 
turned his back on it and set out for 
the great ragged shape of the wreck 
under the two small bright suns. It was 
the only prominent feature in the fiat 
landscape. 

Presently he trod on something that 
rolled beneath his foot. He stumbled 
and spilt about a third of the water. 
Then he picked up the object. It was 
a knob' of rock, twice the size of a man's 
fist. 

As he inspected it his heart began to 
quicken. That irrational hope returned. 
Surely, surely, it had been consciously 
shaped? There were deep eye-sockets, a 
jutting nose, the suggestion of a mouth 
and chin. A primitive attempt at a human head or a badly weather-worn but 
comparatively modern one? Or — was it 
just his own wishful thinking? 

Perhaps — there could have been vwy 



SHADOWS US 

little erosion in this climate. But it 
looked as good as many museum pieces 
he had seen. He put it in his pocket and 
resumed his journey. 

When he got back all the sandwiches 
were gone and Malatesta said, "Why the 
hell didn't you fill the bucket?" 

However, Malatesta had got some 
utensils from the ship and started a fire 
with splintered bookshelves. Johns went 
and got some more bread from the foodstore. 



CHAPTER HI 
And One Makes Three 



AFTER they had finished the coffee they lay back and smoked. 
Johns got out the stone head and 
looked it over closely. 

"What's that?" said Malatesta lazily. 
Johns told him what he thought it 
might be. Malatesta was merely amused. 
He gave the thing a rough examination 
and tossed it back. 

"Meteorite," he said. "You can see 
where it's pitted by the friction." 
"But the shape?" 

"Have you ever been to the Garden of 
the Gods, near Colorado Springs? The 
place is — was — lousy with chunks of 
rock that look like heads. You're just 
superimposing a pattern subjectively, 
like Lowell peering at this planet from 
Flagstaff a century ago and making neat 
little maps of the canals. Or like a patient of Rorschach's — the gink who 
started the psychiatrists playing the 
ink-blot game. 

Johns looked at him with surprise. 
Malatesta then was not wholly a throwback to his gangster grandfather despite his brutality and his deliberately 
coarse and ungrammatical speech. 
Sometime, somewhere, he had read 
books and some of it had stuck. 

"I prefer to think it's the work of 
an intelligence," said Johns, shortly. 

"Naturally. You believe what you 
want to believe like I said. You hope 
somewhere you'll find intelligent com


114 STARTUP" 

panionship — not like mine. Me, I don't 
go for poetry or anything else that ain't 
any good to me." 

"Your disapproval doesn't destroy 
the value of poetry," said Johns. "It's 
an eternal and indestructible value, far 
nbove your or my criticism. The same 
goes for any of the art forms — and 
Truth and Beauty and Goodness." 

He breathed the last words so that 
the capitals were almost visibly apparent. 

Malatesta, on the couch, regarded 
the glowing end of his cigarette. Then 
lie said, slowly, thinking it out, "The 
sonnet form was a human invention — 
and it died with humanity. So did any 
standards of art form whatsoever. They 
were pretty unstable even when they 
existed — yesterday's art is today's 
laugh. 

"Most of the naked Venuses of the 
so-called Old Masters are fat, unsightly lumps by the Two Thousand and 
Three A.D. standards of feminine beauty. Beauty is a matter of fashion, nothing more. If Mona Lisa had tried to get 
a job in the New York TV studios as an 
actress she'd have been told to go home 
and find her eyebrows." 

"And how do you dispose of Goodness?" 

"Just another matter of custom. Cannibalism was evil in America. In Polynesia not so long ago your grandmother's shade would have felt horribly 
slighted if you hadn't eaten her corpse 
and so absorbed her good qualities. 

"I could give you a thousand examples of the same act being thought good 
in one place and evil in another. And 
you can kill people with kindness, you 
know. As for truth — no one's answered 
Pilate yet." 

Johns stared at him. "I'm darned if 
I can make you out," he said. "One minute you talk like a thick-eared mugg and 
the next like a university graduate." 

Malatesta laughed a fat laugh of selfsatisfaction. "I've been both. And I'm 
schizophrenic." 

"You're all wrong anyway. We try 
to superimpose patterns on material, 
certainly. But these patterns are eter


i STOK1BS 

nal standards which we glimpse through 
our imagination and try to record so 
that others may see them more clearly." 

"If the patterns are eternal why do 
they change so often?" 

"They don't. It's our imperfect vision, 
bad guesses and fumbling execution. 
Truth is outside of us and eternal." 

Malatesta said, "The pragmatists 
don't think so and I'm a pragmatist. All 
thought is personal and purposive. Abstracts are figments. A judgment which 
is not prompted by motives is impossible. The only test of a truth is — does it 
work? If it doesn't it's meaningless." 

"The opinion of the majority is 
against you." 

"What majority? Listen, son — wake 
up! There's just you and me and no 
one else. There ain't a majority. My belief is just as good as yours." 

JOHNS was shocked into consideration. He looked at his feet, thinking 
— if there are only two people in the 
world and one is a paranoiac and the 
other a manic depressive, what are the 
tests of sanity? Where are the standards of rational behavior? 

Then he said, "I don't mean to be offensive. I have had more training in 
these things. My greater experience ( 
can be regarded as the majority." 

Malatesta gave him the Bronx cheer, 
for old tradition. 

"Can be regarded — by whom?" he 
jeered. "Only you, of course. I'm two 
hundred pounds — or was on Earth — to 
your hundred and forty. I'll choose to 
regard that extra sixty pounds of rae 
as the majority." 

"On the other hand I'm taller than 
you," snapped Johns spitefully. He knew 
he was talking foolishness. 

"But I'm the better pool player," said 
Malatesta suavely, completing the reductio ad absurdum. 

"This is nonsense!" cried Johns, angrily. "You can't just ignore history and 
pretend that this is the beginning of the 
world. What about Buddha and Aristotle and Lao-Tsze and — " 

Malatesta swung around and pointed 
violently upward, over the wreck, at the 



THE TWO 

sky. "What about them?" he flung back. 
"See that star? It's just a star among 
a billion other stars. There may have 
been saints and sinners on the others 
too — and where is their wisdom now? 
That's finished, written off. 

"I'm not pretending this is the beginning of the world — it is the beginning of the world as far as I'm concerned — my world !" 

And in that moment, as Malatesta sat 
rigid with his arm upflung, a form 
emerged slowly from the wreck. Both 
men stared at it. "A Martian !" thought 
Johns, suddenly flushing with a new excitement. "A Martian!" 

Malatesta let his arm fall. He swore 
under his breath. "This certainly is the 
beginning of the world," he said. "And 
how! Johns, here comes our majority." 

She was dazed and her white dress 
was barred with black dirt and her fingers were bleeding. She was small, brunette, rather plump and they didn't recognize her as first. 

"It's the nurse," said Johns, suddenly, 
recalling the face when it wasn't 
smudged and tear-stained. She had been 
a quiet little thing, keeping well in the 
background, and her services had not 
been required during the voyage. He 
hadn't heard her exchange a word with 
anyone and he wasn't sure of her name 
though he had heard it. 

While he stood there, remembering 
her, Malatesta walked out to meet her. 
Johns cursed himself for his slowness. 
Malatesta picked her up, carried her 
over the wreckage-strewn grass and laid 
her on the couch. 

"Get her a drink of water, beautiful 
dreamer," he said. 

Presently they got her story in a 
faint Nebraskan accent. It was short. 
She had been in the women's lavatory 
when the crash came. She didn't remember anything after that except 
awakening in darkness under a load 
of wreckage and fighting for hours, 
pulling and pushing at the stuff, to get 
out. 

She recalled scarcely more of what 
happened before that. She had only the 
sketchiest memory of the ship and the 



SHADOWS 115 

voyage. She remembered there were 
people. Just people — no names to them. 
She didn't remember Malatesta and 
Johns. 

"I thought I'd gone right through 
what's, left of the ship," said Malatesta. "Didn't think of the ladies' room. 
Maybe I've got loss of memory too. 
What's your name?" 

She didn't remember. She knew she 
came from Ogallala on the south fork of 
Platte River and had been a nurse. 

Malatesta said, "We'll have to call 
you something." 

"What about just 'Nurse' ?" suggested 
Johns. 

Malatesta rubbed his dark bristly 
jowls. "Nope. We'll call her Madge." 

"Madge?" echoed Johns. 

"Short for Majority, wideawake. Do 
I have to explain everything?" 



CHAPTER IV 
Rabbit on the Run 



THE next morning, Johns was awakened by the clang of the bucket 
dropping beside him. 

"More water," said Malatesta, standing over him. "I want breakfast." 

Johns got up. "And a shave, too, no 
doubt," he murmured. 

"Hell, no. I'm never shaving again. 
From now on I make my own social conventions." 

"I'll come with you, Tom," said 
Madge. 

As they walked side by side over the 
grass she said quietly, "He doesn't like 
you, does he?" 

"The feeling is mutual. We haven't 
a thing in common. By the way, do 
you like poetry?" 

"I — I think so. I don't know much 
about it." 

"I could teach you if you're willing 
to learn. He isn't. You know, whether 
Art lives or dies depends wholly on you." 

"Huh?" 

"Art it the communication of feelings, ideas, standards. I am an artist in 



: STARTLING 
a vacuum — with no one to communicate 
to. Actually an artist can't exist without an audience. No one ever writes or 
paints for himself alone. Those that pretend to were thinking of posterity. It's 
possible that we'll have no posterity. 
Will you be my audience, Madge?" 

She smiled for the first time. She 
had nice teeth. "Sure, I'll try to be appreciative." 

"Thanks a lot." 

All the way to the channel and back 
he expressed himself to her — his moods, 
his ideas, his fancies. He didn't give her 
much chance to talk. 

As he was explaining to her his own 
theory of what Picasso had been getting at she exclaimed suddenly, "Ooh! 
What's that?" She pointed to a moving 
object in the grass. 

He broke off, rather irritated by her 
branching attention: he'd thought she 
was absorbing the whole of it. 

"Oh, that," he said. "There's plenty 
of 'em about. I call 'em Martian rabbits." 

"Wonder if they're good to eat?" 

"One day we'll have to find out. That 
food-store isn't going to last forever. 
Perhaps we'll finish up eating grass, 
like Nebuchadnezzar." 

"Neb — who's he?" 

A bit wearily he explained. 

Three more days passed and nothing 
much happened except that the wind 
died down and became almost imperceptible, and the heat of the two suns could 
be more strongly felt. Malatesta seemed 
content to lounge, sleep, smoke and be 
sarcastic at Johns' expense. His one 
other diversion was Madge. What irked 
Johns was that Madge didn't seem to 
mind. In fact it was becoming plain 
that she preferred Malatesta's company 
to his. 

On the fourth morning the split became apparent. 

"Get the water," said Malatesta, so 
tersely and contemptuously that Johns 
grabbed the bucket with the wild idea of 
swinging it at that bristling contemptuous face. But an anticipatory pain in the 
nose caused him to throttle the intention. 



STORIES 

Instead he gripped the bucket firmly 
and said, "Isn't it about time we moved 
to the channel-side? Then we'd have 
water on tap. Anyway this is an unhealthy spot. That ship's beginning to 
smell." 

"I don't mind the smell," said Malatesta, "and all the water I need is 
brought to me. I like it here. There's a 
convenient larder with a lock on the 
door. There's nothing like that along 
by the channel." 

"There may be all sorts of things better than that if we look around. We've 
never tried to explore any of this planet. We've scarcely moved from the ship." 

"I'll think about it when I have to," 
said Malatesta. "Not before." 

"You're some organizer," said Johns 
bitterly. "You haven't done a thing." 

"You're some writer. You haven't 
written a line." 

"What's the use?" cried Johns. 
"There's no one left to appreciate it." 

"Exactly. Why bother? We all do 
it to cut a figure, don't we? And if 
there's no one to applaud us . . ." Malatesta shrugged. 

"You don't claim you were an artist?" 

MALATESTA regarded Johns with 
a queer look that combined derision and defense. 

"In a way, yes. A better way than 
yours at that. Art is only expression. 
You express yourself merely in words. I 
in action. Try my way. You may get to 
like it. Begin now — go and get that 
water." 

"To hell with the water!" exploded 
Johns and flung the bucket away violently. It landed, bounced slowly and 
rolled across the grass to where Madge 
sat. She got up and walked across to the 
two men. 

"Don't hit him, Jack," she said. 

"I'm not going to," said Malatesta. 
"It's impossible to teach this guy. He 
thinks he knows it all. I could see it 
would come to this. Here's your marching orders, Mr. Know-All. Clear off. 
Fend for yourself. I'm tired of keeping 
you. You don't belong in my world. 
You contribute nothing but belly-aching. 



THE TWO 

Scram out of here and don't come back." 

Johns went a little pale and compressed his lips. "I was going anyway. 
I can't stomach this emperor and slave 
routine any more. You're mad and 
you're best left alone. Come on, Madge, 
we'll go start our own world." 

Madge said, "I'm staying with Jack." 

"What?" said Johns and looked appalled. "Why, for heaven's sake? He'll 
only make a slave out of you. He's impossible to live with. Is it because he's 
got the food? You don't have to worry 
about that. There's plenty of rabbits 
for us and shellfish and water. We might 
find edible vegetation somewhere." 

"It isn't that," cut in Madge, irritably. "I'm staying with Jack because I 
prefer to. He's got the right ideas. And 
he's a man." 

Malatesta grinned suddenly and put 
his arm about her waist. Johns felt a 
queer sharp pain. It was loneliness stabbing at him. It was as if he had been 
shut out of life, alone, unwanted. 

"But — " he said weakly. "But I 
thought, Madge, you understood." 

"You bore me sick," she said. "Yatter-yatter-yatter all the time about 
things that don't matter any more. Your 
feet don't touch the ground anywhere. 
I want a family. I want kids and a man 
who knows how to bring 'em up. Can 
you imagine what it'd be like for me 
with you, doing things your way? 

"I'd be doing all the man's work, 
while you'd be sitting with the kids, 
pumping 'em full of poetry and highfalutin' useless stuff, teaching 'em 
everything but how to look after themselves. That's the only important thing 
in this world — how to look after yourself. There's no college here to feed 
you just for lecturing." 

"The majority, you see, Johns, is on 
my side," said Malatesta, his grin 
broadening. 

All at once Johns hated them both 
with impotent fury. He turned away 
and walked toward the bucket. 

Malatesta's grin vanished. "Leave 
the bucket!" he snapped. "That's my 
property. Leave everything except yourself." 



SHADOWS 11T 

Johns bent and picked up the stone 
shaped like a head. 

"I trust you will allow me to take 
this?" he said with gritty mock-politeness. 

"Sure. Start a museum with it. Now 
git!" 

Without a backward glance Johns 
went. The world was against him. It 
seemed idiotic to think of one man and 
one woman as "the world" but factually 
it was very nearly true. 

He had a mad impulse to smash things 
and there was nothing to smash except 
the weak bending grass-stalks. Then a 
"rabbit" crossed his path and instantly he smashed the stone down on top of 
it and broke the creature's back. 

With that killing, the violence ebbed 
from his system, left him feeling weak 
and empty. He stared down at the 
broken mouse-skinned body. It looked 
pitifully small and lonely. 

Unconsciously he identified it with 
himself and regretted his unplanned action. He might have caught the creature, tamed it, made a friend of it. If 
anyone ever needed a friend he did. 

He picked up the stone thoughtfully 
and walked on. Presently he stopped, 
went back and picked up the rabbit. 
Perhaps a fellow couldn't help relapsing to childhood sometimes and feeling 
a need for pets and dolls to confide Ms 
troubles to. All the same he had to 
eat. He was on his own now. He must 
learn to be self-reliant. 

He strode on, frowning, the stone in 
one hand and the rabbit in the other. 
What was it Emerson had said about 
self-reliance? 

After a time he forgot Emerson, and 
by practise became expert in using the 
head as a throwing stone. He could hit 
a rabbit on the run at ten paces. 



CHAPTER V 
The Bonfire 



A FORTNIGHT later Johns floated 
on his back in the channel, gazing up into the dark blue sky at the two 



118 STARTLING 

small suns and the faint stars. The air 
was still, the blue water placid. It was 
quiet and nothing disturbed the peace 
or threatened to. 

And he felt like screaming. 

Sometimes in the turmoil of Earth he 
had dreamed of life on a desert island. 
Once he had seriously thought of going 
into a monastery. 

"Utter fool !" Tie said aloud. One thing 
he had learned — he was not by temperament a hermit. But then, Robinson Crusoe had had his Man Friday, his parrot, 
his goat. And the monks had fellow 
monks — and books. 

How he longed for books! Even so 
they were only a substitute for the spoken word. Oh, for someone to speak to — 
even Malatesta! The man was not unintelligent although he was a brute. If 
he, Johns, had kept his temper they 
might have got along after a fashion. 

Madge he still thought of with bitterness. She had not even troubled to argue 
with him. She had listened to him in 
silence, thinking only of him as a fool. 
It still hurt. But why should he consider her opinion worth anything? She was 
the fool, not he. 

If only she had not at first seemed so 
pleasant. And if only she weren't so 
pretty. . . . 

Why should she keep drifting into his 
mind's eye? Why should he bother to 
waste another thought on her ? She was 
perfectly matched with Malatesta. A 
pair of pragmatists. They could, no 
doubt, raise a family of pragmatists, 
all of them unaware of the eternal 
truths because there was no poet to 
instruct them. A tribe without poetry. 

He floated, with the water dulling his 
ears, quoting aloud the Caliph in Hassan. " 'Ah, if there shall ever ariBe a nation whose people have forgotten poetry 
. . . though their city be greater than 
Babylon of old, though they mine a 
league into earth or mount to the stars 
on wings — what of them?' " 

What had Hassan answered ? " 'They 
will be a dark patch upon the world.' " 

He tried to recall more of it and was 
impatient because he could not. He 
stared up at Earth, thinking of all lite 



STORIES 

literature that had perished. 

Pater had advised the world to "burn 
with a hard, gemlike-flame." Now it was 
doing it — literally. In Earth's dark history there had been many a "burning 
of the books." This, the last, could never be surpassed. It was a funeral pyre 
and no Phoenix would arise from the 
ashes. 

Not unless he did something about it. 

The gloom that sat heavily upon him 
seemed to form itself into as heavy a 
cloak of responsibility, a garment he 
had tried to ignore, had tried to pretend was something else. 

There had been a good library in 
the NvA>va Vita. Much technical stuff 
but also a fine selection of literature 
intended for preservation. How much of 
it had been destroyed in the smash? It 
was his duty to preserve what was left. 

Probably it was the last remnant of 
culture in the Solar System. So far as 
he could judge from a fortnight's trudging up and down the channel-side, peering at the distances, there was no sign 
of any Martian civilization, old or new. 
Perhaps there had never been one. 

He had spent hours examining the 
stone head and was still undecided about 
it. Perhaps Malatesta had been right 
— perhaps he was reading a pattern into 
the chance work of nature merely because he wanted to see that pattern. On 
the other hand he might be just as right 
himself. 

Surely, here on Mars, the eternal values reigned and had been glimpsed by 
some sentient indigenous creatures? 
This carven head was a sign, a symbol, 
a reassurance of that. Sometimes he was 
sure of it and glowed with excitement. 
At those times life would flood with 
meaning again. 

And then at others the stone became 
a lifeless lump in his hands, drained 
of<significance, just a gray-black meteorite. Then everything, including himself, was purposeless and of no more 
account than the dead stone. 

No, the only chance was the books. He 
must get them. 

Spurred by the resolution, he swam 
to the bank. 



THE TWO 

T^VERYTHING looked much as be■*V fore around the wreck except that 
at a little distance from the shack a 
large bright fire burned, sending up a 
wavering column of black smoke. As he 
neared it he could see Malatesta sitting 
on his couch by the fire. There was a 
heap on the ground at his side and occasionally Malatesta reached out, took 
something from the heap, threw it into 
the fire. 

Johns looked around hopefully for 
the small plump figure of Madge, She 
was nowhere in sight. 

When he was close enough to see just 
what Malatesta was doing he gave 
something between a shriek and a shout 
and ran toward the fire. 

"Stop that!" he yelled. "Stop it, I 
say !" 

Malatesta looked up at him calmly. 
"Thought I told you to stay away from 
here." 

"Don't put any more of those books 
on the fire. I warn you," said Johns, 
breathlessly. 

"You're a bit late. We've had the 
fire going for over a week." 

"You vandal !" Johns dropped his 
throwing stone and knelt by the fire. 
It was all burning books, a tangle of 
charring gilt edges, leather bindings, 
printed rice paper. 

He raked out one that had not properly caught and burned his fingers slapping at the smoldering spine. He 
dropped the book. It fell open at a page 
that began complacently, We can, I believe, take it for granted that in the 
world of 2200, which we are trying to 
foresee with our imagination, the present ideological conflicts will have resolved themselves and mankind will 
have united under a common liberal 
education. . . . 

In a spasm of bitter disgust he 
thrust the book back into the flames. 

"Make up your mind," said Malatesta, sarcastically. 

Johns glared at him. "There is no 
need for this sort of thing. The grass 
provides endless fuel. You've only got to 
pull it up and let it dry. As I've done." 

"Ah, but you didn't have any books. 



SHADOWS 119 

They burn longer than grass and give 
more heat. I prefer warmth to idealism." 

"You'll have to make do with grass 
in future. I want those books." 

Malatesta looked him up and down 
apprisingly. 

"Your fortnight in the wilderness 
seems to have toughened you up. Nevertheless I could still beat you up with one 
hand. So quit talking that way." 

"It won't always be like this," said 
Johns between his teeth. "You're too 
fond of that couch. You're running to 
fat and self-indulgence. I'm getting 
stronger." 

"Come back when you think you're 
strong enough," said Malatesta with 
steel in his voice. "I'll be ready for you. 
So will my sons — there'll be a lot of 
'em and they'll be tough — because I 
know how to bring 'em up." 

"Brought up on your philosophy 
they'll be a generation of vipers." 

Malatesta clenched his fist hard. In 
the same instant Johns grabbed his 
throwing stone and stood up. They regarded each other, frozen, tense. Then, 
slowly, Malatesta let his hand open. 

"You still don't like my ideas, huh?" 

"They're the quintessence of evil. You 
could build nothing from them but a 
soulless hell." 

Malatesta gave a short, hard laugh. 
"That's funny. I've always regarded 
you as the serpent in this particular 
Garden of Eden." 

"Your mistake. You're the serpent in 
these parts." 

"As I recall it," said Malatesta, "the 
serpent made Eve eat of the forbidden 
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. 
That's exactly what you tried to do with 
Madge. Haven't you discovered yet that 
knowledge and happiness are incompatible? I thought you knew your Greek 
philosophy. I'd rather be a happy pig 
than an unhappy Socrates. If we're 
ignorant, Madge and me, we're happy 
in our ignorance. You and your Truth!" 

He spat and there was a confirmatory 
hiss from the fire. 

He went on, "Why must your sort always interfere, always preach, thinking you know it all and that everyone 



120 STARTLING 

else has got to think the same as you? 
It was fanatics like you who brought 
our world to destruction. We're satisfied 
with making our own little truths to 
suit ourselves — no factory stuff. 

"Each man to his own belief and let 
the other guy alone. But that's not good 
enough for you. You've got to pretend 
that yours is the only truth and try to 
stuff it down our throats. Intolerant 
fool ! What a hell you would make here 
if you had your way — as you made a 
hell upon Earth." 

"You idiot!" said Johns, fiercely. 
"Earth went up in flames simply because of millions of people like you 
making themselves a law unto themselves. You undermined the belief in 
morals which was our only hope. When 
that code fell Earth fell." 

MALATESTA seemed not to have 
heard him. He had picked up a 
book from the heap and was regarding 
its title. 

"The Works of John Keats," he said. 
"Well, well. 'Beauty is truth, truth beauty — that is all ye know on earth and all 
ye need to know.' On Earth, But this is 
Mars." 

He tossed the book casually into the 
fire. An instant later the throwing stone 
crashed against his skull and killed him. 

Johns stood over the body, fallen 
from its couch, not seeing it, not seeing 
anything but a red mist. When it cleared 
he was sick and the works of Keats had 
gone forever. 

There came a cry, the thud of a 
dropped bucket, the wash of water over 
the grass. Then Madge came running 
and flung herself on the body, sobbing 
and crying, "Jack! Jack!" ' 

Johns watched her dully for a moment. Then he went off a little way 
and lay on the grass, face downward, 
making a pillow of his arms. His head 
was whirling and he could get nothing 
straight. 

Presently, she came and stood over 
him. 

"You murderer!" 

He half-turned his head, and mumbled, "He — " He stopped. What was the 



STORIES 

use of trying to explain to her the loss 
of Keats or the chain of clashes which 
had led up to that last act of vandalism being the immediate pull on a hairtrigger? There must have been half-adozen mixed motives, which he had 
neither the ability nor the will to sort 
out now. 

"He went for his gun," he said. "It 
was self-defense." 

"That's a lie," said Madge, coldly. "He 
never had his gun. Because I had it. 
I've still got it and I'm going to use it. 
Turn around. Do you want to be shot in 
the back?" 

Slowly he turned over and sat up. 
Madge's face was pale and tearstained, but determined, and the automatic that pointed down at him was 
steady. Over her left shoulder burned 
the Earth — over her right the Sun. 

"Every time I went to get the water, 
he would give me the gun — in case I 
met you and you tried anything. He 
didn't care about himself. He could have 
killed you with one hand." 

"I guess he told you that himself," 
murmured Johns, wearily. "Okay, go 
ahead if you believe you ought to. I give 
up. Whatever you believe you're as 
right as I am. When I am gone you will 
always be wholly and absolutely right 
— until you die." 

The gun began to tremble a little. 
"I loved him," she said. "He was 
rough but — I loved that man. Now 
you've killed him. I'm going to kill you. 
That's justice." 

"If you think so. But that's an abstract he didn't believe in, of course. If 
you kill me, thinking that, I win. But is 
your motive really justice? It might be 
revenge — or anger at being deprived 
of his attentions — and his children. 
Don't give it a name. Just act how you 
feel — that was his philosophy and yours. 
I'm not afraid. What have I to live for?" 

"You killed him because you wanted 
me, didn't you?" she said. 

"If you think so. What does it matter now? Shoot — get it over with." 

"Ok!" she said, suddenly, and threw 
the gun away and burst into tears. "I 
don't want to be alone!" she sobbed. 



THE TWO 

"And I want so to have children." 

He stared at her in amazement. Then 
he got up and took hold of her, swinging her half-around. He kissed her and 
she clung to him. 

"Don't leave me alone!" she cried. 
"Don't ever leave me alone!" 

He held her, tightening his grip. "It's 
all right, Madge. We'll keep together. 
We're all that are left — anywhere." 

Over her shoulder he saw their united shadows slanting across the grass 
in a long V. Only two of them left but 
between them they had four shadows. 

It was odd but it was Malatesta's 
materialistic philosophy, adopted by 
Madge, that had now saved his life. 
Madge had let him live only because 
she needed him, because of the practical outcome. If he had succeeded in imbuing her with his abstract ideals he 
would be as dead as Malatesta. 

Had he been wrong? Would he ever 
really know? 

Was there something symbolic in the 
double shadows or was he reading patterns into things again? Here a man 
cast one shadow by the light of the sinful suicidal Earth, another by the light 
of the life-giving Sun. Wherever you 
stood you could not escape the duality. 

So long as there were the two sources 
you were bound to be affected by them 
both. You could not choose to stand only 
in the light of one. 

"We are what we are according to 
our lights," he said, under his breath. 
Madge pressed herself even closer to 
him. 

IT was some time later that he discovered that, though Malatesta's skull 
had been split open, it had been sufficiently hard to do the same to the missile which had struck it. The stone head 
was gaping apart, showing its own 
brain. 

The cells of the brain were tightpacked in the cavity — thousands of 



SHADOWS 121 

rolls of incredibly thin but tough metal 
tape, scarcely an eighth of an inch wide. 
He could just make out some of the little colored pictures on them. To those 
who had made them they must have 
been great banners, blazoning forth the 
history and knowledge of their race. 

"Think of it, Madge !" he said, excitedly. "Of all the incredible luck! To 
stumble like this on the records they 
preserved for posterity. It was a head — 
humanoid, too. I wonder where the body 
is ? We must look for it." 

"There may be lots of 'em around," 
she said. "Our people were always doing that sort of thing, weren't they?" 

"Who'd have thought the Martians 
were such tiny folk!" he said. "There 
was I, carrying this in my hand, scanning the horizons for man-sized relics. 
There must be plenty of traces but 
we'll have to look under the grass, not 
over it." 

"Uh-huh," she said, more concerned 
with the fire, which was dying down 
just as the rabbit-stew was nearing the 
boil. She reached for a book and gave it 
to him to censor. 

He glanced at it absently: 

"Lord, no, not that one! We'll need 
it when we get down to work, making 
our instruments." 

He laid Microscopy and Optical Systems on the grass beside him. 

She handed him another. He looked 
at it, and smiled. "We'll need that, too." 
He laid Obstetrics on top of the other 
book. 

Patiently she held up another for his 
inspection. 

"Brrr!" he said. "Burn that." 

She poked Income Tax Accountancy 
carefully under the pot and the flames 
gathered life. She peeped into the pot 
and was satisfied with what she saw. 
The stew was thickening nicely and they 
would have a rich supper. It seemed 
just about the most important thing in 
life to her at that moment. 



Read the Novel of Shocking Predictions — ENSLAVED BRAINS, by 
Eando Binder, complete science fiction classic in the gala Winter 
Issue of FANTASTIC STORY QUARTERLY, 25c at all stands! 



MEN of the TEN BOOKS 



By JACK 
VANCE 




THEY were as alone as it is possible 
for living man to be in the black 
gulf between the stars. Far astern shone 
the suns of the home worlds — ahead the 
outer star-s and galaxies in a fainter 
ghostly glimmer. 

The cabin was quiet. Betty Welstead 
sat watching her husband at the assay 
table, her emotions tuned to his. When 
the centrifuge scale indicated heavy 
metal and Welstead leaned forward she 
leaned forward too in unconscious sym


EVER sines THE WORLD THINKER appeared in 
Summer. 1*45, TWS. we fiave been asked, "Who 
is-JacV Vance?". His identity has been faultily surmised to be everything from ■ house by-line to 
another pseudonym for the redoubtable Henry 
Kuftner. Actually he Is a young ( thirty -i'sTi ] alumnus 
of University of California and World War Two 
Merchant Marine, where he was torpedoed twice. 
By his own account ha first thought about star travel 
on his seventh birthday and has not stopped yet. 
Hallmarks of a Vance story are a crisp polychromatic imagination, swift, welMnlegrared action and 
a solid bed of human, idealism, often nurtured ingeniously into flowerings of cynicism. His stories 
end the people and other creatures jn them hove 
a way of springing vfvidly to life — for proof, fust 
fead this story! 



122 



MEN OF THE 

pathy. When he burnt scrapings in the 
spectroscope and read Lead from the 
brightest pattern and chewed at his lips 
Betty released her pent-up breath, fell 
back in her seat. 

Ralph Welstead stood up, a man of 
medium height — rugged, tough-looking 
— with hair and skin and eyes the same 
tawny color. He brushed the whole clutter of rock and ore into the waste chute 
and Betty followed him with her eyes. 

Welstead said sourly, "We'd be millionaires if that asteroid had been inside 
the Solar system. Out here, unless it's 
pure platinum or uranium, it's not worth 
mining." 

Betty broached a subject which for 
two months had been on the top of her 
mind. "Perhaps we should start to swing 
back in." 

Welstead frowned, stepped up into the 
observation dome. Betty watched after 
him anxiously. She understood very well 
that the instinct of the explorer as much 
as the quest for minerals had brought 
them out so far. 

Welstead stepped back down into the 
cabin. "There's a star ahead" — he put a 
finger into the three-dimensional chart 
— "this one right here, Eridanus two 
thousand nine hundred and thirty-two. 
Let's make a quick check — and then 
we'll head back in." 

Betty nodded, suddenly happy. "Suits 
me." She jumped up, and together they 
went to the screen. He aimed the catchall vortex, dialed the hurrying blur to 
stability and the star pulsed out like a 
white-hot coin. A single planet made up 
the entourage. 

"Looks about Earth-size," said Welstead, interest in his voice, and Betty's 
heart sank a trifle. He tuned the circuit 
finer, turned up the magnification and 
the planet leapt at them. 

"Look at that atmosphere! Thick!" 

He swiveled across the jointed arm 
holding the thermocouple and together 
they bent over the dial. 

"N i n e t e e n degrees Centigrade. 
About Earth-norm. Let's look at that 
atmosphere. You know, dear, we might 
have something tremendous here! 
Earth-size, Earth temperature . . ." His 



TEN BOOKS 123 
voice fell off in a mutter as he peered 
through the spectroscope, flipping screen 
after screen past the pattern from the 
planet. He stood up, cast Betty a swift 
exultant glance, then squinted in sudden 
reflection. "Better make sure before we 
get too excited." 

Betty felt no excitement. She watched 
without words as Welstead thumbed 
through the catalogue. 

"Whee!" yelled Welstead, suddenly a 
small boy. "No listing! It's ours!" And 
Betty's heart melted at the news. Delay, 
months of delay, while Welstea'd explored the planet, charted its oceans and 
continents, classified its life. At the same 
time, a spark of her husband's enthusiasm caught fire in her brain and interest 
began to edge aside her gloom. 

"We'll name it 'Welstead,' " he said. 
"Or, no — 'Elizabeth' for you. A planet of 
your own! Some day there'll be cities 
and millions of people. And every time 
they write a letter or throw a shovelful 
of dirt or a ship lands — they'll use your 
name." 

"No, dear," she said. "Don't be ridiculous. We'll call it 'Welstead' — for us 
both." 

They felt an involuntary pang of disappointment later on when they found 
the planet already inhabited, and by 
men. 

"Y7TST their reception astonished them 
Mr as much as the basic discovery of 
the planet and its people. Curiosity, hostility might have been expected. . . . 

They had been in no hurry to land, 
preferring to fall into an orbit just 
above the atmosphere, the better to 
study the planet and its inhabitants. 

It looked to be a cheerful world. There 
were a thousand kinds of forest, jungle, 
savannah. Sunny rivers coursed green 
fields. A thousand lakes and three oceans 
glowed blue. To the far north and far 
south snowfields glittered, dazzled. Such 
cities as they found — the world seemed 
sparsely settled — merged indistinguishably with the countryside. 

They were wide low cities, very different from the clanging hives of Earth, 
and lay under the greenery like carv


124 



STARTLING STORIES 



ings in alabaster or miraculous snowflakes. Betty, in whose nature ran a 
strong streak of the romantic, was entranced. 

"They look like cities of Paradise — 
cities in a dream !" 

Welstead said reflectively, "They're 
evidently not backward. See that cluster 
of long gray buildings off to the side? 
Those are factories." 

Betty voiced a doubt which had been 
gradually forming into words. "Do you 
think they might — resent our landing? 
If they've gone to the trouble of creating a secret — well, call it Utopia — they 
■aight not want to be discovered." 

Welstead turned his head, gazed at 
her eye to eye. "Do you want to land?" 
he asked soberly. 

"Why, yes — if you do. If you don't 
think it's dangerous." 

"I don't know whether it's dangerous 
or not. A people as enlightened as those 
cities would seem to indicate would hardly maltreat strangers." 

Betty searched the face of the planet. 
"I think it would be safe." 

Welstead laughed. "I'm game. We've 
got to die sometime. Why not out here?" 

He jumped up to the controls, nosed 
the ship down. 

"We'll land right in their laps, right 
in the middle of that big city down 
there." 

Betty looked at him questioningly. 

"No sense sneaking down out in the 
wilds," said Welstead. "If we're landing we'll land with a flourish." 

"And if they shoot us for our insolence?" 

"Call it Fate." 

They bellied down into a park in the 
very center of the city. From the observation dome Welstead glimpsed hurrying knots of people. 

"Go to the port, Betty. Open it just a 
crack and show yourself. I'll stay at the 
controls. One false move, one dead cat 
heaved at us, and we'll be back in space 
so fast they won't remember we arrived." 

Thousands of men and women of all 
ages had surrounded the ship, all shouting, all agitated by strong emotion. 



"They're throwing flowers!" Betty 
gasped. She opened the port and stood 
in the doorway and the people below 
shouted, chanted, wept. Feeling rather 
ridiculous, Betty waved, smiled. 

She turned to look back up at Welstead. "I don't know what we've done to 
deserve all this but we're heroes. Maybe 
they think we're somebody else." 

Welstead craned his neck through the 
observation dome. "They look healthy — 
normal" 

"They're beautiful," said Betty. "All 
of them." 

The throng opened, a small group of 
elderly men and women approached. The 
leader, a white-haired man, tall, lean, 
with much the same face as Michelangelo's Jehovah, stood forth. 

"Welcome!" he called resonantly. 
"Welcome from the people of Haven !" 

BETTY stared, and Welstead clambered down from the controls. The 
words were strangely pronounced, the 
grammar was archaic — but it was the 
language of Earth. 

The white-haired man spoke on, without calculation, as if delivering a speech 
of great familiarity. "We have waited 
two hundred and seventy-one years for 
your coming, for the deliverance you 
will bring us." 

Deliverance? Welstead considered the 
word. "Don't see much to deliver 'em 
from," he muttered aside to Betty. "The 
sun's shining, there's flowers on all the 
trees, they look well-fed — a lot more enthusiastic than I do. Deliver 'em from 
what?" 

Betty was climbing down to the 
ground and Welstead followed. 

"Thanks for the welcome," said Welstead, trying not to sound like a visiting 
politician. "We're glad to be here. It's 
a wonderful experience, coming unexpectedly on a world like this." 

The white-haired man bowed gravely. 
"Naturally you must be curious — as 
curious as we are about the civilized universe. But for the present, just one question for the ears of our world. How goes 
it with Earth?" 

Welstead rubbed his chin, acutely con


MEN OF THE 

scious of the thousands of eyes, the utter 
silence. 

"Earth," he said, "goes about a-s usual. There's the same seasons, the same 
rain, sunshine, frost and wind." And the 
people of Haven breathed in his words 
as devoutly as if they were the purest 
poetry. "Earth is still the center of the 
Cluster and there's more people living 
on Earth than ever before. More noise, 
more nuisance . . 

"Wars? New governments? How far 
does science reach?" 

Welstead considered. "Wars? None to 
speak of — not since the Hieratic League 
broke up. The government still governs, 
uses lots of statistical machinery. 
There's still graft, robbery, inefficiency, 
if that's what you mean. 

"Science — that's a big subject. We 
know a lot but we don't know a lot more, 
the way it's always been. Everything 
considered it's the same Earth it's always been — some good, a lot of bad." 

He paused, and the pent breath of 
the listeners went in a great sigh. The 
white-haired man nodded again, serious, 
.sober — though evidently infected with 
the excitement that fired his fellows. 

"No more for the present ! You'll be 
tired and there's much time for talk. 
May I offer you the hospitality of my 
house?" 

Welstead looked uncertainly at Betty. 
Instinct urged him not to leave his ship. 

"Or if you'd prefer to remain aboard 
. . ." suggested the man of Haven. 

"No," said Welstead. "We'll be delighted." If harm were intended — as emphatically did not seem likely — their 
presence aboard the ship would not prevent it. He craned his neck, looked here 
and there for the officialdom that would 
be bumptiously present on Earth. 

"Is there anyone we should report to? 
Any law we'll be breaking by parking 
our ship here?" 

The white-haired man laughed. "What 
a question ! I am Alexander Clay, Mayor 
of this city Mytilene and Guide of 
Haven. By my authority and by common 
will you are free of anything the planet 
can offer you. Your ship will not be 
molested." 



TEN BOOKS 125 

He led them to a wide low car and 
Betty was uncomfortably conscious of 
her blue shorts, rumpled and untidy by 
comparison with the many-colored 
tunics of the women in the crowd. 

Welstead was interested in the car 
as providing a gauge of Haven's technics. Built of shiny gray metal it hung 
a foot above the ground, without the intervention of wheels. He gave Clay a 
startled look. "Anti-gravity? Your fortune's made." 

Clay shook his head indulgently. 
"Magnetic fields, antipathetic to the 
metal in the road. Is it not a commonplace on Earth?" 

"No," said Welstead. "The theory, of 
course, is well-known but there is too 
much opposition, too many roads to dig 
up. We still use wheels." 

Clay said reflectively, "The force of 
tradition. The continuity which generates the culture of races. The stream we 
have been so long lost from . . ." 

Welstead shot him a sidelong glance. 
Clay was entirely serious. 

THE car had been sliding down the 
road at rather high speed through 
vistas of wonderful quiet and beauty. 
Every direction showed a new and separate enchantment — a glade surrounded 
by great trees, a small home of natural 
wood, a cluster of public buildings 
around a plaza, a terrace checkered with 
trees and lined with many-colored shops. 

Occasionally there were touches of 
drama, such as the pylon at the end of 
a wide avenue. It rose two hundred feet 
into the air, a structure of concrete, 
bronze and black metal, and it bore the 
heroic figure of a man grasping vainly 
for a star. 

Welstead craned his neck like a tourist. "Magnificent!" 

Clay assented without enthusiasm. "I 
suppose it's not discreditable. Of course, 
to you, fresh from the worlds of civilization — " He left the sentence unfinished. 
"Excuse me, while I call my home." He 
bent his head to a telephone. 

Betty said in Welstead's ear, "This is 
a city every planner on Earth would sell 
his soul to build." 



1S6 



STARTLING STORIES 



Welstead grunted. "Remember Halleck?" he muttered. "He was a city planner. He wanted to tear down a square 
mile of slums in Lanchester, eighteen 
stories high on the average, nothing but 
airless three-room apartments. 

"First the real estate lobby tore into 
him, called him a Chaoticist. A rumor 
circulated among his friends that he was 
morally degenerate. The poor devils that 
lived there tried to lynch him because 
they'd be evicted. The Old Faithfuls read 
him out of the party because they pulled 
the votes of the district. The slums are 
still there and Halleck's selling farm implements on Arcturus Five." 

Betty looked off through the trees. 
"Maybe Haven will turn out to be an 
object lesson for the rest of the cluster." 

Welstead shrugged. "Maybe, maybe 
not. Peace and seclusion are not something you can show to a million people 
— because it isn't peace and seclusion 
any more." 

Betty sat up straighter in her seat. 
"The only way to convince the unbelievers is by showing them, setting them 
an example. Do you think that if the 
Lanchester slum-dwellers saw this city 
they'd go back to their three-room apartments without wanting to do something 
about it?" 

"If they saw this city," said Welstead, 
'they'd never leave Haven. By hook or 
crook, stowaway or workaway, they'd 
emigrate." 

"Inelude me in the first wave!" said 
Betty indignantly. 

The car turned into a leafy tunnel, 
crossed a carpet of bright green turf, 
stopped by a house built of dark massive wood. Four high gables in a row 
overlooked a terrace, where a stream 
followed its natural bed. The house 
looked spacious, comfortable — rather 
like the best country villas of Earth and 
the garden planets without the sense of 
contrived effect, the strain, the staging. 

"My home," said Clay. He slid back a 
door of waxed blond wood, ushered them 
into an entry carpeted with golden rattan, walled with a fabric the color of. 
the forest outside. A bench of glowing 
-dark wood crossed a wall under a framed 



painting. From no apparent source light 
flooded the room, like water in a tank. 

"One moment," said Clay with a trace 
of embarrassment. "My home is poor 
and makeshift enough without exposing 
it to your eyes at its worst." He was 
clearly sincere; this was no conventional deprecation. 

He started away, paused and said to 
his half-comprehending guests, "I must 
apologize for our backwardness but we 
have no facilities for housing notable 
guests, no great inns or embassies or 
state-houses such as must add to the 
dignity of life on Earth. I can only offer 
you the hospitality of my home." 

Welstead and Betty both protested. 
"We don't deserve as much. After all 
we're only a pair of fly-by-night prospectors." 

Clay smiled and they could see that 
he had been put more at his ease. 
"You're the link between Haven and 
civilization — the most important visitors we've ever had. Excuse me." He departed. 

Betty went to the picture on the wall, 
a simple landscape — the slope of a hill, 
a few trees, a distant range of mountains. Welstead, with small artistic sensibility, looked around for the source of 
the light — without success. He joined 
Betty beside the picture. She said halfbreathlessly. "This is a — I'm afraid to 
say it — a masterpiece." 

Welstead squinted, trying to understand the basis of his wife's awe and 
wonderment. Indeed the picture focused 
his eyes, drew them in and around the 
frame, infused him with a pleasant exhilaration, a warmth and serenity. 

Clay, returning, noticed their interest. "What do you think of it?" he asked. 

"I think it's — exceedingly well done," 
said Betty, at a loss for words which 
would convey her admiration without 
sounding fulsome. 

Clay shook his head ruefully, turned 
away. "You need not praise an inconsequentiality out of courtesy, Mrs. Welstead. We know our deficiencies. Your 
eyes have seen the Giottos, the Rembrandt?, the Cezannes. This must seem a 
poor thing." 



MEN OF THE 

BETTY began to remonstrate but 
halted. Words evidently would not 
convince Clay — or perhaps a convention 
of his society prompted him to belittle 
the works of his people and it might be 
discourteous to argue too vehemently. 

"Your quarters are being prepared," 
Clay told them. "I've also ordered fresh 
clothing for you both as I see yours are 
stained with travel." 

Betty blushed, smoothed the legs of 
her blue shorts. Welstead sheepishly 
brushed at his faded blouse. He reached 
in his pocket, pulled out a bit of gravel. 
"From an asteroid I prospected a few 
weeks ago." He twisted it around in his 
fingers. "Nothing but granite, with garnet inclusions." 

Clay took the bit of rock, inspected 
it with a peculiar reverence. "May I keep 
this?" 

"Why, of course." 

Clay laid the bit of stone on a silver 
plate. "You will not understand what 
this small stone symbolizes to us of 
Haven. Interstellar travel — our goal, 
our dream for two hundred and seventyone years." 

The recurrence of the period two hundred and seventy-one years! Welstead 
calculated. That put them back into the 
Era of the Great Excursives, when the 
over-under space-drive had first come 
into use, when men drove pell-mell 
through the galaxy, like bees through a 
field of flowers and human culture flared 
through space like a super-nova. 

Clay led them through a large room, 
simple in effect, rich in detail. Welstead's vision was not analytical enough 
to catch every particular at first. He 
sensed overall tones of tan, brown, mellow blue, watery green, in the wood, 
fabric, glass, pottery — the colors combined to marvelous effect with the waxy 
umber gleam of natural wood. At the 
end of the room a case held ten large 
books bound in black leather and these, 
by some indefinable emphasis, seemed 
to bear the significance of an icon. 

They passed through a passage open 
along one side into a garden filled with 
flowers, low trees, tame birds. Clay 
showed them into a long apartment 



TEN BOOKS 127 

streaming with sunlight. 

"Your bath is through the door," said 
Clay. "Fresh clothes are laid out on the 
bed. When you are rested I shall be in 
the main hall. Please be at leisure — the 
house is yours." 

They were alone. Betty sighed happily, sank down on the bed. "Isn't it 
wonderful, dear?" 

"It's queer," said Welstead, standing 
in the middle of the room. 

"What's queer?" 

"Mainly why these people, apparently 
gifted and efficient, act so humble, so 
self-deprecating." 

"They look confident." 

"They are confident. Yet as soon as 
the word Earth is mentioned it's like 
saying Alakland to an exiled Lak. 
There's nothing like it." 

Betty shrugged, began to remove her 
clothes. "There's probably some very 
simple explanation. Right now I'm tired 
of speculating. I'm for that bath. Water, 
water, water! Tons of it!" 

THEY found Clay in the long hall 
with his pleasant-faced wife, his 
four youngest children, whom he gravely introduced. 

Welstead and Betty seated themselves 
on a divan and Clay poured them small 
china cups of pale yellow-green wine, 
then settled back in his own seat. 

"First I'll explain our world of Haven 
to you — or have you surmised our 
plight?" 

Welstead said, "I guess a colony was 
planted here and forgotten — lost." 

Clay smiled sadly. "Our beginnings 
were rather more dramatic. Two hundred and seventy-one years ago the passenger packet Etruria, enroute to Rigel, 
went out of control. According to the 
story handed down to us the bus-bars 
fused inside the drive-box. If the case 
were opened the fields would collapse. If 
it were not the ship would fly until there 
was no more energy." 

Welstead said, 'That was a common 
accident in the old days. Usually the engineer cut away the thrust-blocks on 
one side of the hull. Then the ship flew 
in circles until help arrived." 



128 STARTLir 

Clay made a wry sad grimace. "No 
one on the Etruria thought of that. The 
ship left the known universe and finally 
passed close to a planeTthat seemed 
capable of sustaining life. The sixtythree aboard took to the life-boats and 
so landed on Haven. 

"Thirty-four men, twenty-five women, four children — ranging in age 
from Dorothy Pell, eight, to Vladimir 
Hocha, seventy-four, with representatives of every human race. We're the 
descendants of the sixty-three — three 
hundred million of us." 

"Fast work," said Betty, with admiration. 

"Large families," returned Clay. "I 
have nine children, sixteen grandchildren. From the start our guiding principle has been to keep the culture of Earth 
intact for our descendants, to teach them 
what we knew of human tradition. 

"So that when rescue came — as it 
must finally — then our children or our 
children's children could return to 
Earth, not as savages but as citizens. 
And our invaluable source has been the 
Ten Books, the only books brought down 
from the Etruria. We could not have 
been favored with books more inspiring. . . ." 

Clay's gaze went to the black bound 
books at the end of the room, and his 
voice lowered a trifle. 

"The Encyclopedia of Human 
Achievement. The original edition was 
in ten little plastrol volumes, none of 
them larger than your hand — but in 
them was such a treasury of human 
glory that never could we forget our 
ancestry, or rest in our efforts to achieve 
somewhere near the level of the great 
masters. All the works of the human 
race we set as our standards — music, 
art, literature — all were described in the 
Encyclopedia." 

"Described, you say," mused Welstead. 

"There were no illustrations ?" asked 
Betty. 

"No," said Clay, "there was small 
compass for pictures in the original edition. However" — he went to the case, 
selected a volume at random — "the 



; STORIES 

words left little to the imagination. For 
example, on the music of Bach — 'When 
Bach arrived on the scene the toccata 
was tentative, indecisive — a recreation, 
a tour de force, where the musician 
might display his virtuosity. 

" 'In Bach the toccata becomes a medium of the noblest plasticity. The theme 
he suggests by casual fingering of the 
keyboard, unrelated runs. Then comes 
a glorious burst into harmony — the original runs glow like prisms, assume stature, gradually topple together into a 
miraculous pyramid of sound.' 

"And on Beethoven — 'A God among 
men. His music is the voice of the world, 
the pageant of all imagined splendor. 
The sounds he invokes are natural 
forces of the same order as sunsets, 
storms at sea, the view from mountain 
crags.' t 

"And on Leon Bismarck Beiderbecke 
— 'His trumpet pours out such a torrent 
of ecstasy, such triumph, such overriding joys that the heart of man freezes 
in anguish at not being wholly part of 
it.' " Clay closed the book, replaced it. 
"Such is our heritage. We have tried to 
keep alive, however poorly, the stream 
of our original culture." 

"I would say that you have succeeded," Welstead remarked dryly. 

Betty sighed, a long slow suspiration. 

Clay shook his head. "You can't judge 
until you've seen more of Haven. We're 
comfortable enough though our manner 
of living must seem unimpressive in 
comparison with the great cities, the 
magnificent palaces of Earth." 

"No, not at all," said Betty but Clay 
made a polite gesture. 

"Don't feel obliged to flatter us. As 
I've said, we're aware of our deficiencies. Our music for instance — it is pleasant, sometimes exciting, sometimes profound, but never does it reach the 
heights of poignancy that the Encyclopedia describes. 

"Our art is technically good but we 
despair of emulating Seurat, who 'outlumens light,' or Braque, 'the patterns 
of the mind in patterns of color on the 
patterns of life,' or Cezanne — 'the planes 
which under the guise of natural objects 



MEN OF THE 

march, merge, meet in accord with remorseless logic, which wheel around and 
impel the mind to admit the absolute 
justice of the composition.' " 

Betty glanced at her husband, apprehensive lest he speak what she knew 
must be on his mind. To her relief he 
kept silent, squinting thoughtfully at 
Clay. For her part Betty resolved to 
maintain a noncommittal attitude. 

"No," Clay said heavily, "we do the 
best we can, and in some fields we've 
naturally achieved more than in others. 
To begin with we had the benefit of all 
human experience in our memories. The 
paths were charted out for us — we knew 
the mistakes to avoid. We've never had 
wars or compulsion. We've never permitted unreined authority. Still we've 
tried to reward those who are willing 
to accept responsibility. 

"Our criminals — very few now — are 
treated for mental disorder on the first 
and second offense, sterilized on the 
third, executed on the fourth — our basic 
law being cooperation and contribution 
to the society, though there is infinite 
latitude in how this contribution shall 
be made. We do not make society a juggernaut, A man may live as integrally 
or as singularly as he wishes so long 
as he complies with the basic law." 

Clay paused, looking from Welstead 
to Betty. "Now do you understand our 
way of living?" 

"More or less," said Welstead. "In the 
outline at least. You seem to have made 
a great deal of progress technically." 

Clay considered. "From one aspect, 
yes. From another no. We had the lifeboat tools, we had the technical skills 
and most important we knew what we 
were trying to do. Our main goal naturally has been the conquest of space. 
We've gone up in rockets but they can 
take us nowhere save around the sun 
and back. Our scientists are close on the 
secret of the space-drive but certain 
practical difficulties are holding them 
up." 

Welstead laughed. "Space-drive can 
never be discovered by rational effort. 
That's a philosophical question which 
has been threshed back and forth for 



TEN BOOKS 129 
hundreds of years. Reason — the abstract 
idea — is a function of ordinary time and 
space. The space-drive has no qualities 
in common with these ideas and for this 
reason human thought can never consciously solve the problem of the overdrive. Experiment, trial and error can 
do it. Thinking about it is useless." 

"Hm," said Clay. "That's a new concept. But now your presence makes it 
beside the point, for you will be the link 
back to our homeland." 

Betty could see words trembling on 
her husband's tongue. She clenched her 
hands, willed — willed — willed. Perhaps 
the effort had some effect because Welstead merely said, "We'll do anything 
we can to help." 

ALL of Mytilene they visited and 
nearby Tiryns, Dicte and Ilium. 
They saw industrial centers, atomic 
power generators, farms, schools. They 
attended a session of the Council of 
Guides, both making brief speeches, and 
they spoke to the people of Haven by 
television. Every news organ on the 
planet carried their words. 

They heard music from a green hillside, the orchestra playing from under 
tremendous smoke black trees. They saw 
the art of Haven in public galleries, in 
homes and in common use. They read 
some of the literature, studied the range 
of the planet's science, which was roughly equivalent to that of Earth. And they 
marveled continually how so few people in so little time could accompilsh so 
much. 

They visited the laboratories, where 
three hundred scientists and engineers 
strove to force magnetic, gravitic and 
vortigial fields into the fusion that made 
star-to-star flight possible. And the 
scientists watched in breathless tension 
as Welstead inspected their apparatus. 

He saw at a single glance the source 
of their difficulty. He had read of the 
same experiments on Earth three hundred years ago and of the fantastic accident that had led Roman-Forteski and 
Gladheim to enclose the generatrix in a 
dodecahedron of quartz. Only by such a 
freak — or by his information — would 



130 STARTL1I* 

these scientists of Haven solve the mystery of space-drive. 

And Welstead walked thoughtfully 
from the laboratory, with the disappointed glances of the technicians following him out. And Betty had glanced 
after him in wonder, and the rest of 
the day there had been a strain between 
them. 

That night as they lay in the darkness, 
rigid, wakeful, each could feel the pressure of the other's thoughts. Betty 
finally broke the silence, in a voice so 
blunt that there was no mistaking her 
feeling. 

"Ralph [ w • 

"What?" 

"Why did you act as you did in the 
laboratory ?" 

"Careful," muttered Welstead. "Maybe the room is wired for sound." 

Betty laughed scornfully. "This isn't 
Earth. These people are trusting, honest. . . ." 

It was Welstead's turn to laugh — a 
short cheerless laugh. "And that's the 
reason I'm ignorant when it comes to 
space-drive." 

Betty stiffened. "What do you mean?" 

"I mean that these people are too 
damn good to ruin." 

Betty relaxed, sighed, spoke slowly, 
as if she knew she was in for a long 
pull. "How — 'ruin?'" 

Welstead snorted. "It's perfectly 
plain. You've been to their homes, you've 
read their poetry, listened to their 
music. . . ." 

"Of course. These people live every 
second of their lives with — well, call it 
exaltation. A devotion to creation like 
nothing I've ever seen before!" 

Welstead said somberly, "They're living in the grandest illusion ever imagined and they're riding for an awful 
fall. They're like a man on a glorious 
wine drunk." 

Betty stared through the dark. "Are 
you erazy?" 

"They're living in exaltation now," 
said Welstead, "but what a bump when 
the bubble breaks!" 

"But why should it break?" cried 
Betty. "Why can'W 



STORIES 

"Betty," said Welstead with a cold 
sardonic voice, "have you ever seen a 
public park on Earth after a holiday?" 

Betty said hotly. "Yes — it's dreadful. 
Because the people of Earth have no 
feeling of community." 

"Eight," said Welstead. "And these 
people have. They're knit very tightly 
by a compulsion that made them achieve 
in two hundred-odd years what took 
seven thousand on Earth. They're all 
facing in the same direction, geared to 
the same drive. Once that drive is gone 
how do you expect they'll hold on to their 
standards?" 

Betty was silent. 

"Human beings," said Welstead 
dreamily, "are at their best when the 
going's toughest. They're either at their 
best or else they're nothing. The going's 
been tough here* — these people have 
come through. Give them a cheap living, tourist money — then what? 

"But that's not all. In fact it's only 
half the story. These people here," he 
stated with emphasis, "are living in a 
dream. They're the victims of the Ten 
Books. They take every word literally 
and they've worked their hearts out trying to come somewhere near what they 
expect the standards to be. 

"Their own stuff doesn't do half the 
things to them that the Ten Books says 
good art ought to do. Whoever wrote 
those Ten Books must have been a copywriter for an advertising agency." Welstead laughed. "Shakespeare wrote good 
plays — sure, I concede it. But I've never 
seen 'fires flickering along the words, 
gusty winds rushing through the pages.' 

"Sibelius I suppose was a great composer — I'm no expert on these things— 
but whoever listened and became 'part 
of Finland's ice, moss-smelling earth, 
hoarse-breathing forest,' the way the 
Ten Books said everyone did?" 

BETTY said, "He was merely trying 
to express vividly the essence of 
the artists and musicians." 

"Nothing wrong in that," said Welstead. "On Earth we're conditioned to 
call everything in print a lie. At least we 
allow for several hundred percent over


MEN OF THE 

statement. Theae people out here aren't 
immunized. They've taken every word 
at its face value. The Ten Books is their 
Bible. They're trying to equal accomplishments which never existed." 

Betty raised herself up on an elbow, 
saidin a voice of hushed triumph. "And 
they've succeeded! Ralph, they've succeeded! They've met the challenge, 
they've equaled or beaten anything 
Earth has ever produced! Ralph, I'm 
proud to belong to the same race." 

"Same species," Welstead corrected 
dryly. "These people are a mixed race. 
They're all races." 

"What's the difference?" Betty 
snapped. "You're just quibbling. You 
know what I mean well enough." 

"We're on a sidetrack," said Welstead 
wearily. "The question is not the people 
of Haven and their accomplishments. 
Of course they're wonderful — now. But 
how do you think contact with Earth 
will affect them? 

"Do you think they'll continue producing when the challenge is gone? When 
they find the Earth is a rookery — nagging, quarreling — full of mediocre hacks 
and cheap mischief? Where the artists 
draw nothing but nude women and the 
musicians make their living reeling out 
sound, sound, sound — any kind of sound 
— for television sound-track. Where are 
all their dreams then? 

"Talk about disappointment, staleness ! Mark my words, half the population would be suicides and the other half 
would -turn to prostitution and cheating 
the tourists. It's a tough proposition. I 
say, leave them with their dreams. Let 
them think we're the worst sort of villains. I say, get off the planet, get back 
where we belong." 

Betty said in a troubled voice, "Sooner 
or later somebody else will find them." 

"Maybe— maybe not. We'll report the 
region barren — which it is except for 
Haven." 

Betty said in a small" voice, "Ralph, I 
couldn't do ife I couldn't violate their 
trust." 

"Not even to keep them trusting?" 
Betty said wildly, "Don't you think 
there'd be an equal deflation if we 



TEN BOOKS 1S1 

sneaked away and left them? We're the 
climax to their entire two hundred and 
seventy-one years. Think of the listlessness after we left!" 

"They're working on their spacedrive," said Welstead. "Chances are a 
million to one against their stumbling 
on it. They don't know that. They've got 
a flicker of a field and they think all they 
have to do is adjust the power feed, get 
better insulation. They don't have the 
Mardi Gras lamp that Gladheim 
snatched up when the lead tank melted." 

"Ralph," said Betty, "your words are 
all very logical. Your arguments stay 
together — but they're not satisfying 
emotionally. I don't have the feeling of 
Tightness." 

"Pish," said Welstead. "Let's not go 
spiritual." 

"And," said Betty softly, "let's not try 
to play God either." 

There was a long silence. 

"Ralph?" said Betty. 

"What?" 

"Isn't there some way . . ." 

"Some way to do what?" 

"Why should it be ottr responsibility?" 

"I don't know whose else it is. We're 
the instruments — " 

"But it's their lives." 

"Betty," said Welstead wearily, 
"here's one time we can't pass the buck. 
We're the people who in the last resort 
say yes or no. We're the only people that 
see on both sides of the fence. It's an 
awful decision to make— but I say no." 

There was no more talking and after 
an unmeasured period they fell asleep. 

THREE nights later Welstead 
stopped Betty as she began to undress for bed. She gave him a dark wideeyed stare. 

"Throw whatever you're taking into a 
bag. We're leaving." 

Betty's body was rigid and ten3e, 
slowly relaxing as she took a step toward Mm. "Ralph . . ." 

"What?" And she could find no softness, no indecision in his topaz eyes. 

"Ralph — it's dangerous for us to go. 
If they caught us, they'd execute us — 
for utter depravity." And she said in a 



132 STARTLIf 
murmur, looking away, "I suppose 
they'd be justified too." 

"It's a chance we'll have to take. Just 
what we said the day we decided to land. 
We've got to die sometime. Get your 
{rear and let's take off." 

"We should leave a note, Ralph. Something . . ." 

He pointed to an envelope. "There 
it is. Thanking them for their hospitality. I told them we were criminals and 
couldn't risk returning to Earth. It's 
thin but it's the best I could do." 

A hint of fire returned to Betty's 
voice. "Don't worry, they'll believe it." 

Sullenly she tucked a few trinkets 
into a pouch. "It's a long way to the 
ship you know," she warned him. 

"We'll take Clay's car. I've watched 
him and I know how to drive it." 

She jerked in a> small bitter spasm of 
laughter. "We're even car thieves." 

"Got to be," said Welstead stonily. He 
went to the door, listened. The utter silence of honest sleep held the rest of the 
house. He returned to where Betty stood 
waiting, watching him coldly with an 
air of dissociation. 

"This way," said Welstead. "Out 
through the terrace." 

They passed out into the moonless 
night of Haven and the only sound was 
the glassy tinkle of the little stream that 
ran in its natural bed through the terrace. 

Welstead took Betty's hand. "Easy 
now, don't walk into that bamboo." He 
clutched and they froze to a halt. 
Through a window had come a sound — 
a gasp— and then the relieved mutter a 
person makes on waking from a bad 
dream. 

Slowly, like glass melting under heat, 
the two came to life, stole across the 
terrace, out upon the turf beside the 
house. They circled the vegetable garden and the loom of the car bulked before them. 

"Get in," whispered Welstead. "I'll 
push till we're down around the bend." 

Betty climbed into the seat and her 
foot scraped against the metal. Welstead stiffened, listened, pierced the 
darkness like an eagle. Quiet from the 



i STORIES 

house, the quiet of relaxation, of trust. 
... He pushed at the ear and it floated 
easily across the ground, resisting his 
hand only through inertia. 

It jerked to a sudden halt. And Welstead froze in his tracks again. A burglar alarm of some sort. No, there were 
no thieves on Haven — except two recently-landed people from Earth. A 
trap? 

"The anchor," whispered Betty. 

Of course — Welstead almost groaned 
with relief. Every car had an anchor to 
prevent the wind from blowing it away. 
He found it, hooked it into place on the 
car's frame and now the car floated 
without hindrance down the leafy tunnel that was Clay's driveway. Around 
a bend he ran to the door, jumped in, 
pressed his foot on the power pedal, and 
the car slid away with the easy grace of 
a canoe. Out on the main road he 
switched on the lights and they rushed 
off through the night. 

"And we still use wheels on Earth," 
said Welstead. "If we only had a tenth 
of the guts these people have — " 

Cars passed them from the other direction. The lights glowed briefly into 
their faces and they cringed low behind 
the windscreen. 

They came to the park where their 
ship lay. "If anyone stops us," Welstead 
said in Betty's ear, "we've just driven 
down to get some personal effects. After 
all we're not prisoners." 

But he circled the ship warily before 
stopping beside it and then he waited a 
few seconds, straining his eyes through 
the darkness. But there was no sound, 
no light, no sign of any guard or human 
presence. 

Welstead jumped from the car. "Fast 
now. Run over, climb inside. I'll be right 
behind you." 

They dashed through the dark, up 
the rungs welded to the hull, and the cold 
steel felt like a caress to Welstead's hot 
hands. Into the cabin he thudded the 
port shut, slammed home the dogs. 

Welstead vaulted to the controls, powered the reactors. Dangerous business — 
but once clear of the atmosphere they 
could take time to let them warm prop


erly. The ship rose, the darkness and 
lights of Mytilene fell below. Welstead 
sighed, suddenly tired, but warm and 
relaxed. 

Up, up — and the planet became a ball, 
and Eridanus two thousand nine hundred and thirty-two peered around the 
edge and suddenly, without any noticeable sense of boundary passed, they were 
out in space. 

Welstead sighed. "Lord, what a relief! 
I never knew how good empty space 
could look." 

"It looks beautiful to me also," said 
Alexander Clay. "I've never seen it before." 

Welstead whirled, jumped to his feet. 

CLAY came forward from the reaction chamber, watching with a peculiar expression Welstead took to be 
deadly fury. Betty stood by the bulkhead, 
looking from one to the other, her face 
blank as a mirror. 

Welstead came slowly down from the 
controls. "Well — you've caught us in 
the act. I suppose you think we're treating you pretty rough. Maybe we are. 
But my conscience is clear. And we're 
not going back. Looks like you asked for 
a ride, and you're going to get one. If 
necessary — " He paused meaningfully. 

Then, "How'd you get aboard?" and 
after an instant of narrow-eyed speculation, "And why? Why tonight?" 

Clay shook his head slowly. "Ralph — 
you don't give us any credit for ordinary 
intelligence, let alone ordinary courage." 
"What do you mean?" 
"I mean that I understand your motives — and I admire you for them. Although I think you've been bull-headed 
putting them into action without discussing it with the people most directly 
concerned." 

Welstead lowered his head, stared 
with hard eyes. "It's basically my responsibility. I don't like it but I'm not 
afraid of it." 

"It does you credit," said Clay mildly. 
"On Haven we're used to sharing responsibility. Not diluting it, you under


How to buy 

better work clothes 




Get long wear from the tough materials and 
rugged sewing that go into Blue Bell work 
clothes. Blue Bell dungarees are cut full so 
they don't bind. They're Sanforized, and 
keep their roomy, comfortable fit as long as 
you wear them. Reinforced with no-scratch 
copper rivets. Plenty of pockets. 

Blue Bell Sanforized chambray shirts are 
cut to body contour for comfort, and topped 
by a dress-type collar for good looks. For outstanding value in all kinds of work clothes, 
look for the Blue Bell Qualitag, which 
guarantees you the best made, best fitting work 
clothes you can buy — or your money back! 

BLUE BELL, Inc., 93 Worth 51., New York 13 
WORLD'S LARGEST PRODUCER Of WORK CLOTHES 



133 



stand, but putting a dozen — a hundred 
— a thousand minds on a problem that 
might be too much for one. You don't 
appreciate us, Ralph. You think we're 
soft, spiritless." 

"No," said Welstead. "Not exactly — " 

"Our civilization is built on adaptability, on growth, on flexibility," continued 
Clay. "We—" 

"You don't understand just what 
you'd have to adapt to," said Welstead 
harshly. "It's nothing nice. It's graft, 
scheming sharp-shooters, tourists by the 
million, who'll leave your planet the way 
a platoon of invading soldiers leaves the 
first pretty girl they find." 

"There'll be problems," said Clay. His 
voice took on power. "But that's what 
we want, Ralph — problems. We're hungry for them, for the problems of ordinary human existence. We want to get 
back into the stream of life. And if it 
means grunting and sweating we want 
it. We're flesh and blood, just like you 
are. 

"We don't want Nirvana — we want to 
test our strength. We want to fight along 
with the rest of decent humanity. Don't 
you fight what you think is unjust?" 

Welstead slowly shook his head. "Not 
any more. It's too big for me. I tried 
when I was young, then I gave up. Maybe that's why Betty and I roam around 
the outer edges." 

"No," said Betty. "That's not it at all, 
Ralph, and you know it. You explore 
because you like exploring. You like the 
rough and tumble of human contact just 
as much as anyone else." 

"Rough and "tumble," said Clay, savoring the words. "That's what we need on 
Haven. They had it in the old days. They 
gave themselves to it, beating the new 
world into submission. It's ours now. 
Another hundred years of nowhere to 
go and we'd be drugged, lethargic, decadent." 

Welstead was silent. 

"The thing to remember, Ralph," said 



Clay, "is that we're part of humanity. 
If there's good going, fine. But if there 
are problems we want to help lick them. 
You said you'd given up because it was 
too big for you. Do you think it would be 
too big for a whole planet? Three hundred million hard honest brains?" 

Welstead stared, his imagination kindled. "I don't see how — " 

Clay smiled. "I don't either. It's a 
problem for three hundred million 
minds. Thinking about it that way it 
doesn't seem so big. If it takes three 
hundred brains three days to figure out a 
dodecahedron of quartz — " 

Welstead jerked, looked accusingly at 
his wife. "Betty !" 

She shook her head. "Ralph, I told 
Clay about our conversation, our argument. We discussed it all around, Ralph, 
and I told him everything — and I told 
him I'd give a signal whenever we started to leave. But I never mentioned spacedrive. If they discovered it they did it 
by themselves." 

Welstead turned slowly back to Clay. 
"Discovered it? But — that's impossible." 

Said Clay, "Nothing's impossible. 
You yourself gave me the hint when 
you told me human reason was useless 
because the space-drive worked out of 
a different environment. So we concentrated not on the drive itself but on the 
environment. The first results came at 
us in terms of twelve directions — hence 
the dodecahedron. Just a hunch, an experiment and it worked." 

Welstead sighed. "I'm licked. I give 
in. Clay, the headache is yours. You've 
made it yours. What do you want to do? 
Go back to Haven ?" 

Clay smiled, almost with affection. 
"We're this far. I'd like to see Earth. 
For a month, incognito. Then we'll come 
back to Haven and make a report to the 
world. And then there's three hundred 
million of us, waiting for the bell in 
round one." 



NEXT ISSUE'S HEADLINERS 

THE SEED FROM SPACE, A Morel by Fletcher Pratt 
LETTERS OF FIRE, • Short Novel by Matt Lee 
BIRTHPLACE OF CREATION, a Captain Future Novehtt by Edmoml Hamilton 

1M 



Short Order 

By SAM MERWIN, JR. 

Enoch /ones, the wanderer, had been about everywhere there 
was to go — but he had traveled always in the same spot! 



IT was time to close up the dogwagon for the night. The hands of 
the dirty-laced clock on the wall yawned 
widely at five minutes of four. A cockroach moved slowly, tiredly, toward its 
nocturnal crack at the base of the wall. 
Molly, the stubby thick-bodied waitress, 
had already hung up her apron and departed for home — or wherever she 



elected to unveil her sawed-off-shotgun 
charms. 

Enoch Jones, the leathery bald-headed 
short-order cook, cleaned with professional care the long thin-bladed knife 
that was the chief instrument of his 
sandwich-cutting trade. He placed it 
carefully in its rack-slot above the backbar, then turned to regard with mel


136 



STARTLING STORIES 



ancholy disinterest the two burly bluechinned Diesel truckmen who were the 
sole remaining customers. 

"Closing up," he told them, his hands 
unfastening with the expertness of long 
practise the strings of his own white 
apron. 

"Okay, pop," said one of them. His 
voice too bore the fuzz of bone-deep 
fatigue. "Just as soon as I get this 
java down." 

Enoch Jones nodded and made a few 
half-hearted swipes at the top of the 
service-bar with a towel that had seen 
better days. Occasionally, at this time 
of the morning, it seemed to him that he 
had been going through this same 
routine with this same pair of truck 
drivers for at least a thousand years. 

He thought wryly that sixty-two 
years could seem a lot longer than a 
thousand if you were the guy that 
lived them — always accepting the fact 
that you could call this a life. He felt 
his jaws crack in a yawn, made no 
effort to conceal it. 

Outside a truck roared past without 
stopping. Enoch Jones had already 
turned off the bright red-and-yellowand-green sign that proclaimed the presence of Enoch's Diner — Tables, Pizza, 
Dancing. He thought of putting a slug 
in the juke-box, decided against it. It 
might cause the Diesel drivers to linger. 

Yes, sixty-two years could seem like a 
thousand-plus, Enoch Jones decided. 
Usually he didn't allow himself to think 
about it. He didn't think about much of 
anything any more — beyond the scant 
mental requirements of facing everyday existence. 

He had long since learned that 
thought was the door-key to recollection — and recollection was the stairway 
to the attic of dusty and discarded and 
broken and outworn dreams. Dreams 
were things — if you could call them 
things — that Enoch Jones had long since 
decided were responsible for most of 
life's miseries. 

ENOCH JONES had had his share of 
them — perhaps mors than his 
share. His life, he thought when he al


lowed himself to think along such lines, 
had been dominated by dreams ever 
since, at the age of five and a half, he 
had first imagined the backyard puddle 
that appeared with each February thaw 
to be a pirate sea, peopled by d'Olineux, 
Blackbeard, Captain Kidd — and paved 
with pirate bullion. 

That particular dream, which invariably found him striding a rocking quarter-deck, cutlass in hand, defying mutineers and Spanish sea captains simultaneously, had not endured very long despite its vividness and satisfaction. For 
other dreams, each as vivid, each as 
satisfying, had followed one another 
with the years. 

For awhile, after the backyard pirate 
sea dried up in the heat of early summer, Enoch Jones had been a cowboy 
with cattle-rustling variations, riding 
the wide loop and beating to the draw 
lank lace-ruffled gamblers amid the 
false-front dens of the Great Southwest. 

He had been, in turn, big league baseball hurler, fireman, soldier, Hollywood 
star, football hero and — after a painful 
pre-adolescent brush with the facts of 
life — Wall Street financier. Each of 
these dreams, while it endured, had filled 
him utterly. 

Ultimately, of course, one king-sized 
dream had come to erase the vigor of 
all others, to dominate his life. It had 
been born one Saturday afternoon in 
the local movie house when his age had 
barely reached double figures. 

The space-ship, resting upright in its 
desert cradle, had been sleek, beautiful, 
dangerous, suggestive of the ultimate 
in unknown adventure. In blast-off it 
had been incredibly beautiful and if, in 
its journey through space to the Moon, 
the stars looked like pinpricks in a black 
velvet curtain, the ship itself had remained as sleek and suggestive as ever 
— especially in Technicolor. 

It had been only a Hollywood fantasy 
— but with it Enoch Jones had soared 
free of the increasing encroachments of 
the dull commonplaces of living. From 
then on he was a spaceman — even 
though no scientist nor adventurer had 
yet even to approach the long talked-of 



SHORT 

conquest of space. 

Enoch Jones, spaceman — Enoch 
Jones, explorer of alien worlds — Enoch 
Jones, perhaps, ruler of some strange 
planet where no other human foot had 
trod, no other human voice been heard. 
This was the dream which, after the 
fashion of dreams, had come to be Enoch 
Jones — although perhaps it was the 
other way around. 

This was the dream that refused to 
fade or be superseded in his imagination. In fact, the older he grew the more 
it came to occupy his thoughts asleep as 
well as awake. Gradually it began more 
and more to shape — or as his parents 
had implied — to infect his life. 

Enoch Jones was not blessed in any 
wordly degree. His father was not rich 
■ — quite otherwise. Since there were half 
a dozen children and he was the second 
oldest he had to go to work early. He 
drifted from job to job, never able to 
rise in such careers as offered because 
his dream of space prevented sustained 
effort. 

So he became a short-order cook. He 
knew he would never get rich behind a 
counter-bar — but he could do the work 
satisfactorily by rote once he had mastered its intricacies. More important, if 
man reached the planets in his lifetime, 
someone would have to cook for them 
there as well as on Earth. 

Perhaps his logic was odd but it satisfied him. He even began to pile up a 
sizable amount of money in the bank out 
of his modest earnings. For if his dream 
prevented his rise in the world it also 
prevented his forming any of the usual 
ties, assuming any of the usual responsibilities that eat up a man's savings. 

Marriage was not for him and the 
girls seemed to sense it. He did not 
starve for women since his desires were 
channeled otherwise and always some 
female around would find his self-preoccupation a challenge. He did all right 
that way. No Miss Americas, perhaps, 
but then how many men did win beauty 
prizewinners? 

"What's more," he used to say occasionally over a glass of whiskey with a 
beer chaser, "how many of them that 



ORDER 1B7 

gets them like it after they're stuck with 
them?" 

There was no answer to that one. 

Enoch Jones got around a lot too. 
When he got tired of a job or the season 
turned sour he'd have his savings converted to Traveler's Checks and take off 
for a balmier clime. He knew his business and could get a job almost anywhere at any time. This, of course, was 
a planned factor in fulfillment of his 
dream. 

He didn't care much for the cities. He 
liked to work the places between towns, 
the little demi-communities that have a 
way of springing up along the great 
highways alongside the filling and service stations, the places where the longdistance commercial drivers stop for refuelling of gas tanks as well as the inner man. 

Yes, Enoch Jones got around. It was 
only after he had lost most of his hair 
and had his upper teeth replaced by a 
dental plate that the extent of his betrayal began to dawn on him. And by 
that time it was too late to do much 
about it. 

ONE night, much like this one, when 
he stepped outside after closing up 
and looked up and down the highway, 
he had an odd impression that he was 
just a kid on his first job, working a few 
miles from the small dark-white homestead — the place with the spring puddle in the backyard from which his first 
dream had sprung. 

"What's eatin' you, lover?" Birdie, 
the dark-roots blonde who had shared 
quarters with him in a shack behind 
the garage down the highway asked. 
"You look like you swallowed a herring 
bone." 

"I'm okay," Enoch Jones replied. 
"I'm okay. Just thought of something. 
Come on, I got a quart of rye stashed 
at the house." 

He had figured the whiskey would kill 
the thought that had troubled him. But 
it hadn't — and a few days later he had 
moved on to try somewhere else. He 
hadn't wanted to face it. But ultimately 
he had had to. 



138 STARTLIN 

All the places he had been — and each 
one of them looked and sounded and 
smelt and tasted just like the rest. He 
had worked Miami, winter playground 
of the continent — and all he had seen 
of it were neon signs and gas stations 
and the inside of the dogwagon. 

All he had heard was the rumble of 
truck drivers' slow chatter and the roar 
of their trucks as they rolled by on the 
concrete outside. All he had smelt was 
fuel and food odors — all he had tasted 
was dogwagon food and not-too-mellow 
whiskey and too-sweet lipstick. 

It had been the same outside Seattle, 
on Route 66, near Greenwich, Connecticut, on the Montreal -Quebec Highway 
and on the main drag beyond Phoenix, 
Arizona. He had been places, yes — about 
as many as a man had a right to get — 
but he might as well have seen, have 
been in only one. 

Enoch Jones had begun to show his 
age once this thought attained the 
reaches of his conscious mind. He knew 
he had lost it, lost whatever it was that 
kept him going so long. There were no 
more Birdies for him — the Mollys, being 
women, knew he had lost it with no questions asked. Yet he hadn't been able to 
stop. The habits acquired in a lifetime 
held him chained to knife and apron. 

He looked at the dirty-faced clock on 
the wall, saw that it was now one minute 
of four. "Come on, fellows," he said to 
the two truck drivers. "I need some 
shut-eye." 

"Okay, pop." The one who had first 
spoken yawned widely, nudged the shin 
of his companion with his heavy boot. 
"We got to be goin' ourselves. See you 
next trip, old timer." 

"So long, pop — give that Molly a 
smooch for me." The other driver, grinning, was on his feet. They brought 
their cups over to the bar-counter to 
save him an extra trip. They were good 
boys, Enoch Jones thought. They 
clumped on out into the night, buttoning 
their heavy felt coveralls and pulling on 
their thick boots. A blast of nostrilstinging air accompanied their exit. 

Enoch Jones turned off all but the 
night light and got into his own heavy 



STORIES 

outer garments. It was cold enough outside to freeze the tail off a brass elephant and he was too old to enjoy it, 
especially when he was bone tired. The 
hundred and fifty yards to the two 
rooms he had in back of the filling station seemed like miles. 

He set the lock on the door and 
slammed it behind him and paused outside, nerving himself for the walk to 
his waiting bed. The roar of a Diesel 
motor, catching with difficulty in the 
cold of the night, made him jump. He 
lifted an arm in salute as his two recent customers rolled past, sodium headlights slicing the darkness in eerie 
death-yellow trim streamers. 

He looked around him before beginning his walk to shelter. Most of the 
bright neon signs were darkened for 
the remainder of the night. But Hogan, 
who ran the roadhouse — by courtesy 
only — this side of the filling station, still 
had his signs glowing. And the big billboards lined the highway spottily, advertising their various products, from 
digestion aids to cold cures to tires to 
hotels. 

It was cold but there was no snow — 
there never was in this crazy climate. 
Enoch Jones was grateful for that. 
Snow would have made his walk that 
much the harder. He began to slog off, 
past Hogan's to the filling station and 
bed, reflecting on the foolishness to 
which a man's dreams could drive him. 

He kept his head down — for even here 
on Mars he was sick of the fading ribbons that were highways in the night, 
sick of neon signs and dogwagons and 
roadhouses and filling stations and tworoom shacks in which he no longer could 
live alone from choice. 

"I never got anywhere after all," he 
muttered as the cold made his nostrils 
stiff and a gust of wind all but stopped 
him in his tracks. "Not anywhere at all 
in spite of all my travels." 

He didn't even look up at the twin 
moons above him — for at best Deimos 
and Phobos were dull and tiny satellites 
and in the bright glare of electricity, 
neon tubing and sodium lamps they were 
scarcely visible at all. 



THE ETHER VIBRATES 

(Continued from Page 6) 



eliminating the strong and allowing the 
weak to live on. 

Perhaps the dodo was lucky to last as 
long as it did, thanks to its eonlong isolation from destructive forces in Tasmania. 
But the chihuahua and the Pekinese have 
maintained themselves through adaptability — in both instances through cooperation with man, a dominant species. And the 
wolf, a far better equipped canine species, 
has been driven to the Northland wastes 
by his refusal thus to cooperate. 

To date humanity has not had to adjust 
to a symbiotic or other relationship with 
a better-equipped species — but he is having 
the devil's own time adjusting to himself 
in any reasonable sort of relationship at 
all. Fortunately not all of our basic urges 
seem to be competitive and therefore destructive. 

Examples of Sacrifice 

History contains far more examples of 
sacrifice, from Damon and Pythias to 
Father Damien, than it does of ruthless 
exploitation in the name of security for 
the individual. Our species has survived 
such human scourges at Atilla, Alexander, 
Genghis Khan, Napoleon and Adolph Hitler 
only through this fundamental desire to 
live in peace with itself. 

Further proof of the greater inherent 
strength of those who give rather than those 
who take — apart from the cataclysms of 
war and nature — ie quickly evident to anyone who takes the trouble to make a survey 
of the obituary columns of his local newspaper. Granted, only notables of more or 
less degree get the write-ups. But notables 
(whatever they are) can supply us with 
convincing proof as readily as greater 
masses of the more obscure. 

Day by day, week by week, we find obits 
written anent the pasing of driving individuals who have forced and forged their 
way to the top in the competitive world of 
business. Over a period of one month we 
discovered the average age of these hardhitting -aggressors, at their passing, to be 
just a*h»ae under fifty years. 

Across the same period we noted and 
listed the professors, artists, physicians 
and othftr folk who had attained distinction 
in ways that were directly beneficial to the 
communities in which they lived. They 



lived on an average some sixteen years 
longer than their ulcer-building rivals. 
And the work they did represents something a lot more solid if, perhaps, less 
tangible than whatever shares of A.T.&T. 
common the competitors left in their private vaults. 

To be personally aggressive a man must 
live in a world enclosed by the radius of his 
own wants, ambitions and personality. If 
he be generous such generosity can only 
spring from the need of his ego to be admired. He is very much a man in prison — 
and prison restrictions have never fostered 
survival. 

Living for a Purpose 

It is our well-founded hunch that survival for its own sake is not survival at 
all but is rather the road to quick destruction. It is not, actually, even a basic 
human instinct save in situations of physical duress (and even here the records of 
our saints and war heroes prove otherwise) 
— not, that is, if we are to consider man a 
reasoning being. It seems more closely 
allied to the popular concept of the pig, 
another much-maligned animal. 

Nor is such aggressive egoism fundamentally evil— for evil implies deliberate 
attempt to harm others and the urge to 
preserve self at all costs is merely a form 
of panic. It is rather a negation of the 
whole purpose and history of humanity. 
Worse, it is ultimately as suicidal as anything the lemmings have shown our observers in their supposedly mad mass race 
for the North Sea. 

If we are to survive at all in this more or 
less hapless age we must seek to live for 
some purpose outside of ourselves. This, 
it seems to us, is our only remaining hope. 
We may not be the "fittest" if we do — but 
at least we shall be the survivors. 




THE reader contributions seem to us 
unusually live and controversial this 
month. What with the windup of our own 
personal race (racist?) controversy and 
sundry other matters, the weeding out 
process has not been easy. In fact the de


partment threatens to run to greater length 
than we intended. So let's get to it with — 

SUGGESTION 

by L. Lockhart Layton 

Dear Ed : I would like to make a request. In 
spite of your reluctance toward printing facts 
in a magazine dedicated to fiction I think it is 
an excellent idea. Many scientific facts and 
theories at first glance appear to be much 
stranger than fiction and are often more entertaining to one who enjoys a bit of mental exercise. I would like to see a department in your 
mag dedicated to strange and little-known 
facts of science . . . scientific puzzles, paradoxes, and mysteries. It seems obvious that 
there are many important bits of information 
lying unused because they have not been called 
to the attention of the right person. 

Of course I am not suggesting that you start 
an inventors' clinic. I'm just trying to point 
out that such a department would have great 
possibilities. I would like to issue a challenge 
to other readers. Send in any unusual bits of 
information you may possess and let's see if 
we can make something of it. It may be something that is considered detrimental to some 
process or it may be something that is considered absolutely useless. Whatever it is let's 
talk it over and see if we can turn it to some 
advantage. How about some letters? 

I am personally interested in electricity, magnetism and gravity. There are a lot of questions to be answered about those subjects. Anyway they tell me that is how science progresses 
-—by asking questions and searching for answers. Any one can do it. You don't need a degree or an expensive laboratory, just a normal 
amount of curiosity and ambition. — 1101 Harwood Street, Vancouver, British Columbia. 

We may be asking for it, L. Lockhart, 
but we like your idea — that is, of course, 
if it appeals to sufficient number of readers 
to get action. A department devoted to 
questions and answers of scientific and 
scientifictional interest has possibilities. 

Furthermore, we believe it should be up 
to the readers to answer the questions sent 
in and published. Therefore, for the first 
couple of issues, if such contributions 
appear, we will run them in a questionbox. 
Then, when, as and if we get answers, we 
will re-run the earlier questions and the 
best explanations as well as a new set of 
questions per issue. This should keep everyone up to date as well as scratching for 
new answers. 

Now all we need is a title. Let's see— how 
about SS READER QUIZ? That ought to 
do it. You want to know what rhodomagnetics are, how to peel a tesseract without 
a knife, why is a parsec? Send us your 
question on a separate piece of paper 
(include your answer too if you have one) 
and we'll run it and let the rest of the 
interested readers do their worst. Thanks 



for the idea, L. Lockhart. Let's hope we 
can get something under way. 

GET ANOTHER MAN 
by Edwin James 

Dear Mr. Editor: An author can stand a 
great many things, but there is always a sticking point. Dorothy Parker recites a list of insults which would not move her, then adds: 

"But say my verses do not scan, 
And I get me another man!" 

Mr. Robert Marlow, who writes in your November, 1960, issue, should not have said that 
my story "Communications" (Sept., 1949) was 
illogical, although he was perfectly within his 
rights as reader and critic to find it "uninteresting," The latter adjective is subjective in 
application but the former is capable of proof 
or disproof. 

Mr. Marlow quotes so admirably in support 
of his contention that physical transfer of messages on ships traveling faster than light would 
be faster than radio-waves, since electromagnetic waves are restricted to the speed of light, 
he might well have quoted yet another passage 
a little farther on in the story: 

". . . Each signal is given a surcharge of 
energy from the same engines which send 
this ship into hyper-flight. Since the difference in mass is enormous, the speed of the 
signal is incalculable and the transmission 
time can be measured in seconds." (p. 110) 

This, of course, has the support of no living scientific authority, but one would .uppose 
that the speed of light limit is no more restricting on electromagnetic waves than on matter. 
The theory has, in addition, the elementary 
logic that a given force will propel a lighter 
object faster than a heavier one. 

My only interest in this aspect of the story, 
of course, was in providing a suitable and 
logical background for my consideration of 
the future of cryptography and its place of 
eminence in a war between two interstellar foes 
of equal power. — 1620 Massachusetts Street, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 

Cheer up, Edwin, we liked COMMUNICATIONS too or we would never have 
purchased and published it. And it seems 
to us we rallied round to its defense back 
in the November SS very much along the 
lines you suggest above. Here's luck with 
your M.A. degree (we'd like to see the 
thesis) and hoping for reams of redhot 
copy in the months and years to come. 

LEY OF THE LAST MARLOW 
by James K. Powell 

Dear Editor: One of life's little problems 
turns up again, a problem that always leaves 
me with a feeling of disappointment. Muddled 
thinking. Robert Marlow (N de P?) has indulged in it a bit in his letter published- in the 
November issue of SS. When Mr. Ley replies, 
if he condescends to, either Mr. Marlow will 
learn one small fact or he will blow the nowfamous lid. 



140 



Mr. Ley, I am happy to say, was not confused. If my Handbook of Chemistry and Physics is not confused also on this point the surface acc«leration of gravity at Vancouver, British Columbia, elevafion in meters; 6, is 980.753 
g cm/see/sec, approximately 32 feet/sec/sec. 
By Mr. Marlow's own definition, "One gravity 
of acceleration is equal to a velocity gain of 32 
ft/sec/sec. . . ." 

Were it not for this constant surface acceleration Robert Marlow (N de P) would be 
floating free somewhere in space. So much for 
your zero acceleration at the surface of oar 
world. 

I have learned to read the Letters first and 
for this reason my letters to you cannot have 
a rating of all the stories. In this issue even a 
partial rating might be more informative than 
none. 

Novelets Average 
Tough Old Man— L. Ron Hubbard. . . 5.25 

Short Stories 

Love My Robot— Rog Phillips 6.50 

Road Block — Rob't Moore Williams. . 4.75 
Tall Tale— Mack Reynolds 3.00 

Ethergrams rated about .45 on the basis 

of 1.00 equals perfection. 

I rated these stories on a personal system, 
don't we all? I use four points in judging all 
stories, ratin.? from 1 to 10 on the arbitrary 
points of characterization, plot, development 
and ending. The average is the rating, my own. 
However the dialect in Tall Tale was above 
average and I thought it only fair to say so. 

I wish to say that I have enjoyed SS for 
several years, whenever I could find a copy. 
The serious lack of stf south of Panama has 
obliged me to catch up on my reading while 
in the States and not spend my time writing 
letters. I will close now as I have a great 
amount of reading to catch up on. 

One last comment, an echo to your devastating aside to that stf -illiterate Rick Dykeman, 
even I know a little about Isaac Asimov and 
not entirely from the professorial angle. 

I will try to say hello personally the next 
time I am in New York if it is at all possible. 
The idea, new to me, that I might be admitted 
to the sacred precfncts of the editorial offices 
just never entered my head before you pointed 
it out in the Nov. issue of SS. Thank you for 
your great patience with just another of the 
reader-fans, and his epistolary efforts. — Box 
No. 883, SRSC, Alpine, Texas. 

Thanks, James K., and we shall look forward to receiving a visit from you here in 
the foreseeable future. Poor Marlow — he 
seems to be getting it from all sides. But 
is he downhearted? Let him speak for 
himself. 

N DE P 

by Robert Marlow 

Dear Ed: I still don't agree with James on 
rhe subject of his high speed radio. In science 
fiction we have a medium known as space wave, 
which is a super speeded-up form of radio. 
This, however, is not radio and should not be 
called such. Pass this information on to Edwin 
James if you please. 

As for Willy Ley, I hope he answers my let


ter with all his fury, for I love to argue when 
I have proof positive of my side of the "battle." 

You probably have realized that (N. de P.) 
is my own original contraction for the words 
"nom de plume," by now, but if you haven't 
connected that stupid manuscript that you rejected two months ago with me then I will let 
you know that Robert Marlow is the nom de 
plume for Robert W. Mckay. (That's me.) 

Do you know that this last issue of yours is 
very good. Your feature novel was so sound 
in plot and so well written that I could hardly 
believe that the story wasn't written by A. E. 
van Vogt or Robert A. Heinlein. The rest of the 
material was good reading. I suppose it was to 
be expected, for every one of your writers has 
appeared before in a leading science fiction 
magazine. 

Your editorial was quite interesting this 
month. I am also glad to see the revisions you 
have made in your fanzine dept. Now to get 
down to discussing Ethergrams. I would like 
to see more poetry in the column. (I use the 
term loosely.) 

I think that Jack Vance is better at writing 
stories other than his Magnus adventures. 
Don't you agree? You said that Honolulu is 
more of a race melting pot than Los Angeles 
in your answer to the letter by Bill Morse. I 
am not an authority on either of these places 
(I'm not an authority on anything, would be 
more correct) but I have inside information 
that the big airport in Newfoundland, Canada, 
sees at least one man from almost every country, every day. They don't live there but they 
are there momentarily, same thing. (Almost.) 

I believe that this ridiculous controversy 
over the Negro question should not be allowed 
to go any further. Any human being in his (or 
her) right mind that would stoop to throw insults at another living human being because 
of skin color should be downright ashamed of 
himself (or herself). 

Who is the white man? If someone told me 
I was a white man I would hurry to see my 
doctor for I would certainly be ill. That is 
the only time I am ever white and I am very 
rarely ill so what more can I say. Albinoes 
are white but they are rare. If Edwin Sigler 
is referring to the light-skinned race I see no 
reason why we should be proud. We (The lightskinned) have accomplished most because we 
have suppressed the other races and prevented 
them from getting anywhere. 

Take a look at George Washington Carver. 
He was a Negro, and one of the greatest organic scientists in the history of the United 
States. In Canada, we have many Chinese and 
Japanese people who put the average "lightskinned person," to shame when it comes to 
ambition and accomplishment. You find very 
few of these "Yellow Men and Women" who 
end up on "Skid row." Is it any wonder? 

Rick Dykeman wants to know about Isaac 
Asimov. does he? Here's what I know about the 
chap. He has written many stories for many 
of your (Better Publications) competitors. He 
also is listed with Edmond Hamilton, L. 
Sprague de Camp, Ray Cummings, Jack Williamson and others as among leading S. F. 
authors at the NYCON. (Consult your NORWESCON program.) 

I say, my Friends, is Wonder Story Annual 
printed in Canada? I haven't seen it anywhere. 

Sorry I couldn't get down to see you all at 



the Norwescon. I hope I can see you at NOLACON. 

Now to poetry: Aha I A limarick. 

An artist named Bergey, so daring, 
Paints a woman who little is wearing, 
His aliens are green, 
But his fcm is a queen, 

So for Pete's sake my friend, who is earing? 

1 like to see van Vogt in print, 

His stories have a charming tint, 

So print lots of them now 

For I love 'em, and how! 

Can't you so-and-so's please take a hint? 

Recently, in a leading magazine there was 
a delightful story about the flying saucers from 
Venus and how they utilized magnetic force 
as a means of propulsion. I hoped that you 
had read the article for it would truly let you 
know that the flying saucer doesn't belong to 
the United States— Invermere, British Columbia. 

Okay, Robert, we are winding up the race 
business this issue as promised. But you 
have to bring up them saucers, to wit — 

No flying saucer have we seen 
In air so blue or sea so green 
But should we see one up above 
We'll send it on its way with love. 

And, by way of returning to the limerick 
form — 

Herr Marlow would like us to float 
An issue made up of van Vogt 
For Heinlein or Kuttner 
Or anyone subtler 
He will not fork over a groat 

Which would seem to be about enough 
of that. Sorry, Willy Ley has not poked his 
heavy spectacles into the argument as yet. 

NOTHING TO FOOL WITH 
by L. L. Shepherd 

Dear Editor: This letter is motivated primarily by two sentences in your fine thoughtful editorial in the November issue. I consider 
these few lines answer the ages-old question, 
"Is there any true worth in reading science 
fiction?" better than anything I have read on 
the subject. 

I shall quote them: ". . . science fiction is 
nothing for the ward-heeler type of mentality 
to fool with and remain a competent corrupt 
human instrument. It does have a cathartic 
effect upon the dogma-packed mind. . . ." And 
that, as you say, is the finest thing that can 
be said of it. 

The proof that this is true is exemplified in 
the contents of the letters of Edwin Sigler and 
Dorothy Brown-Nails, in this issue. It is a 
basic human trait to defend most ardently 
those things we want to believe, yet about 
which we have many doubts. The fact of having doubts must be preceded by glimmerings 
of_ "wider" thinking. Intelligent sustained 
thinking is the nemesis of all dogma. 



It is clear that Sigler hasn't been reading 
science fiction — nor been forced to think widely 
— for very long a time. His letter shows he is 
well versed in certain dogmas. To my way of 
thinking dogmatic beliefs are only a polite 
name for prejudices that have nothing to do 
with the color of one's skin. 

His statement, "our culture was built by 
the white man," is not correct. It is much more 
correct to state that white men conceived, in 
the Constitution of the United States, in this 
nation a method for collecting, improving and 
co-relating the knowledge of all the races of 
the world into a usable form that would not. 
as long as it was strictly abided by, become 
the tail that wagged the dog as all other forms 
of government had done from time immemoriable. 

Under it all men, in this nation alone, 
achieved a freedom never before known to man 
by the elimination of dogmas . . . and their 
result, .prejudice, from influence in their government. He was correct to some extent in his 
reference to "aliens." However, it would have 
been nearer right to have said, the "alienminded" have made remarkable progress in destroying these things through their ignorant 
dogmatic teachings that have led to prejudice. 

Dorothy states her case very well. However, 
she neglects to mentioi- the one thing that I 
have felt is the answer to the Negro's complaint of "lack of opportunity." Exponents of 
the Negro's cause would do well to drum on 
these facts as well as their current "pet 
themes." The lot of the northern Negro is far 
superior to that of the average "poor-white" in 
the South. The lot of the downtrodden Negro 
of the South is far superior to that of the 
average "poor-white" or native in most foreign nations . . . ! 

In addition the Negro has progressed from 
slavery to comparative freedom in less than 
one hundred years in this nation. The envied 
white man, that is so guilty of prejudice 
against the Negro, has only been able to achieve 
"opportunity and freedom" for himself, in the 
being of the "average man," in the last three 
hundred years — and then only in the U. S. A.I 
Else, why should there have been and still be, 
the huge influx of immigrants? 

It couldn't have been the "wilderness" that 
made it the "land of opportunity." A comparable "wilderness" lies mostly unsettled in the 
continent to the south of us. The modern conveniences of our present culture, and the inducements offered by the governments that rule 
those lands, are far superior to those available 
during the first two hundred years to immigrants to this nation. 

Therefore one can only conclude that the 
dogmas and their resultant prejudice that are 
strictly in control of the established governments of these lands, make them undesirable, 
even to the "alien-minded" that are so busy in 
this nation. And, that if the Constitution of 
the United States was in effect there as it is 
here, the modern-day wagon trains would be 
rolling South as they did to the West. 

I doubt if the Editor will print this. However, if he does I wish to add this thought — 
I have become more tolerant with age. However, there is an old saying, "A man changes 
his face often but he seldom changes his heart." 
Therefore, I find my feelings are not always 
what I would like them to be. The effort is 



142 



having ita effect — at least in my part of the 
world. The white kids of today, and the "different" ones too, are much more tolerant than 
they were even twenty-odd-years ago when I 
was in school. 

Ill conclude this letter with a plea ... let 
us_ all read the wide clear there-are-greaterthings-than-man type of reading such as one 
finds in science fiction — that causes the ". . . cathartic effect upon dogma-packed minds . . . !" 
And, remember, although it is not perfect, as 
are not the parents of today ... it is contagious to others, as demonstrated by the tolerance of the kids of today. — Post Office Box 
No. 193, Litchfield, Illinois. 

A letter whose honesty almost hurts, 
Mr. Shepheard — and thanks incidentally 
for the small nod to our editorial. If we 
have helped in any way, directly or indirectly, to widen your heart we are grateful. 
But somehow we suspect that it needs 
little widening. We hope your plea finds 
wide response among our other readers. 

NORTH CAROLINA LETTER 
by M. C. Taylor 

Dear Editor: I agree with you that the racial 
issue -'doesn't belong in an STF magazine. Nor 
do I think it belongs in Congress. It belongs 
to the people. What -they do with it is a different matter. 

I was born in the South and raised in the 
South -and I'm darned tired of people talking 
as if-^he South was a foreign country. It seems 
to me that people could remember that the 
"War" is long over. All you can hear now is 
"the racial situation." I'm sick of it. I wish 
they would forget the "Kace" part of it and 
dwell ma the actual situations. 

It *isn*t just the Negroes that have fared 
badly. They simply have the largest population. Wjhat about the Indians? What about all 
thej*est of the supposedly inferior races? 

I've seen good for nothing Negroes, Indians, 
Chinese and what have you. But, Mr. Editor, 
I've seen some of the most good for nothing 
whites too. Okay so what! Well here's what. 
During the last war there were Indian heroes, 
Negro heroes etc Ralph Bunche is certainly 
■iot a man tot>e ashamed of. Bravery, commonsense and just plain decency know no color 
line, nor do shiftlessness, laziness and outright 
meanness. Bigots, fanatics, heroes and plain 
damn fools come in all colors, shapes and ages. 

I'm white and ai. course I'm proud of it, but 
not far dSwji the road lives a man just as 
l>lack>^as the inside of a coal bin and he's no 
less-jproud of it. Why shouldn't he be pjpnd? 
Why .-shouldn't I? We were both born that way. 

If every person would 1st every other; person 
stwd #n, his own end not on his ancestors or 
church »r .color or ."what fiffve you, my whaf-a 
aiceVorld we would hay^! 

I think I would like KDow Dorothy BrownNails. She founds like a real person. My best 
wishes toiier. 

As tor Edwin £ iccler — all I can -say is a great 
big NUTS. It's people like him that *-uin this 
world with their marrowmindedness, X would 
not like imy children to marry into another 
mace, bo. Bat not because of the color or race 

m 



but because the people like Mr. Sigler would 
make their lives a miserable existence. 

Because in a society filled with such people 
there would be no room for their children. 
Perhaps some day there will be tolerance, (I 
don't like that word, it speaks of condescension) let me say understanding, in the world. 
Until then I say forget the race or Negro issue 
and remember the HUMAN SITUATION. 

Equality be darned, let's be friends. Until 
there is true friendship between the people no 
law can force equality. 

Well I've got that off my mind and I'm glad. 
I'll keep on reading your mag and I'm not 
asking what color are your authors either. Just 
keep the good stories coming. — P.O. Box 81, 
Arapahoe, North Carolina. 

Another large ladleful of honesty and 
frora-the-heart speaking, Mr. Taylor. You 
echo our own feelings in this highly important and highly delicate matter — even 
to dislike of the word "tolerance," which 
to us has always implied the act of enduring 
while loathing. Agreed — you can't make 
people's behavior improve by any sort of 
sumptuary legislation. Prohibition proved 
that obvious truth for the millionth time at 
vast communal expense. Education to acceptance without distaste of the fact and 
foibles of others is the only answer. And 
we have a hell of a long way to go along 
that road, bub. 

ANTHROPOLOGY SPEAKS 
by Phillip Barker 

Dear sir: As a fourth-year student in anthropology here at the University of Washington, may I insert a few comments into this 
race discussion? Mr. Sigler'a remarks have 
raised such a turmoil in science-fiction that we 
hear reverberations clear out here in Washington. Actually Mr. Sigler'a statements have 
nothing to do with fiction — and certainly less 
to do with science. 

However, Mr- Sigler supports scientific 
achievement — "the race that dares to dream of 
the stars." If so, then he will be interested in 
several scientific books, written by men who 
have made a life-long study of race and culture. May I refer him to Boas, "The Mind of 
Primitive Man"; Kroeber, "Race Differences"; 
and to "The Fallacy of Race" (I cannot recall 
the author.) 

The substance of these books is as follows: 
(1) There is no race but the human race. (2) 
National boundaries and linguistic boundaries 
are not racial boundaries. (3) Differences between races are based solely upon different environments and different adaptations of this 
very versatile human animal. (Just think, Mr. 
Sigler, if pour ancestors had gone south instead 
of north way back in the Pleistocene, you 
would have probably been as dark-skinned as 
the people you claim to despise!) (4) A person 
from another racial group, brought up without prejudice in our western environment will 
be a person of western culture, entirely, completely. (5) The "stupidity*' and "laziness" of 
the American Negro is not due to. race but is 
due to-'the low class he is kept in by the forces 



of prejudice and hatred! (6) A Negro (or a 
Chinese or an Australian bushman) can rise to 
the same intellectual heights as any white person (on the average) if his environment and 
background is the same as that of the white 
members of the community. This is amply 

tiroven by the Brazilian race mixing-pot, which 
acks race-prejudice and gives the same opportunities to both Negroes and whites. 

Now then, you make mention of interracial 
marriage. From all scientific findings, sir, the 
only taint or stigma upon children born of two 
races is the taint placed upon them by 
prejudiced individuals in our culture! 

You neglect the obvious factor of cultural 
drive differences. These have nothing to do with 
race. They are simply the peculiar drive or 
direction in which one culture chooses to excel. 

Right now we are involved in a mechanicalscientific cultural drive ever increasing our 
knowledge concerning machines and natural 
laws. But five hundred years ago a mechanic 
was one who dabbled in magic and the-drive of 
those days was religion, religion, religion. 

Each culture has its rise, its heights, its 
decline, and its fall, and each one excels in 
different things. These are not due to race. At 
one time, for example, the Chinese were the 
recognized scientific masters of the world. At 
another time the Arab world held the scientific 
reins. Before them were the Greeks, before 
them the Egyptians. At one time the purely 
Negro culture of Benin held prominence in the 
science of metal working. 

Cultural drives change regardless of race 
or religion. Can't you see, sir, that our modern 
culture is just an outgrowth of the drive for 
understanding of natural laws, which started 
long ago in pre-Egyptian times and has been 
handed on from culture to culture, from race 
to race, like Prometheus' fire? Who knows 
where it will go next? Perhaps, as L. Sprague 
de Camp has theorized, it Will go to Brazil. I 
would offer India as a possibility. 

I am> sorry to have thus taken up the editor's 
time, but as a magazine which deals with 
science, I feel that a little anthropology is not 
at all out of place. Now I should like to rate 
the stories. 

"The Five Gold Bands" — Superb! Vance is 
excellent. "Tough Old Man" — a long way below 
the above but still pretty good. "Road Block" 
— pretty good writing and plot. "Love My 
Robot" — entertaining. "Pardon My Iron 
Neryes" — jio comment. Hamilton, how could 
you? "Tall Tale" — stick this in a separate 
category. Mack Reynolds is a new writer and 
ought not to be forced to compete against the 
old masters. I enjoyed the story and want to 
see more of him but of course he has a pretty 
tough line-up to run against. — Sf.O South 
Stevens Street, Tacoma 6, Washington. 

A nice hot letter with points well taken 
if a trifle diffuse in spots. And the stuff 
about ancient cultural drives especially intriguing. Makes us wonder about those 
immense and ornate South African ruins, 
built by heaven-knows-who, and the vast 
black basalt water-city of Ponape, whose 
creators have yet to be assigned by archeology. Maybe one of them was white but 
we doubt it. 



THE A- RUT 

by Es & Les Cole 

Dear Snark: You old shrewdy, you! Putting 
the Sigler letter into print. You knew durn 
well that it would send up the blood pressures 
of thousands of people all over the country. 
Do you realize what it has done to us? It is 
going to elicit from us an answer — really a 
futile thing. 

We've indulged in these unproductive discussions before; God knows how many times. 
We've heard all the arguments, and we've 
probably heard all the answers; we attended 
Cal, where if all the ideas on religion, politics 
and sex have not been expressed, it's only because they are dead. The discussions are unproductive because the Gibsons can only nod 
agreement while the Siglers you couldn't touch 
with a ten-foot pole. (You couldn't even touch 
'em with the eleven-foot pole constructed for 
people you couldn't touch with a ten-footer.) 
The Siglers remain secure in their Aristotelian 
rut. We've never yet heard of one being converted . . . and we doubt if one could be. 

What Sigler needs is a course in basic nexialism, say Nexialism 2AB; the whole-ism of 
the interrelationship of human cultures. We 
find it an item of regret that another human 
being is incapable of appreciating the art, 
music, mores and food (though possibly not including Calameres) of other groups of the species. 

But to the meat: why do these people always 
make a religious pilgrimage out of the argument? Inasmuch as we haven't had a private 
discussion with the "Living God" lately, we 
feel singularly unqualified to comment on what 
ideas are expressed in religious dogma. This 
business of throwing "Hims" and "His" and 
"holy" (words, we might add, with a purely 
emotional subjective meaning) into the argument might help to convince a religious person; 
there is no sense in pointing out how the other 
side feels about it, especially those interested 
in general semantics! 

Skipping, however, the controversial-unprovable material, we ask what in the name of the 
Living God is a white man? Sigler has him 
building our culture, and we would be quite 
interested in knowing who he is. Who are the 
aliens who are tearing it down? These questions are very important to us; we have to 
know at whom to direct our righteous anger. 
The last we heard the evil hordes directed from 
Moscow were tearing down, our culture, but 
we slept late last night and there may have 
been a significant change. 

It fascmates us, our culture. We are certainly glad to know it was built by the "white 
man." Wo always thought it had its roots in 
Egypt, China, the Near East and the Mediterranean basin. We'd always considered its 
origins in Greek politics, Roman culture and 
conquest, Spanish and Portuguese exploration 
and lately English imperialism. We ? re certainly 
glad to know that a large portion of American 
folk music is white, including such material_as 
"Casey Jones", "Oh, Dem Golden Slippers", 
"Swing Low, S\v£et Chariot" etc. 

Or perhaps Mr. Sigler refers to our peculiarly American form of "materialism". We 
refuse to eoniment ,on that; we'll let a better 
man do it for us. See Phil Wylie, practically 
anything of social significance he has written. 



1*4 



There were rosay tests made to determine 
whether there is a basic difference in "intelligence" between "Negro" and "white". While 
we won't bore you with details — Sigler can find 
the scoop in any elementary psych, text if he 
is able to read — the results, of course, were 
negative. 

Tsk, tsk, kiddo, you put one of your pedal 
extremities in it again. Picking on poor Muriel 
Baxter that-a-way. May we quote? ". . . before we got under way. Quell chore!" (Page 
153) That one drove us to the small dictionary 
with the following results — quell, . . . , 
V. I. t. 1. To cause to cease or yield by force; 
put down; subdue. 

2. To cause to subside; calm; mollify; quiet; 
allay, as pain. 3. To kill. 
II. i. 1. To yield; subside. 2. To die. 

"Quell", old dear, is from the Anglo-Saxon 
"cwellan", die. As if you didn't know! We just 
wish we had a big dictionary too. But there 
is more — 

quell, n. 1. (Poet, or Obs.) A weapon or 
other means of subduing or quelling; power to 
subdue. 2. Murder. 

That last is a most fitting climax to the discussion, but so help us we didn't plan it that 
way. What you should do is can your proof 
readers. Or stop trying to be so fatuous. By 
the way, the correct form is either quel or 
quelle. — S01 t x h Adeline St., Berkeley S, Calif. 

Tsk, tsk, yourselves. And here all this 
time we have been wandering about in our 
innocence, believing nexialism something 
the Grik Gods drank out of a shoehorn or 
something. Shades of L. Sprague de Camp! 
Your racism requires no answer. Those 
big dictionary quests are fun occasionally — 
especially as almost always something turns 
up as fitting as your quelling with murder. 
Which is why we indulge once in a while. 

As to your comment anent some of our 
other activities as against our editorial 
capabilities (carefully deleted from your 
letter) we feel in somewhat the same mood 
as Edwin James a few letters back. However, the story in question was, to us, 
a horrifying thing when we finally saw it 
in print. We shuddered. By then it had 
been thoroughly butchered in the process 
of cutting it to fit an overdue rent bill. 
Maybe you'll find something happier in 
work soon to appear in this and other 
stf magazines. 

SIDEWINDERS PREFERRED 
by John P. C onion 

Dear Editor: I returned from Europe in 
forty-five after an argument with some gents 
who included in their ranks a corps of lads 
selected for size, race, appearance and so forth. 
Unfortunately they used to make soap and 
lampshades of their customers. The SS Trooper 
was a carefully selected person but I would a 
damn sight sooner associate with a mojave 
sidewinder. With all their hollering over the 
race question they wound up allowing th« Nips, 



Krim Tatars, Mongols, Hungarians, Rumanians and so forth to be honorary Aryans. 

As for dreaming of the stars the heathen 
Chinese had good observatories while many of 
our ancestors were using each other for chow 
purposes. They ain't made many changes in 
the world but they ain't having conscience 
pains from making A-bombs. 

There are differences in outward appearance 
among the various races of man but the basic 
equipment is the same. A lot of prejudices arise 
from relations between the man with the whip 
and the pore working stiff. The only real alien 
today is the Communist, whose behavior is 
alien to any civilization except the New Guinea 
cannibal. 

I soldiered in the Regular Army with a 
group of men who represented all the tribes 
of Europe. I enlisted with an old soldier of tha 
Irish Republican Army and what I know about 
the Service I learned from a Lithuanian corporal. As for filth, there was a lad in my unit 
down South whose color was hard to tell — 
until his squad leader and a couple of guys 
with sensitive noses escorted him to the shower 
with a G.I. brush. There ain't any inferior 
races — only inferior individuals. — 52 Columbia 
Street, Newark, Ohio. 

And that, as they say, is telling them, 
Mr. Conlon. At any rate it will serve to 
wind up this turned-on toaster of a symposium that has been raging ever since Mr. 
Sigler replied in heat to Mr. Joe Gibson's 
letter in answer to Miss Lopez's note in 
our March issue— which is long enough 
for any controversy to endure in a letter 
column — especially when it has nothing 
directly to do with stf. Thanks for the 
letters, all of you who did not get into 
print. We're right proud of you-all. 

HEADS DOWN! 
by Joe Gibson 

Dear Ed: Whup! Keep your heads down, 
boys! She's a leetle rough in through here — 
Whereupon I crawl, wriggle and mud-paddle 
up to the O.P. of Eugene DeWeese, who shall 
henceforth be called Indiana. Now Indiana sez 
we ought not to make TEV a battleground. I 
agree. I got an allergy to battlegrounds. I am 
sure Corporal McLamarrah, Canuck Morse, 
Ollie Shannon and one of the Coles, at least, 
will happily join me in a round of five-card 
poker in the nearest liberated distillery, 
gasthaus or bier-keller. Are you there, Les? 

It all places me in a somewhat golden mood 
of reminiscence. Please, Lemuel, leave me indulge myself for this nonce. 'Twas maybe 
fifteen, maybe twenty years ago that the lettercolumns of the stf mags were all-male to a 
vast and nauseating degree, with only one 
letter or so every few months from any female 
stf reader. 

So a bunch of guys of high and noble intellect devised a bit of nefarious witticism. 
They commented to Ye Eds that science-fiction 
was obviously a man's bailiwick, that women 
just couldn't enjoy it because there were no 
frills or fripperies, that the one or two old 
maid* who did hang around were probably just 



out on bail anyhow. We were brave lads in 
those days! 

And gazooks! — did we get our ears pinned 
back! And man, oh man, did we love it! Ever 
since then, somehow or other, the gals have 
always bnen around. Femmes like la belle 
Zimmer-Biadley, whose merrie-mayking 
'mongst the general repartee has always been 
welcomed with loud huzzahs from us Knights 
of the Round Table. Much, I hope, to her sheer 
feminine delight. But — now, isn't that people 
for you'.' 

And for youngsters like Shelby Vick of 
Florida, let me say there are as many beautiful dames among stficcionados as he'll find on 
any local beach. Or, well, it just might be the 
conditions in Florida. That state's a catchall for broad-beamed tourists, anyway. Reminds me somewhat of New Jersey. All the 
pretty tourists are out West! 

But to have one's letter published in a 
better-column, one usually must expect certain results. Some mail-order houses put your 
name and address on their sucker list but they 
usually scratch it off after twenty or thirty 
come-hither circulars are ignored. A good 
thing, though, is that you certainly get 
an opportunity to acquire any stf Stories 
you've missed and always wanted, Fandom 
is chuck-full of crazed collectors and eager 
dealers. 

Also, there are the good fellows. Shannon, 
now, has read stf for twentv years — and is 
this his first letter to TEV? I wonder if he's 
ever sat down with a good fellow to recall 
those old Weinbaum days when heroes went 
jumping into space without spacesuits, holding their breath, and all the first-trippers to 
the Moon found weird intelligent creatures and 
flora? 

As mechanics have shop-talk and pilots have 
hangar-talk, so fans have fan-gabs (in clubs 
and via correspondence) where one is likely 
to be discussing authors and stories one moment and probable Sol-type stars in the Earthtype planets, the next. The present topic of 
interest seems generally to be how science-fiction can be improved so its boom of popularity 
won't do a sudden reverse. 

But the more cooks who join in, of course, 
the bigger the head on the broth! Seems I 
just vaguely recall meeting one Lemuel Mutton 
at last July's New York Stf Conference, who 
said there was a slight bulging of the walls of 
the mail dept. down at 10 East 40th, due to 
some lamebrained fan's brash essay. I am 
now sewing buttons back on my shirt. But 
may those walls continue to bulge, chum! 

Yep. All in all, it's as satisfying a hobby 
as can be. Has its surprises too, I must say. 
So you write a story about a farmer who becomes a senator, now, someplace, that's gonna 
hit a farmer who'd like to be a senator — did 
I say that rierht? Yeah. Okay, so somebody's 
gonna get a kick out of the yarn. 

So a girl wondered why the dark races 
weren't represented in stf — for about the same 
reason, it seemed to me. I grew up in New 
Mexico, where the population's about 80% 
Spanish Americans, which was muy bueno 
with me, and a couple of my finest schoolchums were colored boys — you can imagine 
■what a surprise Dorothy Brown-Nails' letter 
was! But— well, enough of this. 

And with Mac and Ollie and Canuck and 



the rest of the gang, I shall happily wend my 
way through the winding streets of some 
quaint village, rattling the chimney-pots with 
lusty song. And pausing, perhaps, to gaze 
with sadness at any glare of fire or sputtering 
of guns on the far horizon. Indeed, no battlegrounds, please. The way things look we may 
get into that soon enough and it won't be 
figurative. So speaks this jerque from Old 
Albuquerque. — °2& Kensington Ave., Jersey City 
4, N. J. ..-^=. 

We love your letter, Joe — and don't get 
us wrong. It has spirit, emotional appeal, 
nostalgia of sorts, camaraderie, chutney, 
sex-appeal and a dash of basil. But what 
in hell does it mean? Please write us again 
by way of explanation. 

FUTUREFOLK 
by Nancy Moore 

Dear Editor: Since you were nice enough to 
print my last letter I have decided to honor 
you with another (lucky, lucky, you). First 
I think I can help brother Austin on the story 
he's trying to find. In the Fall, '41 issue of 
Planet Stories— I suppose I'll be censored 
here — there was a lead novel by Eando Binder 
called "Vassals of the Master World," wherein Earth is enslaved by a planet called Tharkya. 
All the inhabited planets of our galaxy were 
likewise enslaved and forced to deliver one 
gram of energon to Tharkya yearly as tribute. Hero falls in love with a Venusian girl, 
I think, and they live happily ever after. 
Could be this is the story you're trying to 
find, Buz? 

On to the latest Startling. "Pardon my 
Iron Nerves" was very good. As it has been 
said before. Captain Future belongs to a different era in Bcienti fiction. The old CF stories 
were good and well received when they were 
published but the dyed-in-the-wool STFan is 
looking for a little more than thud 'an blunder 
in his reading. So I suggest you keep the current series of CF stories well sprinkled with 
humor. They're better that way. 

"Tall Tale" seems to me the sort of story 
that might find its way into an anthology in 
a year or so. Incidentally, I met Mack Reynolds 
at the Norwescon. He's a pretty swell guy 
and takes his writing very seriously. Let's 
have more of his work. 

Rog Phillips has done much better than 
"Love My Robot" and how this ever got into 
SS I'll never know. Rog will probably pin my 
ears back for this when he sees me again 
but— LMR WAS THE WORST STORY IN 
THE ISSUE! ! There! I've said it and I'm 
glad! Glad, do you hear ? 

Now to a subject currently under discussion 
— we fen seem to enjoy thinking of ourselves 
as a group of "future people," i. e. mentally 
superior in more ways than one. Still, there 
seem to be some of us who will look down our 
noses at someone whose skin is a different 
color. 

S-f authors often discuss tolerance toward 
extra-terrestrial races. Can we even hope to 
stay on friendly terms with Martians or 
Venusians when there are those among us 
who condemn the other fellow because of a 
different shade of epidermis? 



146 



We're not even ready for something like 
space travel when we still have with us something as downright stupid as racial intolerance. I think that expresses my personal 
views. 

I'll close this with a limerick. Let's hear 
you answer this one, Ed. — 

I dislike Bergey's women, they bulge 

In places unflattering to them 
They curve where they shouldn't 
And bend where they couldn't 

And should get the waste-basket due them. 

Okay but how come your first and second 
lines don't bulge — I mean rhyme? To put 
the limerick in your own (i.e. the N. Moore 
or no-more form sans bulges) form we 
would have to do this — 

The places ivhere Bergey's babes swell 
Are those that cause strong men to 
whistle 

Their sub-breastplate bumps 
Are sure cures for male dumps 
And bring us in many an epistle. 

Whereas and however, not to mention 
nonetheless, your true limerick should run 
as follows— 

The places where Bergey's babes swell 

Wring from every true male a loud yell 

Their curves callipidgious 

Are so prestidigious 

They tell the world why Adam fell. 

At any rate, perhaps you have the idea 
by this time. If you don't you probably 
never will. 

FROM ALL ANGLES 

by Captain Kenneth F. Slater 

Dear Un-nameable: Nov. SS turned up a few 
days ago, beauteous near-nude on cover, as 
always. I know it is not your fault, but I do 
wish something could be done about those 
covers. For my money, they axe the only thing 
that prevent tlae SS/TWS twins from heading 
the field for all-round excellence. Among the 
good, bad and indifferent s-f and fantasy mags 
which are flooding into the market in steadily 
increasing numbers there are one or two that 
outshine yours in some specific way, but none 
which can be relied upon to give such good 
stuff from the "all aneles" noint of view. 

Jack Vance's FIVE GOLD BANDS was 
good but not quite up to par. The plot seemed 
to be somowhat forced and the action strung 
out too much. Best two tales (in my opinion 
only) were the Hubbard novelet and the 
Phillips short. The humor in Ed Hamilton's 
tale rather spoiled it. Shame, cos it had to 
be funny, didn't it? There will be umpteen 
folk disagree with me, of course. Actually, 
I'd almost been converted to liking Captain 
Future and crew. Now I am right back hating 
their intestines. 

TALL TALE, Mack Reynolds, was more 
amusing, from the "lighter" side, than the 



Future item. William's ROAD BLOCK was 
good, tho theme is not new, he gave it rathir 
special treatment. I liked — if it could have been 
longer (it couldn't very well have been) I'd 
have rated it above Rog Phillips' yarn, 

'Fraid there is not much news from this 
side of the water, but one item to note is 
that NOVA PUBS have put out the second 
string— Walt Gillings' mutated SCIENCEFANTASY. I'm sending you a copy . . . and 
you'll note it is not as good as we'd hoped it 
would be. 

This new scheme of fanzine reviewing is 
not so good. At least, you previously prevented a complete waste of money by fans, & 
gave them some idea of what they'd get for 
their sub. I rather think that from here-on 
inclusion in Part II of your listing will mean 
no subs — but that is the fanzine-editors' own 
fault, I guess. 

I can't follow the reasoning behind some 
their complaints. . .do any of them honestly 
expect to make a profit on publishing a fanzine? Excluding such items as FANTASY 
ADVERTISER, naturally. And why they 
should take exception to a few well-intended 
hints that they were below average gets me. 
Fandom must be growing up with thin skins 
these days. 

It is not so long back that folk were being 
positively and absolutely rude to each other. 
Anyway, what real harm does it do to sav 
something is not worth buying — not that I 
can recall you being quite that outspoken. It 
tells the editor that he has got to buck his 
ideas up and it warns other fat»s from laying 
out the hard-earned buck for 10 copies of 
something you can not even use for wrapping 
paper. 

Back in Sept. '49 you told me that OPERATION FANTAST needed its hair brushed. 
Did I write back and complain that you were 
stopping folk subscribing? No, I took a metaphorical brush and comb to the 'zine and cleaned 
it up! I may have cussed you under my breath 
at the time but I took the hint. — IS Gp. R.P.C., 
B. AO.R., 23, e/o GPO, England. 

Something has been done about our 
covers aa you doubtless know by this time. 
Hope you approve the changes. Sex is 
definitely not out but we intend to make 
it a bit more palatable when employed and 
to use other varations and ideas when, 
as and if we can. 

Actually, the new fanzine review system is far sounder than the old. Outside 
of the standouts we could give the bulk 
of them little more than a cursory glancethrough. So our comment was hardly reliable for a shopper's guide. Now we have 
a chance to study completely the bestappearing jobs without cluttering ourselves 
up with the others — yet at the same time 
we give them a listing. 

Seems to me the ten-list should be at 
least as worth while shooting for as th« 
old A and B business. 

We saw on* of the Callings books ;»n4] 



liked immensely, Ken. Hope your gang over 
there gets out of its technical doldrums 
soon. Certainly Britain is teeming with 
loyal and alert fans — one should be productive and would be if they could. We 
hope they get the chance. 

BABY SITTER ISSUE 
by Anna Lee McLeod 

Dear Editor: Starting off this epistle with a 
smile, I must congratulate you for putting 
out one issue (the November one) which is 
greatly suited to all feminine fans who are 
mothers of demanding one-year-olds. When my 
darling daughter was asleep, I was able to get 
in a half-hour or so at a time of reading on 
the short stories. I think your selection was 
most excellent this time also. "The Old Man" 
had such a grand surprise ending; and I liked 
the one about the prospector who saw the 
rocket-ship. In fact they all were good. 

But now comes a gripe. I wish that you-all 
would give this forlorn Californian a chance 
to be happy. I would like to know just how 
to get letters from other stf fans. And what 
does a person have to have to get into TEV 
for good, like the Coles and Ed Cox, etc.???. 

Living in Maryland is like being on the 
Moon — plenty dead. I would like to know 
where to find a Science Fiction Society to join, 
even by mail. S.O.S. — I'm lonely. See what 
you can do, Nonny-mouse. Please. — Apartment 
£, SIS South Union Ave., Havre-de-Graee, 
Maryland. 

Shuck, ma'am, yo-all cain't be lonely down 
there in the heart of the Tannenbaum country. Not while warm hearts and Southern 
chivalry still flourish. Ask any Northern 
racetrack reporter following a Preakness 
weekend. Seriously, Maryland and the Moon 
'have little in common. Take over, Maryland. 
As for getting into TEV "for good" as you 
put it, just keep writing interesting letters. 

Incidentally the "prospector" who saw 
the space-ship in the Mack Reynolds story 
TALL TALE was a very real and fabulous 
figure in the countryclubification of the preCivil War West. It was Jim Bridger who 
first discovered Yellowstone for the white 
man. And his stories of Old Faithful and 
the like were considered riotously "tall 
tales" by his hard-bitten comrades — until 
later confirmed. We don't know whether or 
not he actually did see the space or rather 
time-ship, however. As the story points out 
he lacked the nerve to tell that one. 

WITH FOOT \H MOUTH 
by Earl Newlin, Jr. 

Dear Ed: I knew you were talented but I 
didn't know you ware a contortionist. However, 
yon neatly stuck your foot in your mouth hi 

this Startling November issue. You tell us the 
robot- ve r s u 3 -man stow i" threadbare and m 
1 the same ish you too not one bett two robo*»les. 



Of course, you don't find me complaining 
about this. I'm a sucker for robots. I could 
become quite fond of a cute little metal monster, but this is merely because I'm a psychiatric pervert. There are a lot of us perverts 
around, who have emotional feeling for things 
much less animate than a robot. Things like 
old shoes, speed-boats, pocket knives. . . . 

Anyway, "Love My Robot" was a good tale. 
Also the appearance of Rog Phillips (Yah, yah, 
I know his name's Graham. But it gripes me 
to see characters refer to a penname^. author 
by his true name. It gets confusing, and it's the 
same as saying "Hey look at me. I know his 
real name, so I am an experienced fan.") was 
welcome. 

I liked the other robotism, too. Say Ed, I 
have a brilliant idea. Next time I make a robot, 
I'll put some revolving lop-sided wheels in his 
head. Then he would have a distinct personality. He'd be eccentric. 

I won't bOre you by rating the rest of the 
stories (because I haven't read them yet) but 
I will comment upon the cover. Some Bergey 
fans will like it, shouting "We want flesh. 
Large feminine expanse of soft pink flesh!!!** 

Maybe you could talk Bergey into doing an 
abstract cover. Ah, I can picture it now. Beautiful scantilyclad circle being protected by 
handsome dashing square. And looming in the 
background we find a hideous writhing, bugeyed-rectangle ! ! ! Cute, huh? 

I wish I'd have been around when all that 
Sarge Saturn business was going on. . . . Why, 
we new fen don't even know what it was all 
about! Could you give us a sample? Just one, 
painless paragraph? Aw, come on. 

I'm glad there are gals in fandom- BUT . . . 
first we must assume that they are intelligent, 
as Shelby Yiek did. Now, if a dame is intelligent 
enough to like the same type of fiction a lot 
of the males do (ahem . . .), then they are 
most probably un-beautiful. Most of the average female reading is of the "Intimate Passion" mags. 

Therefore and wherefore, not to mention to 
wit, whereas, we could assume that they had 
an average mentality that was a little — 
warped. Most of the beauties I know aren't 
interested in anything but male animals. Tsk! 

I don't see who started the rumor that an 
stfan had to be intelligent, anyway. A lot of 
swill in other mags (and sometimes in yours) 
is pure adventure, with very little emphasis on 
unusual concepts. How about a lead novel of 
76 pages of mathematical formulae? (If yon 
ever need any more original ideas, I'll help 
you out next month in TWS.) — 103 Perk Awnue, San Antonio lf>, Teras!!! 

Help us out and under the fore-jets of 
some ambulating Mercurian meat wagon, 
you spawn of the outer satellites. Fah ! 
Bring on the xeno, Frogeyes, this diluted 
half-measure of Plutonian dishwater is 
more than we can bear. Had enough, Earl? 
We have — in fact we had it years and years 
ago when we interred the Sarge and his 
gruesome pets in a fur-lined hogshead of 
Arcturean brandy, double-distilled. 

You seem to !>e!ong in the "square" cate


gory yourself, kid. Or, worse, among the 
flats — which, according to Eddy Condon, 
are squares lying down. 

BOUQUETS FOR ROG 
by Janie Lamb 

Dear Ed: You did it. You did it, and here's 
a big beautiful bouquet for you. But how in the 
world did you manage it? blackmail or bribery? 
I'll bet you offered the poor starving guy 
money. Of course I'm talking of your adding 
Rog Phillips to your list of writers. Nice 
work I 

Hamilton outdid himself on this Captain Future yarn. I like a taste of humor in my stories. 
Pardon My Iron Nerves had it. Vance was way 
below par. Better feed him some cream o 1 
wheat. 

I always turn to the reader's corner firstest, 
but this time, whew! I begin to think the dear 
ole Ed had spilled some fried garlic in the letter section {he eats it for lunch, it's a secret 
though) but when I finally located the odor, 
'twas only Sigler's letter. 

And now, Ed, a hearty AMEN to your promise of no mo' letters on the racial question in 
SS. There's no place for it in stf circles 
(squares either). Some seem to think racial 
prejudice is the seed of slavery. 'Tain't so, 
'cause look at the trouble Moses had with his 
family, because he loved and married a colored 
girl. And as wise as Solomon was he lamented 
the fact his skin was black. Had there not 
been racial prejudice then, would he have 
cared if he was black or white? The Negro 
would have been far happier and progressed 
farther if they had been given a reservation 
like the Indians, but let's keep this feud out of 
fandom, regardless of what any of us think, 
or want, racial prejudice is here to stay. — 
Heiskell, Tennessee. 

Solomon black? Old Man Mose in love 
with a Lydian lady? Reservations for Negroes and not on the Superchief? You've 
got us in a spin, Janie, no foolin'. And just 
when we thought that one was all wrapped 
up for the dustbin. Ah, well ! Write us again 
anyway although your logic eludes us completely. It has a sort of eerie charm — yours 
and Gibson's. Confidentially we used neither 
blackmail nor bribery on Roger P. A pressgang did the job for us with dispatch. 

POSITION UNTENABLE 
by Bill Venoble 

Dear Ed.: 

You nasty man, you: Lately I have had a 
eort of antipathy towards SS and TWS. In 
fact, when I saw the latest ish of SS reposing 
on my local newsstand, I gave a great cry of 
jubilation. I will now, figures I, read this over 
and then sit down and write a suitable letter 
of condemnation to the editor. 'Twould indeed 
have been a fitting pastime, as I was severely 
suffering from GAFIA (Gct-Away-From-It\Turn page] 




WINS WRITING SUCCESS 
THOUGH CRIPPLED WITH 
ARTHRITIS 

"When I became almost crippled 
with arthritis, N.I.A. training 
proved Its value. I becan acting 
as local correspondent for two 
papers. Then, I started a publication of my oren. The Beekeeper* 
became a reality and a success. 
Were I physically able, 1 would 
crawl to tile top or tho house and 
shout the merits at the N.I.A. 

— lilmiT Carroll, 
Itoute 3. Box 510, Lansing, Mich, 

Why Can't 

J You Write? 

It's much simpler than you thinkl 

U O many people with the "germ" o£ writing in 
M them simply can't get started. They suffer from 
inertia. Or they set up imaginary barriers to taking 
the first step. 

Many are convinced the field is confined to persons gifted with a genius for writing. 

Few realize that the great bulk of commercial writing is 
done by so-called "unknowns." 

Not only do these thousands of men and women produce 
most of the fiction published, but countless articles on business, hobbies, sports, travel, veteran's affairs, war experiences, human interest stories, local and club activities, 

Such material is in constant demand. Every week thousands of checks for $25, S50 and $100 go out to writers 
whose latent ability was perhaps no greater than yours. 

The Practical Method 

Newspaper work demonstrates that the way to learn to 
write is by writing! Newspaper copy desk editors watte 
no time on theories or ancient classics. The arory is the 
thing. Every copy "cub" goes through the course of practical criticism — a training that turns out more successful 
authors than any other experience. 

That is why Newspaper Institute of America bases its 
writing instruction on the Copy Desk Method. It starts and 
keeps you writing in your own home, on your own time. 
And upon the very same kind of actual assignments given 
daily to metropolitan reporters. Thus you learn by doing, 
not by studying the individual styles of model authors. 

Each week your work is analyzed constructively by practical writers. Gradually they help to clarify your own 
distinctive style. Writing soon becomes 
easy, absorbing. Profitable, too, as you 
gain the "professional" touch that gets 
your material accepted by editors. 
Above all, you can see constant progress 
week by week as your faults are corrected and your writing ability grows. 

Have You Natural Ability? 

Our Writing Aptitude Test will reveal whether or not you have natural 
talent for writing. It will analyze your 
powers of observation, your imagination and dramatic instinct. You'll enjoy taking this test. There is no cost 
or obligation. Simply mail the coupon 
below, today. Newspaper Institute of 
America, One Park Avenue, New York 
16, N. Y. (Founded 1925) 



VETERANS:
COURSE 
APPROVED 

FOR 
VETERANS' 
TRAINING! 



*1 Wr 

* about • 



Newspaper Inititute of America 
One Park Ave., New York 16, N. Y. 

Send me, without cost or obligation, your 
Writing Aptitude Teat and further information 
about writing for profit. 



Mr. ) 
Mrs. ( „ 
Mtsa \ 
Address.... 



a •llslbl* under Uia O.I. Bill o 



Copyright 1949, Newspaper Institute of America. 



149 



All;, and desired to indulge ray sadistic impulses to the fullBut no. No! No! You had to go and fill the 
November ish with the best damn stories I 
have read in a long time in any magazine. My 
day was ruined. Dammit, they were good! I 
suffered interminably that day. I sat down 
and enjoyed THE FIVE GOLD BANDS so 
much that I cried out in frustration. How 
could I pan such a story as that? There was 
no way. It was good. 

I am accustomed to the fact that Vance's 
MAGNUS RIDOLPH series is terrific. Still, 
I oould hope that there would be no MR story 
in that ish. Indeed, when I saw that Vance 
had been trying another type of story, I felt 
jubilant. Here, says I, was where he had gone 
too far. Out of his element I figured his stuff 
would be horrible. But was it? Oh, no! You 
had to publish a good lead novel this time. 

But that wasn't enough for you. Even the 
novelets were terrific. PARDON MY IRON 
NERVES is the hottest thing that has hit Ed 
Hamilton since the beginning of the Futuremen. And having it written in the first person 
by a ro — excuse me, I mean Grag, was indeed 
novel. Has that ever been done before? And 
then there was TOUGH OLD MAN. Now, I 
know Hubbard is a clear, and therefore what 
eould I expect but a good story? And it was — 
it was. Your coup is complete. 

To add insult to injury, even the short 
stories were tops. Who could possibly condemn Rog Phillips, anyway? And how could 
anyone pan LOVE MY ROBOT? It was science-fiction in the best style. TALL TALE also 
rates this category. Every bit of it was anthology material. 

I have one redeemer. ROAD BLOCK. Now 
the writing was O.K. but the story wasn't 
finished. For some reason I like to have a final 
or semifinal conclusion to a story. ROAD 
BLOCK was one of those types that describes 
something with great possibilities and then 
finishes, leaving the reader up in the air. 

But the mag as a whole — I mean the contents — was wonderful. You couldn't have done 
better on a bet. — SS Park Place, R. D. No. A, 
Pittsburgh 9, Pennsylvania. 

Go ahead and be as sadistic as you wish, 
Bill. Wt dote on it, simply dote on it! And 
ROAD BLOCK was so finished ! 

SIEW OR SIUE 
by J. E. Clarke 

Dear Sir: I have never written a fan letter 
to any magazine. I have read every number 
of this mag since it started publication. I read 
science fiction for the enjoyment I get from 
it. I think that it is only fair that I express my 
appreciation for the many happy hours that 
the perusal of this publication has given me. 
The stories arc all good, only some are better 
than others. 

I have just finished reading the Nov. 1950 
number. The stories are improving right along. 
I can't find the name of the Editor any place in 
this mag. I think that I know the reason for 
that — he probably has only a number. I deduce this from the fact that on page 153 he 
savs "Ugh ! Praise Allah we were never a 
child !" 



Could it be that he is a Robot, conditioned 
and trained to be a science fiction editor? That 
would tend to explain the increasing excellence of his material. If I am right in this 
matter there are a whole slew of questions 
that I'd like to ask! 

I especially like L. Ron Hubbard's stories. 
I think that he showed remarkable restraint 
in not mentioning Dianetics in this last story. 
I believe that L. Sprague de Camp disagrees 
with Ron on that subject! I haven't read a 
bad "Captain Future" story yet. 

The inside art work agrees favorably with 
the general makeup of the magazine and the 
cover picture is good, but I can't help worrying whether that little string will continue 
to hold up that dinky apron! Nobody else is 
printing any better stories than STARTLING 
and I read about half a dozen others and 
should know. I'm 68 years old and am probably 
your oldest reader. 

I started reading the letters in the present 
issue using a pair of magnifying spectacles. 
Then after a while I started using a large 
reading glass but even that didn't help for 
long. Some of the letters are interesting. I 
feel that the discussion of racial differences 
should have no place in these letters. Given 
equal educational and training opportunities, 
ALL of them are about equal in brain power. — 
511% Lighthotise Ave., Pacific Grove, Ca/ifornia. 

Robotic editors, yet — brrrrr! At that, it 
might come in handy to have one or more 
around, scuttling out to interview fans and 
so on. More seriously, Mr. Clarke, your letter gives us a desire to know just who our 
oldest reader is. How about it, all of you? 
Will you send in your nominations? We'll 
be glad to publish an occasional photograph 
if it is clear enough for screen reproduction 
With which we hereby inaugurate an oldest 
SS fan contest. 

1950 — THE SUMMING UP 
by Robert P. Hoskins 

Dear Muttonhead: The date: August thirtyfirst, the year of our Lord one thousand nine 
hundred and fifty. The above mentioned year 
is two-thirds gone. Or so one would think. Bat 
wait! What is this? 

The latest issue of STARTLING appeared 
two days ago and is dated November, which 
means that the year has vanished before our 
eyes. There will be no more issues of dear old 
SS dated this year. So the time has come, the 
walrus said, to speak of many things. Of the 
best of novels, novelets and author queens and 
kings. Oh, well, it rhymes. 

Appropriately enough we shall start out by 
listing the six novels in their proper place, according to my own insignificant personal opinions. 

I. WINE OF THE DREAMERS by John 
D. MacDonald. I think you mentioned sometime back that there might be a slim chance 
of its being made into a movie. That'd be one 
of the best things to hit the silver screen since 
talkies and color! 



150 



You Make Money Fast 

{very Time You Give a Show 



II. THE LADY IS A WITCH by Norman 
A. Daniels. Some fan didn't like it. Fie on 
them! Another good bet for the movies. 

III. THE CITY AT WORLD'S END by 
Old World-Wrecker hisself. As in my letter 
in the current SS, I say: A SEQUEL! A 
dozen of them. 

IV. THE FIVE GOOD BANDS by Jack 
Vance. I'm still reading it but I can already 
tell I'm gonna love it. More of the same in 
novel-length from Vance! 

V. THE CYBERNETIC BRAINS by Raymond F. Jones. Superb bit of writing. By the 
way, are we gonna see some more stuff about 
Cal Meacham? 
VI. THE SHADOW MEN by A. E. van 
Vogt. At the beginning of the season I was 
gonna rate it best. But you surprised me by 
coming out with more and more super-superb 
stuff. 



That little chore be through. Next we find 
the novelets. Will only rank what I considered 
to be the top three as there are too many of 
them. Will do the same with the shorts. A 
pause, while I go over the list of them again. 

I. Roman HOLIDAY by Kelvin Kent. Tops 
on my list of novelets. Am thinking of making 
a list of my favorites in each classification. 
RH would be about third in several hundred. 

II. PARDON MY IRON NERVES by Edmond Hamilton. I read the Hubbard nvt in 
the latest ish before this one and I thot that 
that had hit the peak of egotism in a character, 
(Constable Moffat.) But I read Grag's own 
story next. Believe me, I didn't even try to 
conceal my emotions! My sides still ache. 

III. CHILDREN OF THE SUN by Edmond 
Hamilton. This was tough but Captain Future 
scored again! Hamilton and his band have 
taken two out of three in 1950! I hope they 
can do it again. All I can say is all power 
to them. 



And last, but not least, we are down to the 
shorts. This is gonna be the toughest job of 
all. Wait! I'm forgetting the artwork. And I 
thot I was gonna have a rest soon. But on with 
it 

I. STARS OVER SANTA CLAUS by William Morrison. Cute little tale. Samachson is 
tops when it comes to shorts. Dunno why I 
did it but I have chosen him for first and third 
spots. Again one author stealing from his pals. 

II. DOWN THE RIVER by Mack Reynolds. 
In a way it carries a good message. Too bad 
everyone can't be forced to read it. And I 
mean everyone! Illiterate persons could have 
it read to them. Teach this old world to mind 
its P's and Q's. 

in. DISAPPOINTMENT by William Morrison. I see again that several fen didn't like 
it. Any of you boys wanna fight? Good. You'd 
make good sparring partners for some pugilist. 

[Turn pag.e] 



with the Sensational Afew 

;cf "iP'H cY 'a' "8 "b V l cf o "8 o' . o "6' "6 "£S "ifcfcfS b


; TELEVISION BANK; 




Make easy money every show! 

This miniature T-V Dank looks like the bin table models. 
Friends, relatives drop nickles, dimes, quarters to see the 
Screen light tip with different scenes. A flick of the ttnob 
tunes In cartoons, football, bo\i::L', u'i.,tiiti ihols. Holds 
£200 and It's filled up before you know 1(1 

SEND NO MONEY, Use 10 Days at Our Risk 
Just semi name an<l address. On arrival pay postman 
$2.49 plus (J. O. D. If not delighted return for your money 
back. Save money! Send $2.49 and we pay all postage. 
Write today! v 

T-V BANK CO., Oep».V5fiI.C 
215 N. 7th St. St. Louis, Mo. 



mmmm 



MONEY MAKING OPPORTUNITY FOR YOU 
WITHOUT INfFSTMEItTS 

No tiparina mwImJ to act o* ovf Loco! Deafer (or 
MASTEFJ WorV Uniform oornttfltl. *»<"T Unlnru 




NEW WRITERS NEEDED 

EARN UP TO J5.00 AN HOUR, SPARE TIME 

— re-writing idea9 in newspapers, magazines, books. Splendid opportunity to "break into" fascinating writing field. 
May bring you up to $5.00 per hour, spare time. Experience) 
unnecessary — we teach you. Write for FREE details, ana 
how to get FREE Writer's Market Guide I 

COMFORT WRITER'S SERVICE 
Dept. 15-TP 200 S. 7th St. St. Lonia 2, Ma, 




.--d WOO.CQto Mre.L-..-. 
1 of Texas, fornneHnir DoHSfl V 
Jyj.D.MartinofVirRinlaimoi j 
•^or a sin/le Copper Cent. Mr, % 
mninRof N-?wYork,T2,W0.00 for /T?i 
;rL)ollar. Mrs.G.P.Adams,Ohio,tpl 



■ WILL PAY $100.00 FOR A DIME! 

1894 S. Mm!; SSO.OOfor 1 !1 1 ;1 Liberty HeailNlrkel (not 
Uvifrjilu) :,■:.! !,rli! i lrv.l«(:fn1ii<-r;i:.Ni:'.:«ri>riCP5 for coins. 
Send 1c i f and partlm-j 

8, MAX MEHL,T33 P Mehl' Bldg., 



151 



Introductory Offer 




NEW 

IMPROVED 



MEN 

AND WOMSN 



All-in-one Cigarette Lighter and Full-Park Case elves 
and Hams lazoUior as you wont them. Streamlined, t 
. . . n »v,-..|. ii convenience, the Ideal gift, FBES . . 

ENf.JlAV!-;i.> OS ( ASH IN 23-KARAT GOLDI For mi 

for lifetime service of beautiful plastic. Deepamazingly large supply of Buld. SEND NO MONEY 



*u cigarettes 

tart, modem 
ANT NAME 
r women. Built 
lighter holds 
7-DAY TRIAL. 
- 't S1.98 plus 



H&S SALES DEPT 



return for refund. 

-tro to send naroB to bo engraved, 
ItS, 166S MILWAUKEE AVE. 
CHICAGO 47, ILLINOIS 



QUIT TOBACCO! 



Remove ad tobacco craving jafe In every form and join 
the thousand! who have completely obtained satis.faetory freedom from tobacco with the old genuine 
TOBACCO BANISHES. Send for FREE BOOKLET 
describing the ill effects of tobacco, and a safe, reliable home treatment. A proven succesj for 3) years. 

GUSTAF H. GUSTAFSON CO. 
2325 E. Vickery Blvd. Dept. TF Ft. Worth 3, Texas 



Hteh School Course 

at Home | 



Many Finish in 2 Years 

Go S3 tepidly us four time and abilities permit. Coots, 
equlvnlentto resident school work — prepares for college 
eiitranre crams. Standard H. K torts snpnlied. Uinloma 

Credit fur H. S. Milij-oti k!™!» r.^plerrt. ?;„ K lr aabjrrls if 
d.H.red. Bleh aehoul rrtaeatiuo is r.rr iroperUnt fuS adiTinounient 
in bToiiiiuas aod Jndaalrr add euulalir. Don't be bat, , .,' 

liirh Srboo (rmdoate. 6t»It mar traiaiaa nu~ 

e. n 

1 AMERICAN SCHOOL, Dept. H-3S8 Ciexilal 56fh. Chicago 37 



Dangers Of Delay 
On Chronic Ailments 

FREE BOOK -Tells How To Help 
Guard Health 



7,ir BeonwAY 

RECTRL-/C0L0NIC , 
AILMENTS 

Hany facta about colon disorders, headaches, eonattpation, nervousness or stomach, liver and bladder conditions 
are explained in a new <0-page FREE BOOK. Write today. 
Thornton & Minor Clinic. Suite 368, 911 E. Linwood, 

Kansas City 3, Mo. 



Best cover of the year: March issue. I won't 
try to rate the other artwork. Finlay and Orban are in good form. I see that Orban dominates the November issue. 

I didn't get down to see you, Lemmy, for 
which you should be very grateful. But someday I'm gonna make a special trip just to see 
what your ugly puss is like. I hear you're the 
average American man everyone talks about 
when describing someone. Didn't even know 
that such a critter actually exists. 

A few last minute notes: You have published 
a total of thirty-nine stories in SS in the past 
year. Contrary to one fan's opinion in a recent 
ish of Tucker's SF NEWS LETTER, the quality of your material is not going down, but coming up. 

I think Vernon McCain has a good idea in his 
letter. I know I thought about entering fandom 
for at least two years before I finally did. And 
the only reason I finally did was because I was 
in an extra -ambitious mood one evening with 
nothing to do. You now know what I chose to 
do to pass the time. Don't you sometimes wish 
that you had never been born? Or better yet, 
that no fan had ever been born?- — Lyons Falls, 
New York. 

Now that it's over we can't say that we 
do. Although there were moments in the 
course of preparing the above peristyle. . . . 
But enough said. It's all more or less in fun 
or at least in controversy. Once again, you 
all seem to have come up and in with plenty 
on the proverbial spheroid this time. Here's 
hoping it's hotter yet come May. You might 
hop over to THE READER SPEAKS in 
THRILLING WONDER STORIES next 
month to see how things are on that stf ront. 

—THE EDITOR. 




DIMES 

JANUARY 15-31 



152 



IIEVIEW OF THE 
CEItltENT 

SCIENCE 
FICTION 

FAN PUBLICATIONS 



WELL, it had to happen apparently — 
thanks to our limiting our list of 
fanzine reviews to an arbitrary ten. The-ercabbage has overflowed the pot. To maintain 
our "top-ten" listing we are going to have 
to give a number of deserving fan publi



cations special treatment in front. So here 
goes — 

Arthur C. Clarke, E. Sc., scarcely an Xfactor to any of you, has sent us along the 
most recent copy of the erudite Journal of 
the British Interplanetary Society, which 
is led off by the printed version of a speech 
delivered in London before the society by 
Mr. Clarke himself. Its title is Space-Travel 
in Fact and Fiction and apparently the fact 
that it was originally delivered on April 
first, last, has no bearing upon its remorseless peerings into stf primitives. 

Also included, among other articles and 
reviews, are a study of Space Rocket Trajectories by Dr. Samuel Herrick and an 
A. V. Cleaver review of Hollywood's Destination Moon. 

Other arrivals from the "perfidious Albino" include Wonder Magazine, Vol. 2 No. 
2, published by Michael Tealby at 8 Burfield 
Avenue, Loughborough, Leicestershire, England, containing some amusingly anglicized 
fanfiction and the Captain Kenneth F. Slater 
perennial, OPERATION FANTAST, un{Turn page] 

153 




I enUrMnwc ^ 

I postman 2&c MOb (or the enlargement 
--■ '-rnie dIus "St of nint] inn. t;ml3
i guaranteed. Limit t — *■ 
.... . ler, Originals returned' 
! enlarjfcment. Offer limited ti 

HOLLYWOOD FILM STUDIOS 

7021 Santa Monica Blvd., Dept . A« 7, Hollywood 3 8,blir. 



INVENTORS 

Learn bow to protect your Invention. Specially prepared I 
'Talent Guide" containing detailed Information concerning 
patent protection and procedure with "Record of Inrention" 
form will be forwarded to you uponretiucst — without obligation. 
CLARENCE A t O'BRIEN A HARVEY JACOBSCN 

Registered Pofenl Attorneys 
18-A District Nolloflol Bldg. Waihlngfen 5, D. C | 



FREE — Amazing Book on 

RHEUMATISM, ARTHRITIS 

If you suffer the aches, pains and discomfort* of Rheumatism, 
as manifested in ARTHRITIS, NEURITIS. SCIATICA or 
LUMBAGO, send today for the FREE Book. It reveals important facts about why drugs and medicine give only temporary relief without removing causes. Explains fully a proven, 
specialized system of treatment that may save you years of 
distress. No obligation. Write for this FREE Boot today! 
BALL CLINIC. Dept. 504, Excelsior Springs. Mo. 




VETERANS GET 
SPECIAL PREFERENCE 
Railway Postal Clerks 
City Mail Carriers 
City Postoffice Clerks 
Stenographers-Typists 
Liquor Inspectors 
Messengers, Etc. 
40-Page Boole ^ 
on Civil Service <j 
FREE. / 
Mail 

today— 
SURE 
★ 



FRANKLIN 
INSTITUTE 

/ iNot Covernment Controlled) 

/ Dept. N-94, 

/ Rochester 4, N. Y. 

Uriah to me. entirely free 
, of charge, 40-page book 

with: (1) A full description 
of U. S. Government jobs ; 
(2) A list of U. S. Government 
jobs; (3) Tell me how to qualify for a job. 



/ 

I ci 



HEAL COMFORT IHSTAKTU * iw-«m> ■ 
fOJ «ll PUTE WEARERS nnd clipping 1 
—sum soreness heali nnd disappears — forever. 

NOT MESSY • NOT STICKY 

Not a paste— not n ponder— Lino-Dent I* an 
amazing development In the field or plasties. It la 
(he tame material modem dentures are made of. 
That's why we can Guarantee perfect plate comfort 
not for lust a nontb but permanently will) «~~ 
application. 



EAST AS 
ABC TO USE 

A. Apply to Piste. 
8. Ittaart in Mouth 
C. Bite far Perfect 
Tit 



Uno -Dent is pure, non-toxics \ 
n on -Irritating, harmless, odot- 1 
less, tasteless, pleasant. Blur- ,' 
pie to use. Needs no heat. 

1 1'( profenlonslly developed < 
YOUR MONEY BACK IF 
MOT COMPLETELY 
SATISFIED 



SEND NO MONEY gffi 8SK SS 

city upper or lower. Or sand 11.15 and we 
will pay pott IB a. 

im-v m, ta.fe ^yt} 

L ~HO -*D~Nt7 Pi D ept.*W" ™ " ™ 
507-5 Ave., New York 17. !». r. 
Sand lino-dent fort 

OK $1.25 □ Both S2.2S 

I will pay postman □ SI-IS. . DJ2.3S plus posteie My money will be cbeerfully refunded U I 
am not satisfied. 
NAME 

ADDRESS i _ j j i i j 

CITY . ...,..,.„„_., STATE 

Enclose payment and you saw poslitge 



TOMBSTONES 



DIRECT TO YOU » 

Genuine Beautiful Rochdale 
Monuments. Markers. Satisfaction or AlONEY BACK. 
Freifrht paid. Write for our ,BH " 
FREE Catalog and compare prices. 

ROCKDALE MONUMENT CO. 

gagfc 831 JOLIET, 1U.IHOW 





Study HYPNOTISM! 

FASCINATING! Almost Unbelievable 

This unusual course reveals ttio fundamental a of 

" '''' T%lion R 1 " 

S£ S.S^^ M COWHTE 
aoUun Course" today! 
NELSON-HALL CO., 210>S. Clin 
Dept. aC-6 Chicago 



i»*2.95 




loosed quarterly upon an unsuspecting 
world from 13 G.P. R.P.C., B.A.O.R., 23, 
c/o G.P.O. England, at 15c per copy, 6 issues 
75c, post free. As usual it is lively, thoughtful and packed with stf gossip from both 
sides of the Atlantic. 

As for American 'zines, we are giving 
special attention to the second issue of 
INCINERATIONS, a mad, mad and in 
several spots very funny job produced quarterly by the Grape Press, 9109 SW Oleson 
Road, Portland 19, Oregon at 10c per copy 
and 10 issues $1.00. The letter retorts in the 
finale and the cartoon on reinforcement of 
an engram are alone worth a lot more than a 
dime to as. 

The Nameless Ones 

Then a fan-group from 3200 Harvard N., 
Seattle 2, Washington, which has hovered 
on the fan-fringes for some time under the 
title of The Nameless Ones, has burst into 
something of a frenzy of activity with a 
good fanzine entitled somewhat forbiddingly SINISTERRA, in which William N. Austin, Gordon Springer, Burnett R. Toskey, 
Wally Weber, Lin Carter and a slue of 
others cut loose with stories, features, 
poems and artwork of generally high fancaliber at two bits per. 

As if this were not enough the same 
group, headed by William N. Austin, has 
come up with a 15c SCIENCE FANTASY 
REPORT CARD, just about as elaborate 
and informative a polling of fan and prodom 
as science fiction has yet seen. Well worth 
the modest fee. 

And Leonard Moffatt of Lilliputian Press, 
Garden Grove, California, has produced a 
very neat and professional FAN DIRECTORY for 1950 members of the Fantasy Foundation and the National Fantasy 
Federation (NFFF), which should be of 
interest to members and others. 

Quite a lot of special stuff, what? And 
now let's look at the lucky ten and the lists 
of the not-so-lucky that will follow. 

Here Are the Ten 

ETAOIN SHRDLU, Apt. 2F, 40 West 77th Street. New 
York 24, New York. Editor. Stephen Taller. Published 
quarterly, 10c per copy, 3 issues 25c. 

This veteran B lister has taken a remarkable turn for the 
better in its Fell, 1950, issue, even including an amusing and 
thought-provoking article on stf cliches by none other than 
Henry Kutfner (wish we could get him back to writing for 
us!) and the inevitable study of dianetics. this time by Mor
THE FANSCIENT, 3435 NE 38th Avenue, Portland 13, 



154 



Oregon. Editor, Donald B. Day. Published quarterly, 
25c per copy, 6 issues $1.00. 

Recent Norwescon activities seem to have slowed up recent 
publication of this smallest and best of famines. The issue 
at hand, however, though tardy, is up to snuff, containing 
contributions by the de Courcys, Forrest J, Ackerman, Anthony Boucher, E. Everett Evans, Thomas H. Carter and 
others, to say nothing of the inevitable high-quality fanartworfc on which Mr. Day seems to have something of a current monopoly. 

FANTASY TIMES. 137-05 32nd Avenue, Flushing, New 
York. Editor, James V. Taurssi. Published twice 
monthly. 10c per copy, 12 issues $1.00. 
Still probably far and away the best and most information of fanewiines ever printed. It contains more up-to-theminute material from more sources (accurate, too, as a rule) 
than anything else around. We don'f pretend to know how 
they do it but it's damned good reporting. 

MEZRAB, P.O. Bex No. 431. Taholta, Texas. Editors, 
Marion Z. and Robert Bradley. Published quarterly. 
Free on request. 

A fhoughtful and mayhap enlightening article on ORIGIN 
OF THE UNIVERSE by Fernand Roussel is the big item in 
this issue wi'h M. Roussel teeing off remorselessly on both 
Newton and Einstein. We admire hrs neo-Fortean nerve. 
Erik Fennel, Genevieve K. Stephens and others are also on 
hand— although Marion Z. Bradley is missing this time out — 
alack. But a good line none the less. 

THE NEKROMANTIKON, 1905 Spruce Avenue, Kansas City I, Missouri. Editor, Manly Banister. Published quarterly, 25c per copy, 4 issues $1,00. 
A long novelet of time travel, TWILIGHT FELL AT 
CAMELOT by M. Houston, occupies most of the Fall issue, 
shared only by a brief editorial, an article on fantasy poetess 
Lilith Lorraine and a bit of whimsy by D. R. Smith on a mad 
Arab. The Houston job, while not quite up to professional 
standards, is super-excellent fanrine fiction and the Ralph 
Ryburn Phillips is eerily effective. This is just about the outstanding newcomer of 1950. 



ODD MAGAZINE, 1302 Lester Street, Poplar Bluff. 
Missouri. Editor, Duggie Fisher. Published bimonthly. 15c per copy, 2 issues 25c. 10 issues $1.00. 

Jon Arfstrom's cover is certainly ODD enough even for this 
one — so much so that its symbolism eludes us utterly— but 
we liked it for all that. A couple of fair pieces of fanfition 
by Eugene DeWeese and Johnny McKarrian and Richard 
Elsberry's department nudge this one just into the roster of 
the elect. 

RHODO MAGNETIC DIGEST, 2524 Telegraph Avenue, Berkeley 4, California. Editor, Donald Baker 
Moore. Published monthly. 25c per copy. 

Still a West Coast powerhouse, with David B. Koblick coming up this issue with an outstanding article ON COMMUNICATION WITH EXTRA-TERRESTRIALS and such well qualified 
experts on hand as Gladys Fabun. Editor Moore, Norman 
Stringer, George Blumenson, George Frnigan and others to 
tee off on such varied topics as ROCKETSHIP XM and Just 
about all pro and fanzines. Good stuff. 

SCIENCE FICTION NEWS LETTER, P. O. Box #260, 
Bloomington, Illinois. Editor. Bob Tucker. Published 
bi-monthly. 10c per copy. 

Note price reduction in this we II -conceived and acid-tipped 
information 'zine, which is of at least as much interest to 
pros as to fans. Book and magazine reviews, fan-gossip and 

news of pro publishers, editors et al are first rate. Reduction of price from two bits to a dime nofed and approved. 

SPACEWARP, 1057 S. Normandia Avenue, Los An* geles 6, California. Editor, Charles Burbee. Published monthly. 25c per copy. 

This seems to be a new and improved deal all around for 
another B-hst perennial, with Joe Kennedy taking the lead via 
a notous memoir of some of his fanactivities of recent years 
. Laney. Jack Speer, Walter Coslet, G. Gordon Dewey, 
■ "ick Sneery, Redd Boggs and Willie Conner 

[Turn page} 



Stu Metchette, 




RADIO 

TELEVISION, ELECTRONICS 



We train you at huma in your spare timet 

National Schools, an institution with almost 
60 years experience, will show you. bow to get 
Into this profitable and fascinating field , . . 

You build this modern long-distanoe surerbetiTiidyiio receiver, conduct many other 
expwnneuts wUh standard eQuiymeiit sent 
you. (See left) 

SHOP METHOD HOME TRAINING 

By a Rail Resident Trada School 

Think of the vastly Increased number Of 
Television & Itadii> set-; In operation . . . 
»Ud of developments in TV. FJ1 Broadcasting, Electron leal They all demand 
trainud men to repair, install, aervieo and 
maintain equipment. We give rou. basio and 
advanced instruction In all phases of Television. Radio and Electronics. You receive 
a special series of modern Television leasons, all a part of youx course — you master 
all phases. Send the coupon today for Free 
Satn;il>: L.sson and bis. illustrated Opportunity Book. Both Resident and Home 
Study Train inn offered. 



Multitester bow U> 



a part of your ^nur^l 



NATIONAL 

IOS ANGELES 37. C 



APPR0VEO FOR VETERANS 

SCHOOLS 



FIND OUT NOW. . . MAIL COUPON TODAY 



National Schools, Dept. 3-TGL 
4O00 Soutfl FiyuProa Street 
Lo. Anselei 3f, California 



jjajajifai uj 
Address. . 



™k "Your Future In Radio" and tha 
:our». I understand no salesman nllt 



f World War II 



RUPTURED? 

Get Relief This Proven Way 

Why try to worry along with trusses that gouge your 
flr-sh — press heavily on hips and spine — enlarge opening — 
fail to hold rupture? You need the Clothe. No leg-straps 
or cutting belts. Automatic adjustable pad holds at real 
opening — follows every body movement with instant increased support In case of strain. Cannot slip whether at 
work or play. Light. Waterproof. Can be worn in bath. 
Send for amazing FREE book, "Advice To Ruptured," and 
details of liberal truthful 60-day trial offer. Also endorsements from grateful users in your neighborhood. Write: 



Cluthe Sons, Dept. 33, Bloomfield, New Jersey 




CARTOONISTS' EXCHANGE 
Dept. 73 Pleoiont Kill, Ohio 



Learn Profitable Profession 
in QO clays at Home 



•'•fit


MEN AND WOMEN, 18 TO 60. Mans Swelter* 

Mnssage graduates make big money! Large full ttroa 
incomes from doctors, Hospitals, sanatoriunis, cluba or 
ivato practice. Others make good money In 

Z at home and qualifying for Diploma. Anatomy 
larta and 32-page Illustrated Book FREE! 

i The College of Swedish Massage 
m Dept. 163C 41 G. Pearion, Chicago II 



155 



NEW BODIES fcfo 
FOR OLD!* 

■ ^Br mm ™Sr Mi mW 9 thomas manfre 




GIVE iq 
I'll t 



. pep] ess, second -r. 



lent. See what I did for Thomas Manfre 
Let me show you wb.it I've done for thou 

thers — anil Jet me prove what I can do for you, 
in just 15 minutes a day. 

FREE BOOK. Send your name, address for 



CHARLES ATLAS 

come new bodies my way. Yours ABSOLUTELY § 
FREEl Addrca3 ma personally: -^Sfljfc' 

CHARLES ATLAS, Dept. 2TEC, 115 E. 23rd Si., H. Y. \ : ;f . 





Banish the craving lor tobacco is ifcctisantfs 
ha« wfih Tobacco Redeemer, Write for free book' 
let telling of injurious effect of tobacco and 
ol a treatment which has reliever) many men. 
In Business Since 1909 part 
300,000 Satisfied Customers qqqk 

THE NEWELL COMPANY [ 

1S3 Clayton Sta., St. Louis S, Ma. 




enjoyed the thrill < : ,.l,..:r r,..i:i ajrnln, Di?rnio,l JJJ 

lu f'.o dciisilte r, i in ■■ wr .„k9 or money Is re- ■ 

il wiih.oui t,\;.::-,;\t,i,. s<.., lt | Kin , r.r <-.-!■>) for een* 



. Don'l delay! , Sold by't 
I»35| ttrathm Sorest 



n, Dept. 350. Detroit 27, M 




" IF you suffer pain anil misery of Varicose Ulcers. 
,. or On- -ii ! S.-T.--3, tend away at once (or FHEH 

Booklet "THE i.iki'k jii-:T!!OT>^ von home use." 
Tells all atout this 40-year-old method, praised and endorsed by thousands. Liepe Methods, Dept. C-34 



f \9 m mk MAKE $35-545 A WEEK 

y Toil can learn practical mining Sit 

ft\m\ noma in spars time. Course endorsed 
*"^JJ tiy physicians. Thousands of graduates. 

C2nd yr. One graduate lias charge of 
10-bed hospital. Another saved 1400 
while learning. Equipment included. 
Men, women 18 to 60. High school not 
RiluirecL Easy tuition payments. Trial plan. Write today. 
CHICAGO SCHOOL OF NURSING 
Dept. 423, dl Ea*t Pearson Street, Chicago 11. lit. 
Wests send free booklet, and IS sample lesson paees. 
N*mt , 

City State - A z* 



TORQUASIAN TIMES, 1041 Cayuga Street. Santa 
Cruz, California. Editor. R. Hewitt Reneau. Published irregularly. 20c per copy. 

A newcomer which has pulled something of a coup by acquiring a Ray Bradbury short short story for its lead. The 
rest is a bit juvenile save for a rugged Stf quiz but RB 
keeps TT up in the list of ten. 



Other Fan Mags 

Which brings us down to our lesser listings, to wit — 

AD-0-ZINE,_ published in Pennsylvania. Editor. W. C. ButtsPublished bi-monthly. 5c per copy. 

BABEL, 4IS Simpson Avenue, Aberdeen. Washington. Editor. 
T. Daniel. Published monthly. No price listed. 
BOBOLINGS, 6001 43rd Avenue, Hyettsville, Pennsylvania. 
Editor, Bob Pavlar. Published quarterly. No price listed. 
CATACLYSM, HI W. Western Avenue, Muskegon. Michigan. 

Robert E. Briney and Del Close. Published irregularly 



Editors 

10c per copy. 

CHALLENGE, Avalon World Arts Academy. Rogers, Arkansas. 
Editor, Lilith Lorraine. Published quarterly. 30c per copy. 
DESTINY, 545 N.E. San Rafael, Portland 12, Oregon. Editors, 
Jim Bradley and Malcolm Willits. Published quarterly. ISc 

per copy. 

EGOBOO, The Nekromantikon Press, 1905 Spruce Avenue, 
Kansas City I. Missouri. Free on request. 
FANATIC, SW Hill and Hanover Streets. Charleston. South 
Carolina. Editor, Bobby Pope. Published quarterly. A issues 



6 Issues 65c. 

FAN-VET, 409 Market Street, Paterson 3, New Jersey. Editors. 
James V. Tsuresi and Ray Van Houten. Published monthly. 
No price listed. 

JOURNAL OF SPACE FLIGHT & ROCKET NEWS LETTER, 
10630 South St. Louis Avenue, Chicago 43, Illinois. Editor, 
Wayne Proell. Published monthly. 25c per copy, $2.25 per 

LEER, '402 Bristol Street, Moonalua Housing. Honolulu 18. 
T. H. Editor, Charles Lee Riddle. PNI, USN. Published irregularly. No price listed. 

PEON, Fleet All Weather Training Unit, Pacific, c/o Fleet 
Post Office, San Francisco, California. Editor, Charles Lee 
Riddle, PNI, USN. Published bi-monthly. 9 issues $1.00. 
PROCYON. P.O. Box No. 1565, Billings, Montana. Editor, 
Wallace Shore. Published monthly. No price listed. 
QUANDRY, 101 Wagner Street, Savannah, Georgia. Editor. 
U. N. Listed. Published monthly. 10c per copy. $t.00 per 

SAPSIDES, 3317 West 67th Street, Seattle 7, Washington. 
Editor, William N. Austin. Published irregularly. 10c per 
copy. 

SCIENCE & SCIENCE FANTASY FICTION REVIEW. 7312 
Boulevard East, North Bergen, New Jersey. Editor. Calvin 
Thomas Beck. Published irregularly. 15c per copy, 2 issues 25c. 
SEETEE, 3046 Jaclson Street, San Francisco 15, California. 
Editor, William D. Knopheide. Published monthly. 10c per 

SPACESHIP 10, 760 Montgomery Street, Brooklyn 13. New 
York. Editors, Bob Silverberg and Saul Diskin. Published bimonthly. 10c per copy, 3 issues 25c. 

STAR ROVER, 232 James Street, Perth. Western Australia. 
Editor, Roger N. Dard. Published quarterly. 10c per copy. 
STFCARD, P.O. Box No. 4, Helena, Montana. Editor. Walter 
A. Coslet. Published weekly, 20 copies 50c, SI .00 per annum. 
STF NEWSSCOPE. 43 Tremont Street, Maiden "18, Massachusetts. Editor, Lawrence Ray Campbell. Published monthly. 
5c per copy, 50c per annum. 

WESTERN STAR, (534 Grant Avenue. San Francisco II, California. Editor. Jim Kepner. Published monthly. 10c per copy, 
6 issues 50c. 



All in all, one of the largest and most 
interesting fanzine lists we have ever dealt 
with. Please keep them coming. Contrary 
to certain beliefs in certain quarters we do 
like to give praise where praise is due. 

—THE EDITOR 



156 



SCIENCE FICTION 

Bookshelf 



REVIEWS OF NEW BOOKS 



1984 by Georgo Orwell, Signet Boob, New York {25c}. 

To us by far the most important single 
appearance of the most prolific month to 
date in stfantasy publishing is the appearance of the late George Orwell's great novel 
in 25c form. Since this terrifying and magnificent conception of the blind alley into 
which current trends, social, military and 




political may lead us — some say are leading 
us — has already been reviewed to a crisp 
dark brown, we shall here give it no more 
than an enthusiastic re-indorsement. 

Suffice it to say that those who don't seize 
upon this opportunity to read or reread the 
appalling tragedy of Winston Smith, Julia 
and O'Brien under the aegis of the all-pervasive Big Brother should have their heads 
and emotions examined. One of the great 
books of our time — and one of the few great 
books of all time with definite stf interest. 

THE MAN WHO SOLD THE MOON by Robert A. 
Heinlein, Shasta Publishers, Chicago ($3.00). 

An extroadinarily interesting volume, 
composed of a half dozen of Mr. Heinlein's 
famed "future history" series (its inaugural 
studies), which depict with enormous conviction the progress of man from his disordered present into a future which, though 
still plenty disorderly, manages to take him 
ultimately to the stars after a number of 
false starts and failures. 

A number of the stories included, particularly The Roads Must Roll, have been 
previously anthologized but their author 
[Turn page] 





TRAIN QUICKLY! 
OLDEST, BEST EQUIPPED 
SCHOOL of ITS KIND in U.S. 

Student qi*a«c6 Plan 



SION-RADIO 

Finance plan for non-veterans. Mall Coupon Today 
for conuilete details. 

NOT "HOME-STUDY" COURSES! 

You learn on real, full-size equipment, not by mall, 
Finest staff of trained instructors to help you get 
seedy quickly for a belter job. a one future, 



TO MdMroan wiu'eaTfAct NO'WT 

Coyne— An Institution not for Profit 

, B. W. COOKE. Praa. 



• B. w. count, vr**. Ik 
I COYNE Electrical & Television-Radio School. W* 
500 S. Paulina St., Chicago 12. IH. Dept. 31 -84K I 

Send FREE BOOK and full detail* on I 

D ELECTRICITY | 



| D TELEVISION-RADIO 



I NAME. . 



.CITY-. 




'H(,'.W,'1*M 

lief with Denl't. Use Dent's Tooth Gum 



DENT'S 



TOOTH GUM 
TOOTH OKOPS 
DENIAL POULTICE 



Learn BAKING At Home 



Ball tie la one — — — .- . 

Nearly I depression-proof. Thorough basic dome course 
lays sound foundation. If you have aptitude, write for . , . 
FREE BOOK LET. "Opportunltiesln Commercial Basing." W^/ / 
WAT10KAI BAKiNS SCHDC1. e350i.erwPar.,vw. Dfc P L. 1803, £h «fie!4. U3. > y 



Store Route Plan 



SELL COUNTER CARS PRODUCTS 

Build a BOod-payinii bualoesa OI your own. C«1I 
on dealer* of atl Itlnda; show BMtoaaOf «*WJ 
tlsr;d Aspirin, Coametlce, Jtaior Blartca ana 200 
other iu- :-<-:... k:c-:. ilti- Sc ami 1'V rtt ul p;>.-ti»iw*, 
•■teb Quality. Attract iva courier dmpiayn pell 
jod* faat. Vrea book glvta anurias (acts. Write! 
torld'a Product* Co,. «ept, 73-T, isenWa fa. 




157 



EAT ANYTHING 
FALSE TEETH ! 



Coro-on-the-cob, bard candy, nuts 
.. .youcaneatthemaU! Simply lay 
soft scrip of Brimins Plasii-Liner 
on upper, lower or partial plate. 



.nd it molds perfectly. Your 
ujuc fits snugly and stays that -way 
because Brimms Plasti-Untr hard' 




is permanently to your plate. Even 
on old rubber plates get good results sl; months to a year or longer. 
EASY TO REFIT OR 
TIGHTEN FALSE TEETH 
One application gives instant relief from slipping;, 
rocking plates that cause sore gums. You can talk 
without embarrassment Forget temporary "stickurns to hold plates in. Tasteless, odorless, harmless 
tp you and yocr plates. Removable according to 
directions. Money back if not completely satisfied? 

per. Fay postman when delivered. Or send money and 
■ava C O. p. charges. AIbo available at leading drug 
Btorea. aomple of plate cleaner tree if yon act now. 
RASH-LINER COMPANY, Buffalo 1 1, H.Y., Depf.47-H 



Brimms PLASTi~LINER 

The Permanent Denture Reliner 




mm 



I Make money. Know how to treat ana 
1 train borees. WWe today for this booh 
„ _i FREE, toaetlior with special orfer ot 
■ 1111 a course In Animal Breeding. It you 
_-e Interested In Galtlng and Riding the eaudls 
I torse, check Cere ( ) Do U today — now. 

BEERY SCHOOL OF HORSEMANSHIP 
Dept. 823 Pleasant Hill, Ohio 



SAVE FOR YOUR INDEPENDENCE 

BUY U. S. SAVINGS BONDS! 



STATEMENT OF THE OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT, AND CIRCULATION REQUIRED BY THE 
ACT OE CONGRESS OF AUGUST 24. 1912, AS 
AMENDED BY THE ACTS OF MARCH 3. 1933, AND 
JULY 2. 1946, of Startling Stories, published bi-monthly 
at Springfield, Mass., for October 1, 1950. 1. The names 
and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing editor, 
and business managers are: Publisher, Better Publications, 
Inc.. 10 E. 4«th St., New York, N. Y. Editor. None. Managing editor. None. Business manager, H. L. Herbert, 
10 E. 40th St., New York, N. Y. 2. The owner is: Better 
Publications, Inc., 10 E. 40th St., New York. N. Y. N, L. 
Pines, 10 E. 40th St., Now York, N. Y. 3. The known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holders owning or 
holding 1 percent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, or other securities are: None. 4. Paragraphs 2 and 3 
include, in cases where the stockholder or security holder 
appears upon the books of the company as trustee or in 
any other fiduciary relation, the name of the person or 
corporation for whom such trustee is acting ; also the 
statements in the two paragraphs show the affiant's full 
knowledge and belief as to the circumstances and conditions under which stockholders and security holders who 
do not appear upon the books of the company as trustees, 
hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that of 
a bona fide owner. H. L. Herbert. Sworn to and Bubscribed before me this 1st day of October, 1950. Eugene 
Wechsler, Notary Public. (My commission expires March 
30, 195Z). 



is one whose best work (and this is his best 
work) stands up beautifully under the acid 
test of rereading-. But to us a previously unseen effort, the short novel from which the 
title is derived, is the standout. 

Delos D. Harriman, the man who manages to get first others and then finally — 
and almost too late — -himself to Earth's 
atellite, is a fascinating character, combining candor and the unceasing urge to follow 
a dream to its end with humor and a 
professional deviousness that Machiavelli 
might have envied. 

He gets to the Moon— yes. But in order 
to do so he has to involve himself and his 
hard-shelled colleagues in a series of promotional pyramids that are reminiscent, if 
far more skilful, than those indulged in by 
the late Samuel Insull. The story is remarkable not only for its human appeal but for 
the ingenious and loving care lavished on 
the mechanics of quasi-legal big-business. 

A fine adult job all the way. 

THE HOUSE THAT STOOD STILL by A. E van Vogt, 
Greenberg. Publisher, New York ($2.50). 

This is an odd piece of fantasy — which 
manages to straddle the two poles of mystery and science fiction. It deals with an 
ancient mansion on a California hilltop 
which was standing there long before the 
Conquistadores appeared from the south to 
take over its occupance and concomitant rule 
of the surrounding countryside. 

It has remained in the Americanized 
hands of descendants of the Spanish occupiers and is run through an agent, Allison 
Stephens, an ex-Marine, who soon finds himself up to his neck in bodies (quick and 
dead), ancient mysteries, cabals of the present and one Mistra Lanett, a sort of eternal 
woman (apologies to Mrs. D. D. Sharp). 

What it is all about remains obscure to 
Stephens and in large part to the reader 
until, at the story's end, the true nature of 
the ancient house is unveiled. This is a tour 
de force, packed with unsuspected surprises 
we have no intention of revealing here. If 
the story has a tendency to fall at times 
between its mystery and science fiction antipodes — well, for the most part it holds interest if not a great deal of sense. 

THE DREAMING JEWELS' by Theodore Sturgeon. 
Greenberg, Publisher, New York ($2.50). 

A fascinating and very unusual story as 
Mr. Sturgeon tells us of young Horty Bluett, 
the boy who seems to those who know him 



to have anteater blood. Horty knew he was 
"different," of course — but was not aware 
of the extent of his variance from the human norm until he lost, horribly, three 
fingers from one of his hands. 

The fingers grew back by themselves and 
Horty began to get the idea. From then on 
he went in search of his fate, a fate inextricably involved with the alien jewles that 
were not jewels at all, with number of 
strange men and women in a number of 
strange environments, including a traveling freak show. 

Mr. Sturgeon has built his story upon a 
solid interweaving of conflicts and characters that cause it to build almost unbearably to a climax which, in suspense and vivid 
bizarreness reminds one inescapably of 
something Alfred Hitchcock might have 
tackled via the movies but has not yet so 
done. A swell story. 

CO NAN THE CONQUEROR by Robert E. Howard, 
Gnome Press. New York ($2.75). 

This is a neo- Arthurian saga of the colorful derring-dos of an age of magic and 
chivalry existing in some phantom era before the continents of Eartli divided up to 
form the present land-masses. Conan, its 
principal figure, is a prime adventurer who 
has won himself a kingdom and must regain 
it after being dislodged by rival rulers with 
the aid of an evil sorcerer brought back 
from the dead by a miraculous precious 
stone. 

He does so but only after a series of hairraising episodes, which see him roving much 
of the globe, first to learn of the stone, then 
to recover it, then to use it against his betrayers. There is considerable lusty humor 
to lighten the heavy load of super-hoboing 
and a fine inside-cover map by David Kyle 
to make the weird geography understandable. Swell stuff for a rainy night. 

THE GREEN MAN OF GRAY PEC by Festus »ragnell, 
Greenberg, Publisher. New York ($2.50). 

We have often wondered what happens 
to former tennis champions when they vanish from the limelight. Mr. Pragnell here 
tells us of what happened to one of them at 
any rate, Learoy Spofford, when he paid a 
visit to his scientist brother and gets inducted thereby into the world of the atom. 

One of the most popular of all stories 
published in the Hugo Gernsback WONDER 
[Turn page] 




TFfO- IC| lOOKUr' 

You need a high school diploma to get 
ahead! Earn yours in months thru 
home study. Squats resident work. 
Saves time. College prep. Texts 
supplied. Credit for work elsewhere. Easy terms. Write today! 

COMMERCIAL TRADES INSTITUTE 

1400 Creonleaf.. OOpt. Blg-3. Chicago M 



SUIT YOURS 



ftHO BIG MONEY IN SPARE TIME, TOO 

Ve want you to wearthle llii«pMd>-tO-tnM JUT* MlO | 



Mike it 

BOFr,„ 

>~™ orderi with over 1<__ ... 

„ ....nun to newest styles. Also Ladles' Tailor* 
ed Suits — complete line. Writ* today for IHF.E SAMPLES. 
No experience, do money needed. For quick action Mil 
o.«bt>uty.urw>U. J, C. flftD * SON, Inc. 
Hairiaon and Throop St*.. Dept. Q-1BTT. Chic 



•, in. jafflw . 




IODIC 

for Rupture Help 

Try a Brooks Patented Air 
Cushion appliance. This marvelous i nvcation for moet forms 
of reducible rupture is GUARANTEED to brine YOU heavenly comfort ana security — 
day and night— at work and 
at piny — or it costs you NOTHING ! Thousands happy. Light, 
neat-fitting. No hard pads or 
Bpringa. For men, women, and 
children. Durable, cheap. Sent on Mm to prove it; 
Not sold inj etoree. Beware of imitationa. Write for 
Free Book on Rupture, no-risk trial order plan, and 
Proof of Results. Ready for you NOW1 

BROOKS APPLIANCE CO., 1 S3-J State St., Hanhall, Mich. 



ifitsBhewinff&mazfngGLOYf
_3-Dabk Specialties. House 

t numbers, pictures, plastic novelties, 
I religions and nursery objects, etc. 
S Large mannfactorer. Enormous deJ mend. Sell on eight. Write et once 
L* for FREE SAMPLES, 




MADISON MILLS. Dept. T-18 

103 Fourth gyy, HIWVOSK IS, W.Y. 



BE A DETECTIVE 

WORK HOME or TRAVEL. Erperienre unneceautrT. 

DETECTIVE Particulars FREE. Write 
GEO. T. H. WAGNER, 125 W. 86th St, N. T. 



it 



STARTS YOU 
IN BUSINESS 



Special troop tap value tl.OO eejlersj 
direct from manufacturer. Now coil 
ST. BO pot amj your casn profit tl.Sf 



per 003. ItCEular tt.EC 

eblp. Lined ao botb ends. lOun, wool iir.'-rlbiijiit. Money -ma king op^'Iv.'i 11 /^^; 1 . 1 ^- 1 ;;';; A.-t. nowl We pay postage. Money back fruaranleo. 
PHILIP S NECKWEAR, 20 W. 22nd St.. Dept. 710. Big York 10, W. Y. 



| DO YOU NEED MONEY? 

■ $40.00 IS YOURS 
I for selling only 60 boxes of our 200 
I greeting card line. And this can be 
" done in B single day. Free samples. 
Other leading boxes on approval. Many 



FREE 
SAMPLES 

Personalized 
STATIONERY 
& NAPKINS 



surprise items. It costs nothing to try. Write today. 
CHEERFUL CUD CO., Dept. AM-1, While Plains, H, 1 



159 



HEART ATTACK OR 
INDIGESTION? 

THANK HEAVENS I Most attacks are just acid indigestion. 
"When it strikes, take Bell-ana tablets. They contain the 
fastest-acting medicines known, to doctors for the relief of 
heartburn, gas and similar distress. 26#. 



ennui 



A CHALLENGE FROM WASHINGTON D.C.! 

I NTEHNATIO N Al ' D ET ECTI VE TRAINING SCHOOL T^Tm 
1701 Monroe St., N.E. Dept. 1 a 3 Winston 18. P- C. 



H*lp Stop Crl 

AniiilliiE tmlnlnc ■ 
TOh (center o( Ha 
GOVT. AGENT an 



MM (rnio the NATIOVS CAP 

' jjav alTntf.u. i "<"; [■■ vck ran : 
oils used by Criminals. Wrllo I< 





Amazinq Chemical Mill 

AUTO WASHER 

Aoto washed In M time. PREST0I 
Dust, pease, dirt, ttnd iJTime disappear liKemsKic. Leaves finishdear. 
lustrous, Autofrlen 



SAMPLES TO INTRODUCE 



KB1STEE CO., 8tpl.14S7,»ton»,ll. 



Piles May Lead to 

Ass ociate d Ailments 

FREE BOOK Explains Causes, 
Effects and Treatment 

If you have) Piles, Fistula, rectal abscess or any rectal of 
colon disorder— here is good news. 




Write today— McCIeary Clinic and Hospital, 397 Elms 
Blvd., Eicelsior Springs, Mo. — for your FREE copy of their 
164 page, illustrated book. 




!» I Easy to nsoViBccWe Homo Method. HealBmsny old 
tea tores caused by legjtmg&Uoa, vsj'™« « ?"f 

trouble and get » FRESI BOOK. 

T. G. VISCOSE COMPANY 
140 N. Dearborn St. Chicago 2, 111. 



^★* A*AA AAA^*-^** AAAA l AAA ******* 

BE GUIDED BY THE STARS 

YOUR DAILY HOROSCOPE 

APPEARS IN EVERY ISSUE OF 

EVERYDAY ASTROLOGY 

Now on Sale — 25c af All Stands! 

* AA »AAA AAA * AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 



STORIES, THE GREEN MAN OF 
GRAYPEC's stubborn survival in the favor 
of science fiction fans is easily explained by 
its long-awaited publication between hard 
covers. An epic stf-adventure story with 
plenty of heavy pseudo-science to carry the 
mail and some of the most fantastic BEMs 
ever cooked up by any author ever. Fast 
and exciting all the way. 

Dollar Reprints 

Of vast interest to stf fans and of potentially vast importance to the work of 
widening - the science fiction reading - public 
is the appearance of the first four $1.00 
volumes of stfantasy classics to be put out 
by Grosset & Dunlap, most famous of all 
hard-cover reprint publishers. They include — 

THE WORD OF A by A. E. van Vogt, the 
epic of non-Aristotelianism (A — or null-A) 
and general semantics which narrates the 
amazingly ubiquitous saga of Gilbert Gosseyn 
(a sort of one-man trio) in an anarchic Solar 
System that is far from ideal despite vast 
future advances. 

FURY by Henry Kuttner, a fine alien fantasy 
of the problems of Immortal Sam Reed amid 
the undersea citadels of Venus in a day when 
Earth has been for ages an atomized dust-pule. 

THE ISLAND OF CAPTAIN SPARROW by 
S. Fowler Wright, in which a doomed-to-deathby-disease Englishman, Charlton Foyle, finds 
refuge on an uncharted Pacific island inhabited 
not only by savage descendants of 19th-century 
pirates and a beautiful French refugee but by 
Satyrs and the remaining scions of a race of 
ancients from whom came the Greeks. 

THE HUMANOIDS by Jack Williamson, 
rather frightening tale of galactic future-culture in which mankind has all sorts of trouble 
with robots and needs a flock of psi qualities 
to even the score to say nothing of the social 
structure. 

AH in all the most memorable month in 
our several years as a science fiction and 
fantasy book reviewer. We hope it is but a 
forerunner of what lies ahead. 

—THE EDITOR 



ENTERTAINMENT ON EVERY PAGE 
OF 

VARIETY CROSSWORD 
PUZZLES 

NOW ON SALE— 25c AT ALL STANDSI 



LOOKING AHEAD 



A 

Forecast 
of 



Good 
Reading 




ONE of the most distinguished authors 
on the current American literary 
scene returns in May to an early love — 
science fiction. And in THE SEED FROM 
SPACE Fletcher Pratt has written a novel 
so different not only in concept but in solution, so well plotted and geared for suspense, 
so ingenious in theme and humanly characterized that it may well be our novel of the 
year. 

Mr. Pratt, whose writings in recent years, 
when non-factual, have been directed more 
toward fantasy than science fiction proper, 
has here attacked a pure pseudo-scientific 
problem based on modern laboratory reality, 
has followed it through to a conclusion so 
unexpected, so vast and so inescapably terrifying that it is going to disturb a lot of 
well-earned rest and spoil a goodly number 
of bucolic outings this summer. 

Along with this arresting theme Mr. 
Pratt has come up with some of the most 
clear-cut and completely human characters 
that we have had the pleasure of meeting 
in manuscript for too many moons. Slater 
and Angelus, Wright and Belle and Yumping Yiminy and the baffled Inez are going 
to be people you know very well indeed — and 
not all of them are going to be your friends. 

Atomic Space- Writing 
To balance a thoroughly unusual novel we 
have come up with an equally unusual long 
novelet, LETTERS OF FIRE by Matt Lee. 
This is a story of a near future that finds 
Earth, fed to the teeth with the privations 
of ideological conflict, interested not only 
in security but in entertainment — with 
[Turn page] 



CARBURETOR TOO RICH 

MAKES MOTORIST TOO POOR 



prnper g 

W1H be pleased to learn bow to save essoins 
by VACU-MATING over-rich miitures. VACUMATIC fits all cars, tracks and tractors. It Is 
atitomatie and operates oo the snpercharg* 
principle. Easily Installed Id a few minute*. 

SALESMEN WANTED! Bi*Pr«nt.i 

Send came, address on penny postcard torftf 
_ (WrtieiiiOT-sand how to get yours (or introdoeinj. 
VACU-MAT1C CO., 7617-170? W. Stftte St* WAUWATOSA, WIS. 



f*~ MA HE EXTRA MONEY -** 



. EVERY BUSINESS EVERYWHERE 
USES UNION LABEL BOOK MATCHES 

No experience, needed to earn big dairy commissions 
Be a di r ect facfary gaprna antatl v u of the world ' a 1 a rcept 
eielasSve ONION LABKL Book Mateo manufacturer 
Prospects everywhere. Feature 
Glamour Girls, Hillbillies. 
Bcenlcs and dozens of other 
styles — Doubts Books — Jumbo 
Books— nearly 100 color combinations. New, bigger portfolio 1 
makes this fastest polling line I 
a res] profit maker for yon. I 
Write TODAY for foil details. I 




BEUEF...0« TOUR MONEY BACK 

Simple, easy to wear truss 
made by old surgical bouse. 
You risk nothing. Write for 
free booklet, Don't delay, 
i GO. Depf.TF-3 HlIKstmm, Ma 



U E Uf I SENSATIONAL DEVICE ■ - ■ 
nCW ! ENABLES ANYONE TO TEST 




OWN 
EYES 



RIGHT AT HOME 
SAVE up to $15.00 en Glass** 

Big News to the millions of Spectacle, 
Wearers and Prospects. Means Freedom 
from Outrageous Prices. Perfect Satisfaction Guaranteed! No Bisk] 

intr Mm *"« W e MONEY QUICK with 

to friends and others. Let them use It Tree and watch their amiizomm ojw this new system of Belt Testim?. Hero la a (treat new opporiSFr Z » trernent Jous new 0«ld of unlimited possibilities. Spare or 
roil time. No eipenenoo or capital needed. Act oulcil 

Clark Optical Ct>., Dept. A-230, 1 148 W. Chicago Aw.. Chicago 22 



Get Sfito ffood P&tiiMif 
AUTO BODY/W FENDER WORK 



k3I=f demand In Auto Hodr and Fender 
work. Start training nowsparetlme 
tt homefor good piy work. Practical 

. j^V Int7. painting, e 

1 Vb^mLW "" or we will show you how to start 
r*WS f ^i7; Mun own Bbop. Behind TJ. E. L 
•"■"•satsiaHasJ TRAINING la a large national orWrite/or' eanlzatloof oanded 1927. Write toSoefa f gay tow FKEE facts — no obi itration. 
Auio-CraftsOlvIsion. UTILITIES ENGINEERING INSTITUTE 

3323 SHBFFIUD AVE., DEPT. XR-S, CHICAGO SS, IU.. 



161 





PRACTICAL^ 

^ ELECTRICITY 

AUDELS HANDY BOOK OF 
PRACTICAL ELECTRICITY for 

Maintenance Engineer!, Electricians 
and All Electrical Workers. A quick, 
simplified, ready reference book, giving complete Instruction & practical 
INSIDE TRADE 

INFORMATION ON 
rules and law? of electricity- maintenance of electrical machinery — A.C. 
and D.C. motor* — Armature winding 
and repair— wirintj diagrams— house 
wiring — power wiring— cable splicing 
— meters — batteries — transformers 
— elevators — electric 
cranes — railways 
bells— sign flashers— tela* 
phone-Tgnltlon-radlo principles — refrigeration L^ 
» air conditioning — oil burners K- 4 - 1 
— air compressors — welding qnd 
1440 PAGES roany modem applications «s- ____ 
•Jdtta if I ll-R Pi°'ned so you con understand. JlSir* 
ZHW | ndexed fQP ready reference. PROFIT I 

j M COMPLETE • PAY $1 A MONTH 

£L TO GET THIS ASSISTANCE FOR YOURSELF 
■ SIMPLY FILL IN AND MAIL COUPON TODAY. 

Btep op your o wn Bfe 11 1 with the facta and ftrnrea of your trade. Audeia 

-ill-.: I in | ' ! (.-;■;] J !::■!, ill '! x:id<- 1 IlfOtll LLltilJIS 111 £6 

hitnily turm, l<"uliy Illustrated fin'l K&sv to Uiiiic-rst;!.Ti(l. TUsSi'.y J :ndarfled-UUeclul y<!i:^iijtf(jr7JJAl:aFIlEI-:i':XAMIJIATI0N. 
Semi Ho Money. Nothing to pay Coalman. 

^■■■■■•CUT HERE. BM ».'«g 

MAIL ORDER 

I AUDEL, Publishers. 49 W. 23 St., "f w vork 

I Ptesso sand mo nosrnaM tor FREE EXAMINATION books 

' -d <jo helnw. it I decide to keen than I bie™o to 

r mall SI monthly on e.icii book or oat until I 

I MN paid price, otherwUe I will return thorn. 

I □HANDY BOOK OF ELECTRICITY, 1440 Pages, .1 4 
- ^fc □ ELECTRICIANS EXAMINATIONS, 250 Pages. . 1 

4^^> □ ELECTRIC WIRING DIAGRAMS, 272 Pages . . 1 

□ ELECTRICDICTIONARY,9Q00Terms 2 

_ D ELECTRIC MOTOR GUIDE, 1000 Pages .... 4 

tf*l«A«*l> □ ELECTRIC P0Y/ER CALCULATIONS. 425 Pages. 2 

VlWUli nRA0l0MANSGUIDE,914Pages 4 

....... nELECTR0NICDEVICES,2ISPages . ..... 2 

MOW! □ ELECTRIC LIBRARY, 7000 Pages (12 Book Sei) 18 

" W,W " U MACHINISTS HANDY 600K jil650Pgs.. . 4 

You Can □ WELDERS GUIDE, 400 Pages 1 

, , " PBLUE PRINT READING. il$ Pages 2 

Look CW n MATHEMATICS 6 CALCULATIONS, VOO Pages. 2 

Anv Guide H SHEET METAL PATTERN lAYOUTS, 1100 Pages 4 

□ SHEET METALWORKERS HANDY BOOK, 388 Pgs. 1 
In Ytmr p MECHANICAL DRAWING! GUIDE, IWPages . . 1 
0un ,Mom« D MECHANICAL DRAWING & DESIGN, 4S0 Pages 2 
W " □ AUTOMOBILE MECHANICS GUIDE. 180Q Pages 4 

— D DIESEL ENGINE MANUAL 675 Pages .... 2 

* _-.t □ AIRCRAFT WORKER, 240 Pages ....... 1 

Start the p MARINE ENGINEERS HANDY BOOK, 1258 Pgs. 4 

EaiyPay- D SHIPFITTERS HANDY BOOK, 250 Pages . . . 1 

Zl. re D REFRIGERATION & Air Conditioning, I2S0 Pgs; 4 

menf it n MILLWRIGHTS& MECHANICS GUIDE, 1200 Pgs. 4 

Satisfied O POWER PLANT ENGINEERS GUIDE, 1500 Pages 4 

O ENGINEERS & Fl REMANS EXAMS, 525 Pages , 1 

A-.- □ PUMPS,Hydiau!lcs&AirCompressors,1658Pgs. 4 

I L □ ENGINEERS LIBRARY (3 Bock Set) 9 

, - - PMECUA .■■.;-:y, 950 Pages. ... 4 

THIS' □ GARDENERS & GROWERS GUIDES (4 Book Set) 6 

wnnAV PCARPENTERS&BUlLDERSGUIDES(4BookSel> 6 

TUJW*I p PLUMBERS a Steamfitters Guides (4 Book Set) 6 

VP MASONS AND BUILDERS GUIDES (4 Booh Set) 6 

P PAINTERS & DECORATORS MANUAL,450Pgs. 2 

pHOUSEHEATINGGUlDE, 1000Pages. .... 4 

P OIL BURNER GUIDE. 384 Pases 1 



IT4 



what is now Hollywood its most important 
center both culturally and industrially. 

Vidar has replaced both the cinema and 
TV as big-time show-business and the competition is terrific, not to say stupendous 
and colossal. Result — one of the greatest of 
vidar stars comes up with atomic spacewriting as an advertising stunt, thereby 
scoring a major scoop. 

Actually the results are more than anyone bargained on. For the sudden flare up 
of artificial space-writing brings Earth, 
heretofore considered an uncivilized border 
planet, to the attention of both sides of the 
gigantic galactic Cold War that has ravaged 
the star-worlds for generations. 

At once agents from both sides, with remarkable equipment, seek to convey their 
Cold War to Earth. And one of these agents, 
Liza, a cute and utterly ruthless cookie, finds 
herself with a fight on her hands before the 
inevitable happens. An hilarious and ingenious satire, the best Lee story to date. 

Captain Future Once More 

Also, come May SS, it will be time to say 
farewell again to a group of old friends, 
Curt Newton, Simon Wright, Grag, Otho, 
Simon Gurty, Joan Randall and the rest 
of the Futurefolk. For in a grand finale of 
a novelet, BIRTHPLACE OF CREATION, 
Edmond Hamilton rewraps the famed Captain Future up for posterity. 

This series, which has appeared regularly in SS during that past year and a quarter, has brought back to modern stf a maturer Captain Future whose ultimate publication in book form should be more or less 
inevitable. But Mr. Hamilton would prefer 
to tackle other characters and other themes 
and we have no intention of saying him nay. 

Short stories — yes, and plenty of them. 
Our roster remains solid and even outstanding in spots. So look for a full fat issue of 
fine stf in May. It appears to be a highly 
promising edition. 

—THE EDITOR. 



Read Our Companion Magazines 

THRILLING WONDER STORIES 

and 

FANTASTIC STORY QUARTERLY 

and watch for the 1951 

WONDER STORY ANNUAL 



J62 




I Send You 
I8BI0 

KITS 



OF RADIOTELEVISION 
EQUIPMENT 




' My Famous Training System Prepares You 
Double Quick For a Good Job or Your Own 
Profitable Radio-Television Business 

Jtp.<lio-Ti']i.'Y^!i>n is now America's greatest opportunity 
field I Trained men are m edud 10 till good jobs and 
handle proli r ji 1 u v i:.i.i;"-Ti levi-lon Seiv;<v work. I have 
framed hundreds nf men roi siiiitss in lladio Television 
—ami I stand ready to T:,:in vuu 100. even if you have 
no previous experience. M> training is In"'; i>ractieai— 
designed to tivc yon (he knowledge and cii>or!eiice yon 
nu'd to make money in Kadio-Telovision in the shortest 
I'osmI,!,. Mm.'. I Train v. ,,, , vll h no-to-t hi-si-rond revised 
le.sot,,- J.'I.I'S mam hii," liils (if K a . I i o - 'IV I . ■'. i .i . ,|i equipment. You aetnaik do over S Icm. .ii:-( rai ions, eiperl
nicnts and niiw! ne: i m iirnjecis. hi addition, you build 
a Powerful 0-tuba-2--b«iu] radio, a multi-range test 
iiu'Ii.t and a coiiiiilt'tc TeU-vLdon rceidvcrl All equipment 
Is YOURS TO KEEP. 

EASY TO MAKE EXTRA MOHEY WHILE YOU LEARH 



al. yoi 
" with 



training with me AT Htf.M v. in -pare hours. Keep 
tne while learning — and earn 
begin sending yi *


The day you enroll I ___ 

i«re time lladio-TV work.' Main ,.< i 
their entire training tiiis wayl You s 



extra cash 

ideas for doinu [inituable 
Sr : iij berry studi "* 
Iirici/N-ss einerii'ii v ami men. 
hulld all your own Radio-TV Test Equip] 
—nothing else 10 buy. Just one more rons. 
amblilous man the biggest value in top 
available anywhere in America today. 



L Radio-TV Training 



BE READY FOR TOP PAYING RADIO TELEVISION JOBS 

Itaiilo-T levislon is growing wilh amazing s|ieed. More than 2000 
Itadio hroadei^unji stations 1'I.VS an addi: ional Television sta)W On tlie air, Itadio sols and TV receivers arc being made 

'"< id tin-akin-- numl i. II vnu eninv workiritc with your 

it von like to do interest in;.- and vaiied work ... If you 
lo make pm.il r-."ii.-v ami work in an ind'.istrv that has o> 
. VUU IilCl.ONI! IN ii.MHO Tld.KV IsfnN. lint you 
? good Training to "rash In" ... the kind of training 
mai siures you out Willi basio fundamentals and parries you right 
through every circuit and oroW.-ii! of Ma-!; . Tel.-.'. ■ .n Servicing and 
llciialr. In a word . . , tint's SpmtMIry Training . , . the course 
backed by more than 20 years of association with the RadioTelevision Industry! 

FREE TELE 16 RADIO AND 



111 'ST 1 




YOU CAN MAKE MONEY... 

TURNING WORTHLESS ORJECTS 
INTO GOLDEN TREASURES— 

. . . B V /H£TAl/Z//V6 / 

HERE ARE JUST A FEW OF THE HUNDREDS OF ARTICLES THAT CAN BE RESTORED 
BY REPLATING- INCREASED IN VALUE -OR "ETERNALIZED" AS KEEPSAKES WITH 
A COATING OF EVERLASTING BRONZE, STERLING SILVER, OR 14 KARAT GOLD. 




Make *5 00 An Hour For Your Spare Time! 

" OWN YOUR OWN HOME-OPERATED BUSINESS 



Amazing book tells you how 



HOW 



f'inipmrr.t — how and v. 



Thin 



-: , , j 



fHnla-.HcT 

. . . Y..f it is nlni.lm. lv tr.i.. ... AS YuU CAN 
QUICKLY PROVE TO YOURSELF. 

AN EXCITING NEW OPPORTUNITY 

Ju.-t at a t\m- wlien huinlreds of men nn.l women 
iviiiLi<ilik<< f.malf iin .-Mr:, f !.', «' I„ i.vi.im n «■.-,■■ 
in ^inr,; tim.- (L-.m.- w..rk. Ill,' ol.l ..MHlilish,-,! BtKlWyh' y pro ri t a til e M i 

ewTiire 



EBrfldS by jewel plating with pre* 

ALL THIS INFORMATION IS FREE 



Wfor 



!aof bi 



h anyone — rffiinlk'si ' nf aire or t 
- learn the fusi-inatir 



NO "CATCH TO THIS OFFER SfflfSS IB 



P 



^HP% ^^Learnahoutthis wonder■fT_\ fill "Ace in the hole". See how 
^Mrwi you can start without risking 
^ij^fe.-/ j" h or check — how you 

<-' an turn sparo hours inlo$f>.00 

bills — how you can actually 
tum fun makinK money in a husinesa 
that all the family can help with. No 
charge now or at any time for the zons in your me. 
R. E. Brandell, Warner Electric Co., 1512 Jams, Dept. 243, Chicago 26, III. 



complete facts about this permanent I 
lifetime business that has now opened 
its door to home operation. Scores of 
men and women have already started i 
. . . Plenty of opportunity for hun- I 
drcds more. BUT DON'T PUT IT I 
OFF. Send your name Find address 
TODAY. . . It may open new hori


■ R. E. Brandell. Warner Electric Co 
I 1S12 Jarvla, Dapt. 3*3 Chicago 26. III. 

| Rush complete facts shcwin B how the olu a 
I pri.lil:il_.l.' M. ti.luina Business hu now been « 



j Addre 



Another Jgenutg ^cnn 
from 




