nEBULR 

science Ficnon 



Price in U.S.A. 



35 



Cents 



DECEMBER, 

1958 




FOR READING THAT'S DIFFERENT 




A. E. ROY, B.Sc, Ph.D., F.R.A.S., F.B.I.S. 

The Earth has one satellite. Jupiter has twelve and Saturn nine, but the 
Earth is unique in that its moon is larger in relation to its primary's size and 
mass than any other moon in the Solar System. In fact the Earth-Moon 
system is more like a double-planet system, the Moon's diameter being more 
than one-quarter the diameter of the Earth while its mass is one-eightieth 
that of the Earth. 

It pursues an elliptical orbit about our planet at an average distance of 
238,000 miles in a period of revolution of 27-j days. Apart from an occasional 
asteroid or comet, the next nearest body is the planet Venus and its nearest 

Continued on inside back coyer 



nEBULA 

science ficTion 



Edited by PETER HAMILTON 



Issue Number Thirty-ThfM 



Novelette : 

TALK NOT AT ALL 



E. C. Tubb 3 



The Thaed were the engineers of life, working upon 
living tissue as the Earthly metallurgist fashions steel 



Short Stories: 

WAY OUT 
MUTE WITNESS 
DEBT OF LASSOR 
CONFLAGRATION 

Four-part Serial: 

WISDOM OF THE GODS (Part Two) 

Special Features: 

Look Here 

Who Rules in Space 

Something to Read 

Scientifilm Previews 

Fanorama 



Robert Lloyd 26 

Clifford C. Reed 35 

N. K. Hemming 39 

Stuart Allen 55 



Kenneth Bulmer 66 



Peter Hamilton 2 

Donald Malcolm 104 

Kenneth Slater 107 

Forrest J. Ackerman 109 

Walter Willis 1 1 1 



Front Cover by Kenneth Barr Back Cover by Kenneth Ban* 

Black and White Illustrations by Kenneth Barr and John J. Greengrass 

NEBULA Science-Fiction is published monthly by PETER HAMILTON, 159 
Crownpoint Road, Glasgow, S.E., Scotland. . * 

Editorial Address: X, I£ylepark Crescent, Uddingston, Glasgow. 

Subscription rates in Great Britain and the British Commonwealth : 12 issues, 24/- stg. ; in the USA. 
and Canada, 12 issues, ?4.oo. All rates post free. Sole distribution rights for Australia and New Zealand 
have been granted to Messrs. Gordon & Gotch- (Australasia), Ltd. 
Application for second-class mail privileges is pending at New York, N.Y. 
No responsibility can be accepted for loss or damage of unsolicited mss. or artwork, 
and while these are invited, adequate return postage should always be enclosed. 
All characters and events in these stories are entirely fictitious, any resemblance to persons living or dead 

is purely coincidental. — * «~« 

Made and printed by Cabitt & Co. Ltd. in the Re P^^ Ireland at Parhgate Prmnng Works. Kingsbrutgt, 



Look here . 



Much has now been said and written about the dawning of the 
Space Age. A great deal of it has come from the mouths and pens of 
those who, prior to the launching of the first Soviet sputnik, were at one 
with many of our leading astronomical " authorities " in deriding the 
whole conception of space travel; while rather less has emanated from 
those who have maintained throughout the truly scientific attitude of the 
Open Mind. 

One of the most interesting single comments came from a man 
who has always shown a remarkably lively interest in the scientific, the 
technological and, indeed, in every worthwhile and forward-looking 
aspect of modern life. I refer, of course, to H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, who, speaking at a discussion entitled " Britain Enters the Space 
Age ", in April of this year, alluded to the research programmes currently 
being carried out both by the U.S.A. and Soviet Russia and stated that 
he did not believe that Great Britain and the Commonwealth would be 
prepared to sit back and allow others to explore the universe around 
them. " Research is almighty expensive," declared the Duke. " We 
could only possibly go in for this if we were prepared to make very 
considerable sacrifices in other directions." 

This is all too true as far as it goes, but it should also be borne 
in mind that the people of Great Britain and, indeed, of every other 
civilised country in the world, are already making tremendous sacrifices 
to finance the manufacture and testing of nuclear weapons which, 
through their cumulative effect upon the level of radioactivity in the 
atmosphere of this planet can only have disastrous consequences for mankind — and this, even if they are never put to their evil and predestined 
purpose. 

Such sacrifice as this — and it runs to truly gigantic sums of money 
each year — could just as easily be put towards a realistic programme of 
taming our environment here on Earth, with the ultimate result of providing security and plenty for all and thereby removing the fundamental 
cause of war (as well as the need for nuclear weapons) for ever. No less 
important, however, would be an intensified and, if possible, unified 
attack on the problems of spaceflight so that the human race, able to 
expand once more, would cease, mentally as well as physically, to stagnate and turn in upon itself. 

The late Mike Todd has been quoted as saying that poverty is a 
state of mind while to be broke is but a temporary predicament. Which 
is it with we, the inhabitants of Earth? JLet us sacrifice, by all means, 
but let our sacrifices be worthwhile. 




E. C. TUBB 



Talk Not At All 



The Thaed were the engineers of life, working upon 
living tissue as the Earthly metallurgist fashions st°d 



Illustrated by Kenneth Barr 



They say, those who claim to know, that when a man grows 
old death loses much of its terror and that, at the very end, he wili 
welcome it almost as a friend. 

It may well be so. The time will come, perhaps, when I will be 
able to make a personal test of this assumption. Until then I can only 
work on observed data and, working on such data, I have my doubts. 

My data was the oldest and most terrified man I had ever met. 
His name was Gerald Lancaster and he sat facing me across a table 
in Lee Hung's Palace of Ineffable Delights which swung in a lazy 
orbit above the Earth a score of thousand miles below. 

"lama desperate man, Conwell," he said. " I want you to 
understand that." 

Looking at him I could well believe it. He was tense with strain, 
a strain which had become so much a part of him that now it was 

3 



4 



NEBULA 



difficult to see how he could ever relax. He was thin with an almost 
painful gauntness and his face, hook-nosed, lantern-jawed, was a 
finely engraved mass of lines. Sparse white hair straggled over a 
domed skull and his eyes, sunken deep in shadowed sockets, were 
wary and furtive, darting like trapped lizards, beneath shaggy brows. 

" Desperate enough," he continued, " to have sent for you." 

A goblet rested before me, a delicate thing of transparent porcelain gilded with the misty touches of a hair-fine brush. A ruby liquid 
rested in oily quiescence within the goblet and the air above it quivered as if from heated vapour. I lifted it, swirled the contents with a 
turn of my wrist and held it beneath my nostrils. A heady vapour 
assailed my senses as I inhaled. 

"Are you listening?" Lancaster sounded peevish, he was not 
used to having men do other than anticipate his wishes. 

Again I inhaled and then set down the goblet. A troupe of 
winged Sirians danced into the open space above our heads and I 
watched their graceful gyrations as coloured lights sparkled from their 
irridescent scales. When the vapour had cleared from my head I 
looked at the man facing me. 

" You sent for me and you are desperate," I said. " Two facts. 
Perhaps it would help us both if you were to tell me a little more. 
For example, what has made you desperate?" 

" Fear," he said. " The fear of death." 

" Assassination?" It was a logical question. A man as rich and 
as powerful as Lancaster would run the normal hazards. He dismissed the notion with contempt. 

" I can take care of such matters," he said, and his eyes flickered 
to the surrounding tables. Men sat there talking to gaily painted 
women but the eyes of these men did not smile in company with their 
mouths. 

" What then?" 

" I told you. I fear to die." 

" All men must die." I uttered the platitude without thought or 
feeling. It was obvious. All men had to die as they had to breathe. 
Lancaster startled me with the vehemence of his protest. 

"Why, Conwell? Why?" His eyes burned like stars in the 
shadows of his brows. " Why must all men die? Because they have 
always done so? Follow that logic and what of progress? Men have 
to break away from what is and find new paths or we would not have 
fire, the wheel, the means to traverse the gulf between the stars." He 
controlled himself with an obvious effort; his doctors must have 



TALK NOT AT ALL 



warned him against excessive 
emotion. " Think of me as a 
fool if you wish, but I. prefer 
to be considered a pioneer. 
Someone has to be the first to 
cheat death. Why not I?" 

The Sirian aerial dancers 
had gone; in their place was a 
coiling amorphous being from 
some wayward planet, who 
hung suspended beneath drifting lights and emitted subaudible harmonies of nostalgic 
sadness. 

" You have summoned the 
wrong man," I said. " I am not 
a gerontologist and I have small 
medical knowledge." 

" You are a space pilot, a 
trader, a man of many parts and 
a man of dubious reputation." 
Lancaster caressed the delicate 
porcelain of his goblet. " I know 
all about you, Earl Conwell." 

I could have argued, but I 
let it pass. Instead I 'concentrated on the poignant thrummings from the thing above our 
heads. 

" Medical science cannot 
aid me," said Lancaster. "I 
have financed my own group of 
gerontologists for the past halfcentury but, aside from devising certain means to give a 
transient strength to this wornout body, they have failed. All 
modern science has failed. All 
available science." He stressed 
the operative word and looked 
at me, his eyes strange in the 
drifting lights. 




6 



NEBULA 



" Available?" 

"Let us rather say, readily available." His hand caressed 
the goblet again and I could sense his hesitation. The lure of escape 
from reality into a dream-world induced by the heady vapours must, 
to him, have been a temptation hard to resist. He thrust aside the 
goblet so that it slid from the table and shattered into splintered 
shards on the floor. 

" I will be frank with you, Conwell," he said harshly. " I want 
to contact the Thaed." 

I said nothing. Those who know nothing about the Thaed use 
their name as an atheist uses the name of God, without thought or 
feeling or understanding. Those who know a little talk about them 
less and those who know more than a little, talk about them not at all. 

" You heard me, Conwell?" 

" I heard you." 

" Then you know what I want. The Thaed can help me, I'm 
sure of it, and I want you to arrange a contact for me." 

The amorphous thing had been replaced by a living ball of coloured light, hypnotic in its rhythmic pulsations. From it hummed a 
singularly sweet melody which seemed to hang and quiver in the 
scented air. 

I looked at Lancaster, realising for the first time the extent of his 
desperation. He had reached the panic stage in which he would try 
anything and everything and give thought or consideration to none. 

" Do you realise what you ask?" I said. *' Can you realise it?" 

"I think that I can." He was breathing fast now, like a man 
who has run a long way. " I have little to offer," he said, and now 
he was almost humble. " I have only money, but I will pay you what 
you want. You can have anything you want — if you will conduct 
me to the Thaed." 

"And if I refuse?" My answer was written on his face. It 
would not be hard for Lancaster to avenge himself on any who 
crossed his will. " It will be dangerous," I warned. " More dangerous than you realise." 

" I can only die," he said, and seemed to gain comfort from what 
he said. 
To disillusion him would have been unkind. 

Memory is a treacherous thing. Seven years earlier I had fled 
from the planet of the Thaed vowing never to return. I had had my 
reasons, and yet time dulls memory as it dulls pain and fear and grief. 



TALK NOT AT ALL 



7 



I had suffered much and yet I had been fortunate also. Sometimes I 
felt the prickle of fear as I realised just how fortunate I had been. 
' And yet I was again approaching the planet of the Thaed. 
There is an awful fascination in danger and the risk of destruction. And the greater the risk the more potent the lure. Men have 
gambled their lives on the turn of a card or the spin of a revolver 
chamber and, winning, they gamble again. And they gamble voluntarily, without duress, and do not regard themselves as insane. So 
I could not, in all fairness, regard myself as other than sane for doing 
what I did. 

I thought about it as I stared at the warp-drive. It sat like a fat 
spider in the heart of the ship, chuckling to itself with electronic power 
as it gathered the threads of space and time, spinning us along the 
web of the universe in a strange, half-real, half-dream dimension. 
We did not exist, the ship, the machine, those in the ship. We would 
not exist until our journeying had been completed and we were spat 
into reality in the environs of the planet of the Thaed. 

It was quiet within the ship, aside from the chuckling of the drive 
there was no sound, and yet so softly did the woman move that I 
sensed rather than heard her as she came towards me. 

" How is Lancaster?" 

" Sleeping." Her name was Oitheria. She was tall with a welldeveloped body and hair which was like spun sunshiny on a summer's 
day. Her skin was warmly saffron and her eyes were grey barriers to 
secrets no man has ever solved. She was Lancaster's doctor and, 
aside from he and I, the only person on the ship. 

I remembered how I had protested when I had first learned that 
she was to accompany.us. 

" You're a fool for going, Lancaster, and I'm a bigger fool for 
taking you, but let us not add to our folly. The nurse stays behind." 

" She is my doctor," said Lancaster. " I need her." 

" But a woman. To Thaed! " It had seemed obscene to me then 
as it did now, but he did not, could not, understand. 

" I trust her," he had said simply. " And she is willing." 

I had argued no further. She was adult and, even though she 
was ignorant, it was not for me to educate her away from her 
desire. Once aboard she had taken charge of Lancaster while I 
attended to the task of plotting our course away from sanity. It was 
a long journey and it would have been easy for me to have allowed 
myself to be drawn towards her, but I remained aloof. A wise man 
does not permit himself barren emotions at any time and a man would 
be a fool indeed to fall in love on the way to Thaed. 



8 



NEBULA 



" You are tense," said Clitheria, and her voice matched the perfection of her body. " Are we close?" 
" Yes." 

" Curt, too." She sighed and stared at the chuckling machine. 
"Iam not used to such curtness from men." 

" Why do you go to Thaed?" The question burst from me 
despite all my resolve not to interfere. " Lancaster said that he 
needed you but that was a lie. He may have thought that he did but 
you and I know better." 

" Lancaster is a sick and frightened man," she evaded. *' It 
gives him comfort to be attended by one he can trust." 

" He can trust me." I stared at her in sudden suspicion. " Does 

he?" 

" He has to trust you." Again she was evasive. " But out here, 

alone, with a man he has just met " 

"He is a fool!" 

" He is a man who has lived solely by reason of unremitting 
caution. Would you be trusting if you were he?" 

" If I were he I would not be going to Thaed." 

" Perhaps, but you are. going nevertheless." 

" For a million deposited in my name. For the threat of assassination should I have refused." I looked at her. " Were I a wise man 
I would have run the risk of assassination." 

" A live dog is of greater worth than a dead lion," she said 
softly. "And a million is not lightly, to be refused." 

" A million, on Thaed, is worth no more than the breath in your 
lungs." I moved from the chuckling machine and stared to where a 
spot of irridescent shadow rested on the wall. In normal space it was 
a direct vision port. Casually I said: "And you? How much is 
Lancaster paying you?" 

" A quarter million." She said it simply, without shame or embarrassment. " The cost of a small hospital on Tanamasuri. There 
are still undeveloped places in our portion of the Galaxy, you know/' 

I knew that, and I knew of Tanamasuri also. I turned and 
looked at her with a new respect. It seemed odd that a woman with 
her grace and skill should choose to spend her life in the cesspool of 
the Galaxy. She noted my expression and, with a woman's skill, 
changed the subject. 

" You fear the Thaed," she said. " Why?" 

" I " My throat seemed to close on what I wanted to say. 

" I can't tell you." And it was the truth, the literal truth. I could 
think, yes. I could warn, yes. But I could not go into detail. She 



TALK NOT AT ALL 



9 



stepped towards me, halting with her face inches from my own and 
her hand, soft and almost caressing, touched my forehead. 

" You mean it," she said wonderingly. " You are unable to tell 
me." The doctor replaced the woman and a glint of understanding 
hardened her eyes. " Conditioning," she said wonderingly. " Something has been done to your mind so that there are things of which 
you cannot speak." Her hand fell away from my face and her sharp, 
white teeth dug into her lower lip. " Now," she whispered, " for the 
first time, I am beginning to know fear." 

" You do well to fear." My voice was harsh, unnatural. " It 
is not by accident that the name of the Thaed and the name of their 
planet is an anagram of death." 

Then the machine abruptly finished its chuckling. There was 
an instant of twisting strain, the shadowed irridescence flickered from 
the port, and the cold stars flashed into being. 

Below us the planet of the Thaed loomed against the glittering 
backdrop of the universe. 

It was vast, that planet, a great, featureless ball shielded by 
crimson cloud and swinging its lonely path around a dying sun. It 
was vast, but I knew that its density was such that its gravity was a 
little less than Earth normal. I felt sweat bead my forehead as I 
stared towards it. 

We had been seven. Seven men and a ship which was mostly 
junk, trying to scrape a living by dubiously honest trading among the 
scattered planets of the Rim. The natives had attacked on Fronden's 
World and then we were five. The pile blew while we were in warp 
and we'd emerged near Thaed with the ship a shambles and the crew 
more dead than alive. 

We had landed on Thaed. 

I felt someone close to me and turned to find Lancaster at my 
side. He had rested during the trip but, nevertheless, he had aged. 
His hands, thick-veined and with swollen knuckles, trembled as he 
rested them below the port. 

" Thaed?" 

" Yes." 

" At last ! " He breathed the words as if they were a prayer. His 
head tilted as he stared at something to the edge of the port. 
" Those?" 

" Orbiting vessels of the Galactic Federation." I stared at the 



10 



NEBULA 



strange, polyhedron-shaped vessels which, I knew, enclosed the planet 
in an invisible skein of watchful alertness. One day, perhaps, Earth 
would be admitted to the Federation and would share the benefits and 
responsibilities of that vast civilisation. When that day came we 
would be truly adult. 

" Will they stop us?" Clitheria's voice sounded in my ear. 

" No. The planet is in strict quarantine to the Federation but 
not to us. They regard us almost as if we were dirty little children 
toying with undesirable pastimes." My voice must have echoed my 
bitterness. " Perhaps we are." 

" And yet they find it necessary to quarantine the planet against 
their own?" Clitheria was sceptical. 

" You do not understand." I gestured towards one of the 
vessels. " They are not there to prevent entry to Thaed but to prevent egress of the Thaed to the universe. They are a barrier around 
a cancer." 

" If they fear the Thaed then why do they not destroy them?" 

" The Galactic Federation believes in the sanctity of life," I said 
wearily. " It is the reason for our own continued existence." 

I was tired of the discussion, and left them while I went to the 
control room there to signal to the orbiting vessels. The face of the 
monitor, as was usual whenever I made contact with a Federation 
vessel, filled me with the depression of inferiority. Not that he was 
arrogant, quite the reverse. But it was as if an aborigine should 
contact a civilised man who has already discarded as unimportant the 
things in which the aborigine takes pride. 

I did not like to feel that I was an aborigine and I was not proud 
of what I was doing. 

Then came the moment I had been dreading, the moment of 
no-return. Even now we could have left the vicinity of Thaed, slipped 
back 'into warp-drive and headed back to sanity. It would have been 
the wise thing to do and it would have given us stature in the eyes of 
the watching vessels, but even as the temptation came, so it died. 

I signalled to the Thaed. 

There was no response and I had expected none. The screen 
remained blank while my words dissolved into emptiness, lost in space 
and the regions below the crimson cloud. I had shouted into silence 
and had not received even an echo in return. But, now that I had 
shouted, there was only one thing left for me to do. 

I operated the controls which sent the vessel humming towards 
the surface below. 



TALK NOT AT ALL 



II 



We landed on the shore of a vast,, oily sea. There was no wind 
on this part of Thaed so that the thick, almost opaque waters rested 
stagnant beneath the crimson sky. A winged thing had guided us to 
this place. First it had appeared on the screen and then, almost immediately, before us, beating the air with tremendous wings, its razorbilled head pointed the path we had to take. We had landed and it 
had gone and now we were alone. 

And yet, not quite alone. I spotted them as we left the ship and 
halted in my tracks, my hands catching at the others. Around us, 
tiny against the sand of the shore, rested a host of tiny winged insects. 
Smaller than bees and of the same colour as the sand, they were 
almost invisible. They surrounded us, crawling on the sand or lancing delicately through the heavy air before settling again. Clitheria 
tried to catch one, would have done had I not knocked her arm 
roughly aside.. I stilled her protest. 

" Don't touch them. They sting and their sting will paralyse." 

" What are they?" 

" You could call them the committee of welcome." I was not 
being humorous. " Should we try anything, then they will attack. 
Let us sit down." 

" But " 

"We have a choice," I said gently. "We can sit down or 
we can lie paralysed and helpless. In either case we have to wait." 

We sat and waited. Lancaster, naturally, was loquacious. He 
stared at the barren shore and the oily sea. He squinted up at the 
clouds and then distastefully at the watching insects. He was disappointed and he said so. And I knew why. 

He had paid me a million for something he could have done for 
himself. There was no secret as to the location of Thaed. An autopilot would have both reached and landed on the planet. He had 
hired me to be his guide, his mentor, his agent to bargain with the 
Thaed for the thing he wanted. He had not realised that the Thaed 
operated under their own code. There were many things he had not 
realised. Discovering them would strain his sanity. 

Something huge broke the water at the edge of the shore and 
slithered towards us. I seized both Lancaster and Clitheria as they 
started to their feet and instinctively turned towards the ship. There 
was no safety in flight, the insects would see to that. There was no 
possibility of retreat either and for the same reason. Once a person 
landed on Thaed he stayed until given permission to depart. 

" Relax," I said softly. " It won't hurt us." 



NEBULA 



- It was hard to believe. The thing was larger than the largest 
whale ever to swim earthly oceans. Its colossal head tapered to 
a whip-like body; the undulations of that body providing its motion. 
The mouth, scant feet away from us and extending half-way down the 
grotesque head, opened revealing a cavernous interior ringed with 
teeth and fringed with ropy cilia. 
"Enter," it said. 

The unexpected is always shocking; the unnatural always terrifying, and the sound of that thick, bubbling, yet vaguely human voice 
made a mockery of the ordered scheme of things. I felt the others 
strain against my grasp so that I had to exert my strength to hold 
them. 

" Enter," the thing said again, and its ropy cilia reached towards 

us. 

I stepped towards it, dragging the others with me. 

" No ! " Clitheria fought to free herself. " No ! " 

" We have no choice." I stepped within the great orifice of the 
mouth. " If we refuse the insects will sting us into paralysis and the 
cilia will drag us inside." 

Darkness closed around us as the thing closed its mouth. Movement swayed us from side to side as it retreated back into the ocean. 
Then there was nothing but a gentle vibration from the spongy surface on which we stood. 

I sat down, the others with me, and found that I could talk with 
a freedom impossible before. 

" The Thaed are biological engineers," I said. " They construct 
things from living flesh and bone and tissue as we build from steel 
and plastic and stone. This thing," I slapped my hand down on the 
spongy surface, " is little more than a means of transportation. It is 
self-repairing, self-fueling, self-sufficient. Probably it can also breed 
others of its kind." 

" And intelligent?" Clitheria asked the question. 

" To a certain extent, no doubt." 

" It spoke," she said. " It spoke in our own language."I did not answer. 

" It had the voice of a man." Lancaster spoke from the darkness. His hand found my arm, the old fingers digging into my flesh 
with surprising strength. " Conwell! It had the voice of a'man!" 

"You thought that it did. Any voice speaking in a familiar 
tongue would give that impression." 

" No." He remained silent for a long time, so long that I won


TALK NOT AT ALL 



13 



dered whether he had fallen asleep. " You haven't told all you know, 
Gonwell," he said thickly. " Are you trying to trick me?" 
"No." 

" How can I be sure of that?" I detected a thin note of hysteria 
in his voice. " You've been here before. You- " 

"Stop it!" The thin note of hysteria had risen and that, 
coupled with my own fear, resolved itself into anger. " I warned you 
against coming here, didn't I? Now that we're here we'll have to take 
what is coming. Whining about it won't make things better." 

" Information would," said Clitheria quietly. " You could tell 
us more than you have." 

" What can I say? What do you imagine I know of the Thaed? 
Do you want to listen to rumours? Shall I tell you that they take 
human bodies arid human brains and build them into monsters? Is 
that what you want me to say?" 

" Do they?" 

" I don't know," I said desperately. " I don't know." 
But I did know and I shuddered in the darkness as the thing 
in which we sat carried us towards the Thaed. 

I had seen them before and thought that I would never forget 
them and yet, when later I had tried to describe them, I found it 
impossible. How do you describe an attitude, an emotion, a sense of 
intangibles? But now, seeing them again, it seemed incredible that 
I could ever have forgotten. 

I went to my knees before the tall, cowled figure and my head 
bent to the polished stone. 

" Master," I said. " I have returned." 

" Rise." The voice was emotionless, the voice of a machine. 
The word was without accent or inflexion yet it carried an authority 
I dared not question. I rose and heard the suck of breath behind me 
as the others noted my action. 

We had left our living transport at the mouth of a tunnel drilled 
into a sheer wall of ebon stone. We had followed it to a small chamber 
and there we had waited until three cowled figures had stepped from 
an opening. My action and my words had been involuntary, something I could no more help than I could still the beating of my heart. 

" Tell them," said Lancaster. " Tell " 

He fell silent, not because of anything said or done but simply 
because it was the thing to do. Men do not carouse in church nor do 



14 



NEBULA 




they shout in libraries. By the same token here was not the place for 
speech. 

The cowled figures left the chamber and we followed. Again no 
word was said or gesture given; we followed because it was the thing 
to do. Our path led along winding passages of polished stone lit from 
above by drifting lights which, somehow, gave the impression of sentient organisms. They clustered just before our path, dispersing when 
we had passed, so that we were constantly attended by a cluster of 
drifting lanterns. 

Clitheria's hand stole into mine. 

It was quiet, only the sounds of our own feet broke the utter 
stillness, the Thaed made no sound at all. I watched them as we 
walked, tall, cowled figures, their coverings touching the stone so that 
it was impossible to see their feet. 

Did they have feet? Did they walk on pads or glide like snails? 
Did they, even, touch the floor at all? To ask was to indulge in fruitless speculation. I had been here before but I had never seen a 
Thaed. All I had seen were their cowls which hid even their features. 
If they had hands and arms they remained hidden; faces and eyes the 
same. I could only guess at the nature of their bodies. 

We entered a vast hall and Clitheria's hands tightened on mine. 

It was big, that hall, so big that the drifting lanterns seemed like 
stars as they hovered above. The light was a soft twilight which revealed shape but not detail. Against one wall hung a tapestry, a 
thing of shimmering fibres and sombre colour. Things moved over it 



TALK NOT AT ALL 



15 



as if they were spiders spinning a web and, as I watched, one swung 
down towards me, strands streaming from orifices on its body. 
It was not a spider. 

I heard Lancaster suck in his breath and his voice, thickened 
with horror, rang in the stillness. 
"God! "he said. "God!" 

From the tapestry, from shadowed corners where distorted creatures toiled at their endless task of polishing the adamantine stone, 
from the upper regions beyond sight, came a thin, answering chorus, 
chittering and laden with the ultimate in despair. 

Then silence resumed its sway, the stillness seeming even more 
tangible because of its breaking. 

The Thaed had paused in the centre of the hall where stood a 
table of stone. Lights drifted down from the upper levels and illuminated our faces as we approached. I felt the edge of the table hit my 
thighs and halted, Lancaster to my left and the woman to my right. 
I tried not to think of what we had seen swinging from the tapestry. 
Silence mounted around us and then, suddenly, I knew the time had 
come to speak. 

Lancaster felt it too and words tumbled from his mouth as if 
they were escaping from under pressure. I listened to him without 
paying attention, I knew what he had to say. Then it was my turn 
and I swallowed my fear. 

" I want nothing from the Thaed," I stammered. " Once you 
gave me life and for that I am grateful. Now I have returned." 

For a long moment I stood, the sweat starting on my forehead 
and then something, perhaps the impact of alien eyes left me and 
Clitheria began to speak. 

"I am a woman who can never become a mother," she said 
evenly. " Radiation scars have rendered me barren beyond the aid 
of known medicine. I would be whole again." 

I felt horror grip me as I heard what she had to say. All along 
I had suspected some deeper reason than Lancaster's money for bringing her to Thaed. I damned myself for not having questioned 
more closely, warned more strongly while there had yet been time. 
And yet I knew that it was a vain regret. I could not have uttered 
the words to warn her away, not then and not even now. 

The silence closed around us again when Clitheria voiced her 
wishes. The Thaed stood as immobile as statues of stone and only 
-the drifting lights above our heads showed signs of life. I became 
conscious of a multitude of eyes staring at us from the tapestry, the 
roof, the shadowed comers, 



16 



NEBULA 



" You may speak." 

Which of the Thaed had given the command I did not know, but 
that it was addressed to me there could be no doubt. For now I could 
speak as I had not been able to do before. But not in warning, in explanation. 

It was too late for warnings. 

" The Thaed are masters of life," I said dully. " They are 
biological engineers working with living materials as we work with 
ores and minerals. As surgeons they are, and have ever been, unequalled anywhere in the known universe. They are an old race, how 
old even they have forgotten, and it may well be that they were responsible for adapting and spreading lif e as we know it." I hesitated, 
not liking what I next had to say. " It would even be reasonable to 
give them the credit for our creation." 

I paused, wondering just how I had acquired this knowledge. 
Not for the first time I wondered just what they had built into my 
shattered body when I lay helpless in their chambers. A certain 
amount of conditioning, that I now knew, but what else?" 

" They are an old race and a decadent one. They have retained 
their manipulative skill but it has turned upon itself. They distort 
flesh and bone to create objects which have no real place in the 
scheme of things and they do this for no other reason than that it 
interests them to do it." 

And that was true, I had reason to know it. Words such as 
" amuse " could not be applied to the Thaed any more than words like 
" help " and " hate ". But how could anyone explain the Thaed? 
How can anyone explain what it is that makes a man watch a line of 
marching arits and then, for no reason, either step on them or remove 
an obstacle from their path? 

" Anyone can come to the Thaed," I continued. " And the 
Thaed will give them what they demand. But there is one stipulation. The Thaed will either give you what you want in the way you 
want it, or they will give it to you in a manner decided by themselves. 
In either case they will keep to the letter of your demands." The ait 
seemed to have grown thicker around me. " Those terms apply to 
any and everyone who lands on this planet." 

They did not understand, I could tell it from their expressions. 
Lack of imagination, perhaps, or a blind refusal to face the obvious. 
But they had to understand, it was essential. 

" They can give me eternal life?" Greed shone in Lancaster's 
eyes. I glanced at the motionless Thaed. 

" I don't know. If it is at all possible they will do it." 



TALK NOT AT ALL 



17 



" That's all I wanted to know." He almost hugged himself with 
delight. He had forgotten what he had seen on the tapestry. Clitheria 
was not so blind. 

" You said something about terms," she said. " Just what did 
you mean?" 

" I said that the Thaed would keep to the letter of your demands, 
but there are two ways of doing that." 

She was beginning to understand. I saw her face whiten as 
she glanced at the things scuttling on the walls. Lancaster was 
still bemused by his dream of immortality. 

" A million and a quarter it's cost me to come here," he said. 
" But it's worth it, every bit of it. If you give me what I ask," he 
continued, addressing the Thaed, " I'll give you five million. Ten! 
Anything you want ! " 

" You fool ! " Anger boiled within me, rage induced by fear and 
perhaps something else. Was I, all unknowing, the instrument of the 
Thaed? Was this why I found myself beginning to hate the cheap 
huckstering of this money-mad dotard? 

" Seven years ago I landed here in a wrecked ship with two companions." I forced myself to speak calmly, hard though it was. " We 
were injured, all of us, injured in the worst possible way. The pile 
had blown and what wasn't broken was burned and what wasn't 
burned was rotting with radiation sores. Anywhere else we would 
have died within hours of landing." 

" So?" 

" So we wanted to live and the Thaed gave us what we wanted. 
I was the lucky one, I lived the way I wanted to, in the shape and 
form of a man. The others — well, they lived, too, after a fashion. 
If you can call it living." 

" The tapestry ! " Clitheria shuddered as she stared at it. " That 
thing ?" 

" Jud Owens," I said bleakly. " Once a man and now what you 
see. They showed him to me before I left." 
" And the other one?" 

" I don't know. I don't want to know. The only thing I am 
certain of is that he is alive and conscious and that every second of 
every day he prays for death;" 

" God!" Lancaster looked physically ill; I couldn't blame him. 
" Let's call it off," he muttered. " Let's get away from here." 

" You can't." I was brutally frank. " You came here of your 
own free will but you will leave only by permission of the Thaed. 
And they will only let you go when the bargain is complete." I 



18 



NEBULA 



sought for a word to express my meaning. " Bored "? It wasn't 
correct but it would have to do. 

" They are bored," I said. " They have few diversions and are 
unable to acquire raw material because of the orbiting Federation 
vessels. They have to wait for fools like us to come to them." 

" But you didn't suffer here," said Clitheria. " At least you are 
still a man and not a thing. Why you and not them?" 

" I won the gamble," I said, and knew that I should have told 
them of this before. " There is a test, a competition, a chance of 
sorts and if you v/in it, then you win everything; if you fail, then you 
are their property, to do with as they will." 

" What is the competition?" 

" I don't know." It was the truth, I did not know. If I had ever 
possessed a memory of it, then that memory had been removed. I had 
even lost all memory of how I had been informed of the test at the 
time. Yet there was a vague recollection of a husky voice whispering 
to me from behind veils of darkness. 

And, because of this, I acted like a fool. 

"Master." My knees lowered to the. stone and my forehead 
touched the ground. " I have made no demands and wish nothing 
from the Thaed. I returned with others. Is it your will that I must 
do as they?" 

An aching moment of silence and then an unmistakable wave of 
negation. Elation was a living flame within me; I was to be allowed 
to go free. 

I was tempted then, tempted almost to insanity, but I turned my 
head and caught a glimpse of the woman's face and read the horror 
that she was trying so desperately to conceal. And I thought of her 
as she might well become. 

"Master." I grovelled when I would have preferred to stand 
and face the Thaed with the pride of my race. But I could no more 
help my actions than I could restrain the offer which blurted from my 
lips. 

" Master. Let me take the woman's place in the chance proposed. Let her have what she demands without condition. Let me 
take her risk. If I win we both go free; if I lose she goes free and 
you do with me what you will." 

" Earl ! " Her instinctive cry of denial rang through the cloying 
stillness of the hall as a blade of light slashing through darkness. 
"Earl! No!" 

I did not answer. Her cry died and stillness closed about us and 
the period of aching silence was longer than before. I seemed to 



TALK NOT AT ALL 



19 



sense communion between the Thaed and, had they been men, I 
would have had hope. Men would have known surprise, curiosity, 
a touch of wonder, perhaps, as to why one being should risk so much 
for another. But the Thaed were not men and their emotions, if they 
knew emotion at all, were incomprehensible in their alien strangeness. 

Then it came again, that wave of utter negation, and the breath 
sighed from my lungs and I was coward enough to feel relief. 

My offer had been refused and Clitheria would have to face her 
ordeal alone. 

I did not look at her as they led us from the hall. 

I was alone in a living tomb an unknown depth beneath the 
surface of an alien planet and my thoughts were not easy to bear. We 
had separated when we had left the hall; each following a silent guide, 
Lancaster and the woman each to their respective chambers where 
they would be tested, examined, put to their ordeal, while I waited in 
my living tomb. 

I looked at it again in the soft light of a drifting lantern, thankful 
that I was not wholly in the dark. The walls were of a soft, moss-like 
growth, the floor of stone. A raised portion, also moss-covered, served 
as a couch, aside from these the place was bare. There was no door 
but, just beyond the narrow slit, lurking at the edge of vision, 
squatted something I was glad I could not see. The Thaed needed no 
inorganic barriers when they had their creations shaped to serve their 
purpose. 

Waiting is always hard; when tormented by imaginative speculation it can be refined torture. A thousand times I thought of Clitheria 
and the primeval urge which had brought her to this place. I thought 
of her as I had last seen her and then I thought of her as she might 
well be if fortune was against her. And I thought, how often I 
thought, of the machinery of the test she would have to undertake. 

I had passed through it and yet I had no memory of it. That 
memory could have been removed and yet, pacing the narrow confines 
of my cell beneath the soft light of the living lantern, I began to have 
doubts. How can a man understand alien patterns of behaviour? It 
was possible that I had been tested without even knowing the nature 
of the test or how I had won. A boy could set a barrier before an ant 
and decide that, if the ant turned to the left it would be allowed to 
live; if to the right it would be destroyed. And if the ant turned 
to the left and so was allowed to go on its way how would it know 
that it had won a test? How could it know? 

And, to the Thaed, men were less than ants. 



20 



NEBULA 



Time ceased to have meaning itr the soft-lit darkness. The 
smooth passage of the hands of my watch seemed divorced from 
reality and it was with something almost akin to shock that I found 
myself stumbling as I paced and the poisons of fatigue dulling my 
eyes and mind. I was exhausted, carried by nerves and tension to 
the brink of collapse. Or was it natural fatigue? Could there haye 
been a subtle exhudation from the surrounding moss? A vapour 
which dulled the senses, perhaps, a drug which quietened fear and 
induced sleep? 

I did not know and had no way of telling but, as I sprawled on 
the yielding softness of the couch, it did not seem to matter. Nothing seemed to matter but the need for rest, for sleep, for escaping the 
torment within my mind. I slept and, when I awoke, I was a helpless prisoner. 

The moss was more than normally alive, that I had suspected; 
that it was a symbiote I had not dreamed. I opened my eyes and tried 
to rise and found that I could not. Tendrils fastened my arms to the 
couch, other tendrils laced across my chest, my legs, my throat. Something had grown onto my scalp and, as I lay in momentary terror, I 
realised that other extensions had penetrated into my body. 

My terror did not last. It died in the moment of its birth and, 
in its place, came a wonderful tranquility, a sense of peace and 
termination of struggle. I and the moss were one. It would feed me, 
remove my waste, calm and soothe my fears so that, wrapped within 
its embrace, I could rest like a child in the womb. In return it took 
what litde it needed and took it without harm to myself. Together we 
were greater than individuals apart. 

And, somehow, it could communicate. 

There were no words; words are clumsy things.. There was no 
direct induction of concepts or visual images, our communion was 
more subtle than that. Instead I fell into a peculiar semi-dream state 
in which I seemed to see through other eyes and gain knowledge of 
things I had never been taught. Time and space ceased to be barriers 
so that, even while I knew my body was lying somnolent in the embrace of the symbiote, I seemed possessed of a strange mobility. It 
was as if I had left myself so that I stared down at my own figure and 
yet, at the same time, was aware of something looking down at me. 

It was as if I had merged with the consciousness not only of the 
symbiote but of other sentient organisms. 

And, with that knowledge, came understanding. 

I was a man and, as such, I had a conditioned attitude towards 
the inflexibility of life. Things were as they were and, to alter themj 



TALK NOT AT ALL 



21 



was something I could not regard with other than emotional reflex. 
A cripple aroused, not only pity but a sense of revulsion. A man 
who was not whole was not wholly a man. Mutants, freaks, distortions of what was accepted as the norm, aroused hate and fear and 
disgust. Intellectually I could deny that; emotionally I could not. 
The inflexibility of life was, to me, a sacred thing. 
But not to the Thaed. 

Life, to them, was plastic, something to be adapted and altered, 
worked with as men work with metal, to be shaped and reshaped, 
built and torn down to be built again. I thought of an analogy; of 
the horror a race of machine-beings, creatures of geared limbs and 
mechanical bodies, of oil for blood and computers for brains, would 
experience if they saw how men tear apart their machines to rebuild 
them for other purposes. 

To those robots, if they believed in the inflexibility of life, such 
actions would be obscene. To be subject to such treatment might 
well drive them insane. But, even if insane, their parts, to men, 
would still be of use. 

I seemed to be drifting high above a table on which rested an 
amorphous being. From th<» edge of the table a line of tiny creatures, 
ant-like in their construction, marched towards and disappeared into 
an orifice in the colossal bulk. I knew that they would penetrate 
deeply into the creature and, at a selected place, they would shear away 
unwanted tissue with their razor jaws, digest it, smear exhudations 
from their bodies on the wound so as to seal and heal it and, finally, 
their work done, would leave the creature as they had entered. 

Life to work on life. Pygmies crawling in the heart of a 
machine, repairing and changing pipes, welding seams, replacing 
gaskets, reconnecting wires; work which a giant could do only by 
dismantling — killing — the machine. And the tiny creatures left no 
scars, required no clumsy surgery, gave no shock, caused no pain. 
They worked as beneficent bacteria work. 

I thought always in analogy and, dimly I realised, it was because 
there was no other way in which I could understand. Understanding can only be gained by the use of familiar concepts; words only 
have meaning when aligned to previous experience. My symbiote 
was relaying information to me through the only channel it could 
utilise. But, to it, there was no difference between a man and a 
machine. 

A machine can be built ten feet square and a hundred feet high. 
The same machine, the same parts, can be assembled ten feet wide 
by a hundred feer long and ten feet high. It will have a different 



22 



NEBULA 



shape but it can serve the same purpose. A sentient being is a brain 
fed by a body which may or may not have useful appendages. The 
shape of the body doesn't really matter, it will still feed the brain. A 
brain can be in a compact, easily carried mass or it can be spread out 
to cellular thickness; it will still be a brain. 

Shape, unless it determines function, is unimportant. Function 
determines shape; so men build their machines and so the Thaed 
build their creations. 

Kindness is a' concept peculiar to man. Consideration, thoughtfulness, mercy, the Christian Law, all are peculiar to one race of 



beings, and the converse is also true. The symbiote was being neither 
cruel nor kind, thoughtful nor inconsiderate; to be either required 
emotions which the being simply did not have. 
It showed me Clitheria. 

She was naked, resting on a table, her body surrounded by the 
lines of marching, ant-like creatures. A peculiar vegetable-like mass 
of veined and mottled convolutions rested on her skull and I realised 
that she, like myself, had been merged with a symbiotic entity. 
Superficially she appeared unharmed and yet I knew that, deep within her, were tissues undergoing a major transformation. 

The thing which sent me rearing against the confining strands 
was the awful doubt as to just what was happening to her. Had she 
won? Was she undergoing the relatively simple manipulation 
required by her demand? Or had she lost and was I even now seeing 
the first steps of her transformation? 

I felt the lacing trendrils across my chest yield and part a little. 
My legs threshed and my throat swelled as I fought the thing which 
held me. For a moment black tides of madness clouded my brain 
and, from a great distance, I heard the sound of harsh panting and 
did not recognise the sound for my own. 

The symbiote knew of the change in my blood. It discerned the 
increase of adrenalin, the glandular fluids released when a man is 
wild with anger and fear, the rise in the temperature of the skin when 
he is under shock, the violent fluctuations of heart and respiration. It 
may also have discerned the disturbance in my emitted brain radiation. It adjusted its chemistry to quieten its host. 

Darkness enfolded me. I lost the vision of Clitheria and, instead, 
«tw oddly shaped colours and weaving patterns of sombre brilliance. 
Calmness steadied my heart and I ceased from the futile struggle 
against the tendrils which held me. I sighed a little and then, relaxing, I slept. 

When I woke I was not alone. 



TALK NOT AT ALL 



23 



The Thaed stood just within the narrow portal. Three of them, 
never had I seen less than three together, never more, always three. 
Their cowls made them seem taller than they must really have been 
and the drifting lantern cast their shadows in shifting pools on the 
polished stone. Around me I could feel the embrace of my symbiote 
withdrawing from my body, slowly, easily. With an impression 
almost of regret the living moss absorbed its extrusions and I was free 
to rise. 

" Master." Again the genuflection, knees to the stone and head 
bowed to the ground. Why had they built this conditioned reflex 
into my body? Was it a precautionary measure? It seemed hardly 
likely that they would need such protection and, surely, it could not 
have been for any personal satisfaction they may have experienced at 
being so saluted. Once again I felt the baffling impossibility of trying 
to understand the motives of an alien race. 

I rose to my feet, feeling an unnatural litheness when I had expected to be stiff and perhaps a little weak after my imprisonment. 
How long I had lain in the embrace of the moss I had no way of telling, but it had not been a short time, of that I was certain, and a little 
weakness would not have surprised me. But I was not weak. I was 
agile and felt stronger than at any other time in my life. The symbiote had taken good care of its host. 

I followed the Thaed as they left the chamber and was pleased 
that whatever they had left to watch over me was no longer in 
attendance. I could not see it but I knew that the Thaed were far 
from defenceless. The creatures they fashioned would be within easy 
distance for both offensive and defensive measures. And yet, even 
while I thought about it, the concept of attacking the Thaed dissolved 
from my mind. It was one of those things which just could not be. 

Together we walked in the stillness and, of the four, I was the 
only one making sound. 

The passage led a winding path past narrow-doored chambers 
into which I had no desire to peer. The drifting lanterns clustered 
in ghosdy attendance as we progressed and I had the impression of 
watching eyes. The Thaed went before me and the temptation to 
look over my shoulder became almost overwhelming. If we had not 
reached the hall when we did I would have yielded to that temptation. 

Instead I stared at the thing on the table. 

It was a cone, a foot in height and the same in diameter at 
the base. It was of a dull scarlet in colour and was utterly featureless. It could have been made of metal or glass or even of plastic, 
but I knew that it had been manufactured from none of these. There 



24 



NEBULA 



was an aura about it, an intangible something which gave the impression of life. 

I was looking at one of my companions. 

I think my sanity was saved then by the conviction that it could 
not have been Clitheria. She had wanted the power to become a 
mother and this thing obviously could not breed. What it could do 
was beyond my conjecture. Why it had been fashioned at all was 
past comprehension. A man would use it as a door-stop, perhaps; 
a giant for a paper-weight. The Thaed had constructed it for a 
whim, an exercise in their art. Their reasons were known only to 
themselves. 

I followed them out of the hall, away from the tapestry on which 
things which looked like spiders spun in endless industry, away from 
the table of polished stone and the thing which rested on that table. 
The human brain locked in the cone-shaped body. Away from Lancaster who had wanted eternal life and who had received what he had 
demanded in a form to which death would have been a welcome 
relief. 

We came to a chamber in which I seemed to catch a hint of seasmell and there I was left to wait with a pounding heart for what was 
to come. I saw the clustered lights down the passage. I saw them 
draw closer and I saw the tall, cowled figures beneath those lights. 
And I saw who was following them, walking as if in a dream. Together they entered the chamber. 

Clitheria bowed in utter subjugation. 

" Master." 

She was well, I saw that in the first glance. She was woman, 
all woman, whatever had been her test she had won her chance. She 
genuflected before the Thaed and, even as she did so, my mind spun 
with questions. Why, Master? Why always the singular when 
addressed to the plural? Why not, Masters? And why, why had 
I never seen more than three? 

Were they the very last remnants of a dying race? 

The questions died in my mind as Clitheria rose and stood at 
my side. Together we stood waiting; two children in a world so 
adult and wise with time that we could never hope even to understand the smallest part of it. And, like children, we received our permission to depart. 

" Go." 

We bent as one. Our knees hit the polished stone, our foreheads touched the ground and our voices blended into a muted 
chorus. 



TALK NOT AT ALL 



25 



" Master." 

Then we turned and walked to our freedom. 

Tanamasuri is not a pleasant place; some have called it, with 
reason, the cesspool of the Galaxy. But to Clitheria and me it is 
home. 

To the small hospital, built and maintained by Lancaster's 
money, come the disease-ravaged creatures of a dozen worlds. They 
come for medical help, for drugs to ease their torment, for hope when 
there can be no comfort and for comfort when there can be no hope. 

We are respected, Clitheria and I, though at times I feel that that 
respect stems more from fear than from true regard. Whatever the 
reason, we are never molested, our hospital is never robbed, our staff 
walk the streets of Tanamasuri as thev would walk the streets of 
any civilised city. 

There is a girl, so much like her mother that it hurts my heart to 
see them together, and a boy who, so people tell me, is the image of 
myself. We are happy enough, Clitheria and I, in our work and our 
children and our love for each other. But sometimes, when the 
hospital has been busy and medical science shown again for the crude, 
fumbling thing that it is, I catch her expression and I know of what 
she is thinking. 

And sometimes, when we dine out, and I watch the strange, 
amorphous creatures provided for our entertainment, I grow thoughtful and memory becomes an enemy. 

We talk then. Talk of gay, inconsequential things, of the routine 
of the day and the progress of our children and, even, of the distant 
past. 

But of the Thaed we talk not at all. 

E. C. TUBB 



BACK NUMBERS ,. . , 

In response to requests from a large number of readers zee > 

are again offering back numbers of NEBULA for those who \ 

are unable to obtain them from their usual supplier. \ 

All issues from No. i 1 to No. 32 can be had for zj- or 35c \ 

each post free. All other numbers are permanently sold out. \ 

Cash with order, please, to : NEBULA Science-Fiction, f 

159 Crownpoint Road, Glasgow, S.E. i 
y^y^y^yy^y^yy^y^y '^'^>^'^'^/^/^y^^v^y^A^✓>✓v^^.<^J^^^^ 



ROBERT LLOYD 



Way Out 



For this brief instant he held the life of a 
planet in his hands, and was as God Himself 



There was no time for thought. 

One moment he had been looking through the glass partitions 
surrounding his office, cutting him off in a world of his own from 
the general activity outside; the next he stared at a wall of grey 
concrete while within him his stomach rebelled at the sudden 
descent. 

It had been fast, he admitted, but then it had to be. Thought, 
even human thought, was a slow and cumbersome thing when compared to the speed of electrons and nothing slower than these would 
have served the purpose. The external tell-tales had caught the warning, had relayed it at slightly less than the speed of light, the trips had 
operated and now he was falling to safety while above him the 
building disintegrated into radioactive slag. 

It was, he had to admit, a neat and ingenious method of getting 
out from under. 

Slow though conscious thought might be, yet still it was almost 
too fast for comfort. As yet the bare concrete of the shaft down 
which he was falling had hardly seemed to move. He could see, 
with starding clarity, the imprint of the wooden shuttering used 
to retain the liquid cement. He noted the coarse grain, the slight 
bulges between the planks where the concrete had oozed, the tiny 

26 



WAY OUT 



27 



pockmarks where air had been trapped to form bubbles. He seemed 
to hang suspended in a moment of time in a fraction of space and 
little things took on a tremendous importance. 

Shock, of course, they had warned him about that. The terrible shock of .the abrupt transition from the routine of normal, 
everyday life to this sudden plunge into the shaft. That was bad 
enough in itself but coupled with the physical disorientation was the 
mental knowledge of what had caused it. And there was too the sick 
knowledge of what would have happened to him had he not been 
sitting in his chair, at his desk at that exact moment of time. 

Then the lights went out as the connections finally snapped 
and he sat alone and in darkness. 



If anything the darkness was worse than the light. He had 
always hated the dark, even as a small boy he had feared and so 
hated it. His mother had scolded him for his fears. 

"Edward Ambler, now you go right back upstairs this very 
minute! A great big boy like you afraid of tlie dark! Why, what 
your father would say I don't know. The idea, indeed! 'Afraid of 
the dark! Stuff and foolishness, thafs what it is. As if there was 
anything to hurt you in the dark." 

She had been wrong, of course, as she had been wrong about 
so many things. There were things to hurt you in the dark, strange, 
distorted monsters which craftily took on familiar shapes under the 
impact of light. A chair, in the darkness, became a squatting, toadlike beast. A wardrobe, free from the freezing influence of light, 
became a tall and menacing entity waiting with incredible patience 
for some unwary human to step within reach of its swinging, doorlike arm. And there were other things which could only live at 
night; queer creatures of the imagination, intangible but all too real 
to an eleven year old boy who had never known the security of love. 

And it didn't help to remind himself that Edward Ambler, the 
scared eleven year old schoolboy was now General Ambler, C.W.H., 
with the responsibility of the lives of millions weighting the insignia 
on his shoulders. The Commander of the Western Hemisphere and 
the schoolboy who had been terrified of the dark still had much in 
common. They were still afraid of the unknown. 

The soft moaning of the air being compressed beneath him had 
stilled now and he knew that he had left the concrete shaft for one 
of steel. Oose fitting, this shaft, as air-tight as it could be made so 



28 



NEBULA 



that the tiny platform on which he rode would be cushioned to a 
stop by the compressed air beneath it. By now he must be beneath 
ground level and, by now, he was surely beginning to slow down. 
The thought brought a new anxiety. While falling comparatively 
free there was little likelihood that anything from above could catch 
up with him but, as his descent slowed any debris from the shattered 
building above, which had fallen into the shaft, would certainly crash 
down on him. 

But those who had designed the escape shaft had foreseen even 
this eventuality. The desk was merely a slab of steel supported at 
either end by ranked drawers. Between those drawers was ample 
space for a man to crouch and, so crouching, he would be protected by the steel surface above him. It was cramped, uncomfortable, but it was safe. 

Squatting in the darkness, his head scant inches from the steel 
above, Ambler waited for his journey to end. When it did he 
regretted it. There was a moment of terrible pressure, as if something heavy were being piled on him from above and, at the same 
time, as if the metal floor on which he sat was rising so as to pulp 
his body. Something hit the desk above his head with a dull crunch 
and something else splintered on the floor beside him. The platform 
shook with a peculiar shuddering motion and, from a distance, came 
a peculiar hissing scream. Downward motion was abruptly altered 
to a sidewise slithering and light blazed around him as doors swung 
open. 

"He O.K?" The voice was muffled and anxious. A man, 
grotesque in his anti-radiation suit, stepped forward swinging a 
counter. Another man, similarly garbed, stooped and stared at 
Ambler through his goggled helmet. 

" Seems O.K.," he said and held out a gloved hand. " You 
all right, Sir?" 

" I think so." Carefully Ambler rolled out from beneath the 
desk, staggering a little as he climbed to his feet. 

" Better get him out of here," snapped the first man. He swung 
his counter over the shattered fragment of concrete resting on the 
desk. " this stuff's hot." 

" Seal it up, then." The second man led Ambler towards a 
short passage. "This way, Sir. Down the passage, turn right at 
the end and then left into the operations room." The eyes behind 
the goggles were anxious. " Are you sure that you're all right, Sir?" 

"I'm sure," snapped Ambler irritably. Fuss always annoyed 



WAY OUT 



29 



him and to put an end to it he walked away from the technicians. But 
he wished that he felt as confident as he had sounded. His bones and 
muscles ached as though he had been beaten with rubber hoses and 
he had the flat, sour taste of blood in his mouth. Out of sight of 
the two men, he leaned against the wall for a moment to recover 
from a sudden nausea then, biting his lips, forced himself to continue. All the briefing he had received on the use of the escape 
shaft had done nothing to prepare him for the actual psychological 
effects but, at least, he was still alive. Others weren't so fortunate. 

An orderly brought hot coffee and, sipping it, Ambler listened 
to the initial reports. 

" It was a cobalt, Sir," said Carter. * No doubt about it. We 
were lucky to get away." 

" Leyman and Goshen?" 

" Leyman wasn't on his platform, Sir." Carter shook his head. 
" He must have left it for some reason, maybe he had to go somewhere urgently." 

" And Goshen?" 

" Dead on arrival." Carter's attempt at levity was quite unconscious. He, like Ambler and Laughton, was still suffering from 
shock. It isn't every day that a man literally races away from the 
effects of an atomic explosion. The three of them formed a unique 
and exclusive fraternity. 

Ambler slowly sipped at his coffee and forced himself to relax. 
Around him technicians were busy at the boards gathering and collating information from the thousand watch points and monitoring 
stations scattered over the Western Hemisphere. To one side, 
Carter sat and stared at his hands while Laughton wandered about 
aimlessly. Ambler stared at him, wondering whether the man 
was still under shock and then, with sudden impatience, decided 
that if he were, then, he would have to be snapped out of it. This 
was no time for temperament, 

" Laughton!" 

"Yes?" 

" Come over here and sit down." Ambler let acid sharpen his 
voice. "That's an order!" 

Laughton grunted and slumped into a chair. He kept blinking 
and, high on his cheek, a muscle twitched as if with a life of its own. 
He touched it, stared at his hand, then abruptly felt for a cigarette. 
Ambler let him put it between his lips before interfering. 



30 



NEBULA 



" Hold it." He gestured to a technician. " How are we for 
air?" 

"Sir?" The man frowned, then his face cleared as' he saw 
what Ambler was getting at. "We're sealed from the outside, 
naturally, so we have to avoid contaminating the air any more than we 
have to. There's a room set aside if you want to smoke, we've got 
a special filter and unit installed in it, but . . ." 

" No smoking anywhere else," interrupted Ambler. " Is that 

it?" 

"Well . . ." Awe of rank struggled with technical caution. 
Ambler ended the indecision. 

" No smoking," he announced. " Return to duty." He glared 
at Laughton. "Put that thing away, otherwise you might forget 
and set light to it." 

Slowly Laughton took the cigarette from between his hps and 
stared at it. 

"The end of the world," he said bitterly. "And you worry 
about a lousy damn cigarette." 

Put that way it did seem rather futile. 

There had once been a psychologist, Ambler had forgotten his 
name, who had gone to a tremendous amount of trouble to prove that 
men quite often get what they fear because they fear it. He had 
adapted his findings to nations and come up with the proof that, 
merely because a nation didn't want war, that was one certain way 
to get it. Defence, when carried to the ultimate, can only lead to 
war. The only true defence lies in the total elimination of potential 
enemies. 

" What are we waiting for?" said Laughton suddenly. " Why 
don't we just blast them to Hell?" 

" Who?" Ambler forced himself to remain calm. 

"Who else could it be?" Laughton jerked a thumb ceilingwards. " Can there be any doubt as to who dropped that bomb?" 

If there was a doubt it was a small one, Ambler had to agree and 
yet, strangely enough, he felt no great urgency, no haste to get on with 
retaliation. The need for haste had gone and now there was nothing 
to do but decide the moment when he would unleash the destructive 
fury stored against this hour. 

Carter rose from where he sat and came over to take a chair 
next to Ambler. 

" I keep thinking," he said. " Do you know, I almost didn't 
make it. I was just deciding whether or not to get a cup of water 



WAY OUT 



when it happened." He shuddered a litde. " It was as close as 
that." 

" It was too close for Leyman," said Laughton bitterly. He glared 
at Ambler. "You and your shop-window effect." 

It wasn't Ambler's but he had agreed with it. Let the responsible officials remain in plain sight so that they could boost morale. 
No one would think that a war was imminent if they could see that 
those who would be in charge of hostilities were exposed like sitting 
ducks. Of course, none but a very few knew of the escape shafts and, 
apparendy, the enemy hadn't dreamed of them. Their bomb had 
been well-aimed but it had failed in its purpose. The Western 
Hemisphere still had its teeth. 

And it was up to Ambler to use them. 

" The swine ! " Laughton was glaring up at an illuminated 
map of the Western Hemisphere set above the communication 
boards. It winked with lights, red, amber, blue and white. The red 
stood for cobalt bombs, the amber for megaton H bombs, the blue 
for " small ", " clean " atomic bombs and the white for retaliation 
bases. The map was sprinkled with a fair scattering of reds with 
more ambers and blues. Even as they watched a white light winked 
out to be replaced by an amber. 

" Another base gone," fretted Laughton. " How long do we 
wait before we use what is left?" The muscle twitched high on his 
cheek and his eyes had a dull, glassy stare. He was, Ambler realised, 
a man almost insane with frustrated rage. He was also a man who 
knew the firing signals as well as Ambler did himself. 

"Carter!" 

" Sir?" 

" 5ummon the guards." Ambler remained silent as Carter, 
after one questioning stare, went to call the guards. He returned 
accompanied by Two men wearing sidearms. Ambler gestured towards 
Laughton. "-Place this man under close arrest. Confine him and 
have the doctor give him sedatives." He backed his orders with an 
impatient stare. The guards, trained to obey orders from superior 
officers, never thought of disobedience. They escorted Laughton 
from the room, deaf to his screaming insults and accusations. Ambler 
looked at Carter. 

" Do you agree with what he says?" 

" Sir?" 

" Just now he called me a saboteur, a spy and a traitor. Well?" 
Carter hesitated. " I do not agree with him," he said cautiously, 
"but . . ." 



32 



NEBULA 



" Yes?" 

" I can understand why he said what he did." Carter gestured 
towards the illuminated map. "Why wait, Sir? Why hesitate? 
You know what has to be done, why not do it?" 

It was, in the parlance of a now-dead era, the sixty-four thousand 
dollar question. 

It was a hard question for Ambler to answer. A week ago, even 
an hour ago, he would have had no hesitation. But then, a week or 
an hour ago, he would still have had the comforting thought that, no 
matter what happened everything had been provided for. Now he 
wasn't so confident. He turned and looked at Carter. 

"Would you give the word if you were I?" 

" Yes, Sir, I would." Ambler shrugged at the unthinking reply, 
genuine though it may have been. Carter had said what he had to 
say simply because it had been drilled into him. But if Ambler had 
not come safely down the shaft, if, perhaps, Laughton had been in 
command, what then? Ambler shrugged again, annoyed at himself 
for posing ridiculous questions. Had he not come down the shaft, 
then, for him, all speculation would have had no reality. 'He would 
have been dead and out of it all and problems of all kinds would 
have ceased to exist. He returned his attention to the board. 

The lights still winked. Several more ambers, a couple fewer 
whites but no more reds and he was thankful for that. Red spelt 
cobalt which meant utter and complete death to every living thing 
in the area of the bomb. He voiced a question to a pale-faced 
technician. 

" Any reports on radioactive intensity?" 

"A few." The man consulted a computor. "With the prevailing winds, cobalt contamination will mostly be carried out to sea 
and there dispersed. Of course, that won't help the atmosphere, the 
stuff will hang about too long as it is, but it could have been worse." 
He checked his instruments again. " Seems as if the bombs contain 
a cut-down element, something we didn't know about, the contamination isn't as wide-spread as we feared." He gave a short 
laugh, a vocal sound without humour. " Natural enough when you 
think about it. They wouldn't want to commit suicide as well as 
murder." 

" That won't save them," said Carter grimly. Ambler ignored 
the remark. 

" Any information on the state of population?" 
" From the impact areas and recorded fail-out I'd say that it is 
pretty bad." The technician seemed to be a master of understate


WAY OUT 



33 



ment. " Most of the densely populated areas have been wiped out 
and the prevailing winds have swept a mass of short-term fall-out 
over the centre of the country." He glanced up at the map. " See? 
Cobalt along the coast to shower the country with fall-out and Hbombs and straight atomics plastering industrial and manufacturing 
areas. They seem to have had a pretty shrewd idea of our bases 
too." 

" That won't make any difference," said Carter, and he was 
right. One bomb was all it would take, one big cobalt bomb and 
then it would be the end of the play for the race of mankind. And 
the bombs Ambler commanded had no safety element incorporated 
to cut down the lethal fall-out. 

It came as a shock to him to realise that he was contemplating 
the literal end of the world. 

" Call the guards," he said to Carter. 

" But ?" 

" Call the guards." 

He almost smiled as his aide went on his errand, half-guessing 
the thoughts which he must be thinking. And those thoughts were 
justified, in part at least. Ambler had no intention of being outmanoeuvred in this, the most critical decision of all. While he waited 
Carter's return he visualised the intriguing concept of a man who 
was now a God. 

It was like staring at a little red button. Press it and finish! 
Finish to everything. Finish to the possibility of life or the possibility that mankind could survive this latest wound as it had survived so many others. Just give the word; send the code signal which 
would operate the radio-controlled trigger mechanisms and Armageddon would soar from the underground launching ramps to plunge 
halfway around the world. It was a heady power, an intoxicating 
power and the temptation to press that little red button just to see 
what would happen was almost irresistible. 

Ambler became aware of the guards standing at his side, but 
paid them no attention. He was thinking, trying to visualise the 
unknown and, deep within him, an eleven year old schoolboy cringed 
at the thought of darkness. Not night, that was but the symbol, but 
the darkness of the unknown, the darkness which must follow if he 
did his duty as the others saw it. 

" Arrest that man," he snapped, and pointed to Carter. " You ! " 
He stabbed a finger at the technician. "Radio a message on all 
frequencies. The Western Hemisphere offers unconditional surrender. Movel." 



34 



NEBULA 



" What?" The technician stared and then, unaccountably, 
relaxed and laughed with an hysterical relaxation from strain. Carter 
took a step forward only to be restrained by the guards. He seemed 
dazed, unbelieving, appearing as a man would appear who has just 
seen the impossible happen before his eyes. Ambler spoke quickly 
before the other could protest. 

" If we retaliate we lose everything," he said and knew while he 
was saying it that his words were mere justification for his decision. 
" By surrendering we at least ensure the survival of the race and 
what is left of our country. And our moral victory will be incalculable; we shall be the only true Christian nation history has ever 
known." 

It was good and true enough as far as it went, but he knew that 
it wasn't the real reason for what he did. The real reason was far 
more simple than that. He had realised that, once he retaliated, 
then neither he nor anyone else would have anywhere left to run to. 

And it is in human nature to demand a way out. 

ROBERT LLOYD 




CLIFFORD C. REED 



Mute Witness 



The testimony of even his most despised companion 
may well endorse the greatness of mankind 



Queenie drifted soundlessly along the pavement. There was 
an aroma from the other side of the wall, but she did not permit 
herself to be tempted. She remembered the occasion when she 
had scaled the barrier, and had barely escaped with her life. For 
the dog which guarded this particular house was both large and 
ferocious. Regretfully she continued on her way. 

When she came near the end of the block she halted. There 
was only a vacant plot after this, and she would get no benefit from 
the weeds and old iron which was all which that space had to offer. 
She would do better on the other side of the street. 

Nevertheless she went on, stealing forward on silent feet, until 
she came to the corner. There she froze, crouched as low as possible in the shadows. 

For the plot was no longer vacant. 

There were no lights showing from the structure. But it was 
occupied. The hair rose along her back. It was not only occupied, 
but the inhabitants were awake, and watchful. 

They were watching her. 

Cautiously she commenced to edge back. Then checked. Half 
a lifetime survived as a freebooter had strengthened her intuition. 
There was no hostility in the roundhouse on the site. She knew 
this as a definite fact. All the same, that was not enough. Not 
tonight. She had no objection to friendliness. At times she would 

35 



36 



NE B U LA 



even- go out of her way to provoke it. What she wanted tonight, 
however, was food. If they had food— — ? 

Her tail moved, slowly, curving upwards. Her legs lifted her 
body a shade higher. There was food in the place. The scent of it 
rolled towards her, exciting her, drawing her forwards. She did not 
rush. It was rather that she yielded to the scent, but with all her 
muscles under control. She was still ready, if the need arose, to 
whirl and flash to safety. 

A window slid open without noise. In the darkness only 
Queenie could have seen that there were two shades of grey behind 
the opening, and that one of these was alive. But she could observe 
this, and paused because of it. For a long time she stood without 
moving. 

The smell of food came more strongly, and with it came sound. 
Barely audible sound. Nevertheless she heard it, and interpreted 
it. The sound said she was welcome. It invited her to enter, and 
to satisfy her hunger. It went further. It promised that no harm 
would come to her. 

It repeated that she was welcome. 

She trotted now, swiftly, without hesitation, her tail pointing 
straight up. Effortlessly she sprang towards the opening, touched 
the frame, and stood on the narrow rim. The one inside made a 
friendly, pleased sound, and lifted a hand and touched her. 

Queenie purred. 

The hand passed over her, caressingly, and she undulated her 
body against it. The hand moved in under her, raised her, and she 
lay along the arm. Her tail waved gently. She did not notice the 
window slide up once more. 

In the main room were two more strangers. She was set down, 
and she stood, her eyes moving from one to another without fear. 
She had started to purr. 

One of the three stooped, and placed a dish on the floor. An 
exultant shrillness exploded from Queenie, and she leaped forward. 
She crouched before the dish, stretched her neck, and began to eat, 
bolting each mouthful, and the three stood watching. 

Only when she ceased, did one of them move. Approaching a 
cabinet fixed against the curved wall, he stooped to examine a battery of dials and gauges. 

" No signs of interest outside," he reported. " We've struck 
a respectable, stay-at-home neighbourhood." He glanced down at 
Queenie, busily washing herself. But where do you fit into that?" 
he asked. 



M lilt WITNESS 



37 



The others chuckled. 

The speaker turned back to the cabinet, moved different knobs 
and dials. There was no noticeable effect, yet Queenie suddenly 
ceased her licking, and lifted her head. Then she was on her feet, 
her ears flattened. 

" Sensitive to a degree," one commented with pleased interest. 

From the third stranger came sounds of reassurance. She 
stared at him with expressionless, brilliant eyes in a mask face. 
Then, as suddenly as she had taken alarm, she relaxed once more, 
and resumed her washing. 

" Steady at six thousand," the one at the cabinet reported. 

The third nodded. He made soothing noises, bent down to 
Queenie, and lifted her. He carried her to a bench next to the 
cabinet, set her down on this. 

There was confidence in all their movements. There was no 
hesitation such as could disturb a creature of fine-tuned nerves and 
muscles. What they were doing was something which was 
altogether familiar to them. This feeling transmitted itself to 
Queenie, so that she did not protest even when they set electrodes 
against her skull, fixing them without excess pressure. From the 
electrodes leads ran back to instruments on the cabinet. 

" Ready," the first one announced. The second's attention was 
for a range of meters and lights. The third remained with Queenie, 
one finger moving in rhythmic reassurance along her fur. She lay 
quiescent under this finger. 

" Ready," the third answered. 

All the while, as the needles moved on the dials, and the lights 
flashed on and off, his finger stayed with Queenie. 

Even when at times her fur rose, and her back arched, and she 
spat; or again, when she squirmed ecstatically, or perhaps whimpered, the finger did not cease its vigil. 

Until, finally, the investigation ended, and the electrodes were 
removed. 

"Normal?" Queenie's guardian inquired. 

She stretched, and sprang down to the floor. Energetically she 
began again to wash herself. 

The third one laughed. " A ritualist," he proclaimed. He 
looked at his companions. " Normal?" he asked again. 

The examiner shook his head. "Altogether abnormal," he 
reported. " Altogether opposed to any sub-species we have met 
before." He considered Queenie with pleasure. " A discovery," 



38 



NEBULA 



he declared. " A rebel. Born domesticated, and deliberately choosing to be a vagabond." 

"That is not new," the third objected. 

" It is new when it is accepted as normal with a species. To 
be integrated into society whilst insisting on freedom to remain outside it at the same time." 

" I see." The third walked over to a seat. When he sat 
down Queenie leaped upon his knees, purred, and made herself comfortable. He stroked her, and smiled. 

" Her memory banks are instructive," the examiner went on. 
" She is accepted as a rebel, and tolerated as such. Even though 
she must shift for herself, there is no drive by the dominant species 
to destroy her." 

" She is anti-social," the second enlarged, " and she is permitted to remain anti-social. That tells us a great deal." 

" About the dominant species. Yes. It argues that individualism is not stamped out automatically. Even when the rebel, 
through her way of life, is a potential danger as a carrier of disease. 
That tells us more. Add the fact that from her stimulated memories 
instances of benevolence predominate. The answer can only be one 
of two alternatives." 

" That the people of this world are ignorant of medicine?" The 
second shook his head. " No. Their buildings and streets are evidence of their stage of development. They could not, at the same 
time, be ignorant of hygiene." 

"In that case !" The third smiled. 

The examiner nodded. " Yes. It means that Man, on this 
planet, is fundamentally tolerant in a developing civilisation." He 
crossed the room, and took Queenie from his companion's lap. 
" From our reading of the evidence of this witness we can all sign 
to that in our report?" The others murmured their agreement. 
" In that case," the examiner said, " we can return this world's representative to her unlawful occupation." 

Once again the window slid open, and Queenie balanced on the 
rim. She lingered only long enough to judge her distance, miaouwed 
once, slid her forepaws down the outside wall, and leaped. 

She padded across the site until she reached the corner of the 
fence. A small wind behind her made her turn her head, but she 
saw only the weeds and odds and ends of junk, and she turned and 
drifted off along the street. There was a rubbish bin down the 
block which she should investigate. 

CLIFFORD C. REED 



N. K. HEMMING 



Debt of Lassor 



The people &f Earth were as zombies and without hope. 
How to rekindle the fire which once so brightly burned? 



Illustrated by John A, Greengrass 



It was raining when Thorval came to Earth, a thin, miserable 
drizzle that suggested a total lack of life or hope, even on the part 
of the elements. No brilliance of lightning flashed across the sky; 
no sullen rumble of thunder sounded a drumbeat of menace or warning. It was a planet where nothing flashed or thundered any more. 

He saw one of the natives in the viewport of his ship as it touched 
down and the coldness that had been gnawing deep inside him since 
he first came to the planet, reached up an icy hand and gripped his 
mind with fingers of guilt. 

We did this to them! 

The Earthman still had the height of his ancestors, but stature 
was the only characteristic he shared with them. Once he had lifted 
his head in pride. Once his shoulders had been straight with that 
same pride. What was this creature of the abject, shambling walk? 
Was this a descendant of the ancient, glorious race? 

We did this to them! 

39 



40 



NEBULA 



He tried to ease the heavy sense of guilt with the assurance that 
man was resilient, that the independent blaze of sheer, stubborn courage, the brilliant flame of genius, could and would be rekindled in 
the crushed and broken heart of Earth — but he could not overcome 
his reluctance to operate the telescopic controls of the port that would 
bring the pathetic figure nearer. Then he would see the expression 
rn the man's eyes; then he would know what a thousand years of 
tyranny had put there. 

Orare, in charge of the Earth based forces, met him at the newly 
converted Rehabilitation Centre. They walked to the office which had 
been set aside for Thorval with the quietness of old friends meeting 
on the status of equality. 

Orare looked at the new Rehabilitation Director speculatively as 
the younger man sat down. It was the first time he had seen anyone 
who bore the imprint of the ancient Moranian race so clearly. It 
was in the thin, hawk features and the slant of the man's eyes, the 
quick decisive movements and, above all, the luminous darkness of 
the glance that returned his stare with faint amusement. 

" Well?" 

Orare grunted. " I wonder how long it will take you to realise 
you have an impossible job here." 
" Nothing is impossible." 
" No?" 

Orare shrugged. The answer to that could be left to time — and 
the people of Earth. 

" How do you intend to start?" 

Thorval frowned thoughtfully. " I think the best thing would 
be to broadcast to the people first and explain why I've been sent 
here. As they would trust members of their own race more than 
they would us, I shall ask for assistants from among them." 

Orare gave him a strange look. " You expect to get Earth 
assistants?" 

Thorval nodded. " They probably hate us for what we did to 
them, but there should be a few who'll be able to believe we're sincere 
in wishing to give them their freedom and helping them to rebuild." 

Orare grunted again. " You haven't been long on Earth. Have 
you seen an Earthmatf yet? Really looked at him, I mean?" 

Thorval nodded. " I've seen one — from a distance though." 

Again he felt the rise of the chilling doubt in his mind, because 
he knew how reluctant he had been to use the telescopic controls ; 
which would have given him a close-up. 



DEBT OF LASSOR 



41 




Orare smiled grimly. "I thought so." He leaned across the 
desk and punched a switch on the communications panel. " Bring 
in one of the Earthmen . . . any one will do." He turned back to 
Thorval, frowning slightly now. " Before you came here you studied 
the old history tapes of Earth?" 

"Yes." Thorval's eyes glowed with an enthusiasm he did not 
have to keep at bay. " They were a great people, Orare. They weren't 
very advanced scientifically when they were found, but they had a 
streak of genius that would have made them the equal of any race in 
the galaxy." 

Orare gave a short laugh of morose confirmation. " I thought 
that was what was making you so optimistic." He shook his head. 
" Those spools are over a thousand years old. You're living in the 
past. The race" you see in them died — to the last man, if you want 
to be dramatic." 

Thorval looked faintly puzzled. " I understood the population 
of Earth to be in the billions." 

" Oh, it is," Orare agreed. He looked grimly at the flaming twin 
suns of Lassor emblazoned on the wall. " Only it's not the same 



42 



NEBULA 



race." He paused again. " They cannot yet be called animals," he 
said slowly, " because they still have intelligence — of a sort." 

The Earthman who had been brought in gave a queer little 
salute that was servility and slavery in movement, then he stood with 
his hands hanging at his sides, his head bent, mutely waiting. 

Orare dismissed the soldier and looked over at the Rehabilitation 
Director. When he saw the aghast realisation break over his face, 
he knew also the sickness and bitter regret that would be clawing 
inside him, as it had torn at his own mind when he had first come to 
Earth. 

" Well?" he demanded, but Thorval did not say anything, nor did 
the Earthman move. He just stood there, relaxed yet somehow not 
relaxed. A slave did not relax in the presence of his masters. 

" Lift your head," Orare ordered. 

The Earthman did so and Thorval met eyes that held an expression he had never seen before. It was not hopelessness, not 
resignation, but something that went far beyond both; something 
that had no name. 

He looked away. He had to. It was impossible to meet that 
gaze any longer, knowing who and what had caused it. 

" What happened to this race has no name," Orare said quietly, 
switching to code Lassorian, so that the native could not understand 
them. " A race like the old people of Earth couldn't bend, nor could 
it break. It had to go beyond both — and become this." 

Thorval glanced at Orare sharply, seemed about to speak, but 
turned back to the Earthman instead. 

" What is your name?" 

" I have no name." He spoke in Lassorian, the only language he 
knew, because all languages of Earth had died, too, in the long ago. 
" I am No. 1374526 of Sector CB3 District 57." The same nameless 
thing that was in his eyes was deeply ingrained in his voice. 

" That is your official designation. What name do you give to 
yourself?" 

" I do not understand. Only the Masters have names. I am 
No. 137 ..." 

!< Yes, I know." Thorval's voice was hasty, his quick nod halting the upraised arm with the branded number that was proffered 
as evidence. 

* Didn't you know about their lack of names?" Orare asked, 
fhorval nodded. " It was just an idea. They were forbidden 
names; all recalcitrant races were." A name gave a person individu


DEBT OF LASSOR 



43 



ality. A number, a mere cog in a slave machine, would not be so 
eager to fight for personal rights — because he was not a person, just a 
number. " I was hoping they would secretly have given themselves 
names." 

" But that would have meant rebellion." 

" I know. That's what I was hoping for as well." As Thorval 
looked at the Earthman he began to understand at last what Orare 
had been trying to tell him. Once Earth had been a world populated 
by an intelligent, progressive race, aggressive and ambitious towards 
their future. 

That was the past. 

" What is your work?" he asked the Earthman. 

" Third Assistant, Radio Isotopes Laboratory of the Central 
Hospital, District 57." 

"Radio Isotopes Laboratory!" There was a quick rebirth of 
the optimism he had felt on the journey out and he threw Orare a 
faintly smiling glance. " I thought you said the old intelligence was 
dead." 

" Not the intelligence — the reason behind it. They can be 
taught tricks, like animals." Orare gave a short laugh. " That's all 
his work is to him. He performs it without knowing the meaning 
of what he's doing, or why. Try him for initiative and creative ability 
and you'll get no reaction whatsoever." 

" I still believe they can be saved." Thorval stood up decisively 
and sent the Earthman away, then turned back to Orare. " I shall 
address the people as originally planned. A week from today. That 
should give you time to see that receiver screens are set up in every 
Earth settlement." 

Yet in spite of his renewed optimism, he could not help remembering the expression in the Earthman's eyes. 

Thorval, Lassorian Rehabilitation Director of Earth, spoke to 
the people of the newly freed planet, and because he was a Lasp^rian 
they listened to him with dutiful attendance. He saw them in the 
screens, a quiet, almost unmoving audience- — and on every face within 
range of view he saw the same thing that had been in the eyes of the 
man brought into his office. 

There was no need to silence them. They were too still and too 
quiet. No mother quietened a crying child. No child cried. Their 
tears had dried long ago. Eight hundred years ago. 

He told them of the civilisation they had once possessed, of the 



44 



NEBULA 



names that had once given them individuality. In a controlled voice 
he spoke of the coming of the invaders, of great cities smashed by his 
ancestors; how, even though the science of Earth had been only a 
child to the invading ships of the great interstellar empire that, had 
caught them in its steel net, the Terrans had fought, viciously, with 
every toy weapon in their possession. The cities of Earth had been 
smashed to dust, their people murdered by the millions, but for years 
no Lassorian soldier dared to walk alone, or even in groups of less 
than six together when venturing out of their camps. Some hidden 
sniper would sell his life dearly. Retaliation meant nothing to people 
who fought to regain the freedom they had once possessed and prized 
so highly. 

" The heart of the expanding empire was Lassor," he continued. 
" Its inhabitants had always been aggressive by nature and when, with 
the coming of space travel, another race wis found in their own solar 
system, it was inevitable that war should break out. The Morans, who 
occupied the neighbouring planet, had no chance from the beginning. 
Their civilisation had developed along entirely different lines. Ethically and socially they were far more advanced than Lassor, but they 
had no physical sciences. The quick contest and absorption of the 
Moranian race was only the beginning. An interstellar drive was 
developed and Lassor took her desire for conquest out to the stars. 
When a race is strong and ruthless, empire comes easily. 

It was not until a thousand years after Earth had been subjected 
and added to our Empire that a revolt of any significance took place 
and surprisingly enough, the revolt started on Lassor itself. Perhaps 
the Lassorian race itself had, changed. In any case, we found we could 
no longer accept as right the way of life forced upon the subjected 
races of our Empire and a rebel government was formed on Lassor. 
Not everyone had changed, of course. The governors of most planets 
and their immediate retinues and bodyguard had to be overcome, 
since they were reluctant to give up the power they possessed, but 
most of the space fleet and planetary armies were with us. 

The revolt, although started only a few Earth years ago, is now 
entirely successful. Rehabilitation is now doing all it can to rebuild 
the civilisations of subject planets to the stage reached before they 
were occupied, or at least to a point where it can carry on unaided. 
That, at the very least, is our duty towards the people our Empire 
once enslaved. I have been sent here to direct the rehabilitation centres 
of Earth. For a time, officials of Lassor will still have to administer 
Earth, as you have, as yet, no organisation of your own, but we shall 
help you to rebuild your civilisation. You will govern yourselves 



DEBT OF LASSO R 



45 



again and will be offered membership in the federation of free planets 
now being formed." 

As Thorval spoke no suspicious voices cried out to question 
trickery. No memory remained of the civilisation Earth had once 
possessed. Freedom was just a word and who could tell them what it 
meant? How did one explain freedom? It was not a thing to be 
stated in words. It was something inside heart and mind. Even if 
a truly semantic explanation had existed^ it would still have been difficult to get it across to these people. 

He moved wearily as he added his last few words to them. " I 
think we can help you to regain your old civilisation, but I shall need 
your help. Those of you who have understood my words should 
stay by the vision screens nearest to you, wherever they may be. The 
rest of you return to your homes and your various duties. For the 
time being life will go on as before, but it will not be long before 
the work of rebuilding commences." 

He stopped and they clapped, unreasoningly, dutifully, as they 
had been taught to clap when a Lassorian addressed them. They did 
not cheer though. That needed enthusiasm and enthusiasm was 
something that had died in them long ago. 

Orare gave Thorval a quizzical glance as he came into the office. 
"Well?" 

The other shrugged. " You were quite right. None of them 
stayed." 

" The suppression took two hundred years. After that they had 
eight hundred years of complete slavery, both of body and mind. It's 
a thousand years since the old race lived. You can't expect to bring 
it back in a few days. I doubt myself whether it will ever come 
back." 

" It must!" Thorval rose to his feet abruptly at a knock on the 
door. " I wanted you here for this interview. I'm trying something 
else." 

A soldier brought in a man and a girl. Both were young and 
attractive, except for the terrible expression that seemed natural to 
everyone on Earth. 

The manner of the Rehabilitation Director altered as he looked at 
them. Orare appeared startled for a moment at the air of harsh 
arrogance the younger Lassorian suddenly adopted, but he didn't say 
anything. 

"You had chosen each other as companions and the choice has 



46 



NEBULA 



been approved by the Selectors? Your bond was to have taken place 
two days hence?" 

They confirmed respectfully that he was correct. 

" That approval is rescinded." He called over the guard who 
had brought them in. " Take this girl to my quarters." 

The Earthman did not even look startled, but Orare smiled 
slighdy. 

" You understand?" Thorval watched the Earthman closely. 
"You are to give up all claim to the woman, No. 59471. She is 
of a standard of attraction suitable for Lassorians. She will become 
first my mistress and afterwards will provide entertainment for the 
soldiers of Lassor." 

The man gave the characteristic Earth salute. "It is as the 
Master wishes." He blinked unconcernedly. " May I now return 
to my duties?" 

It was Orare who answered. " Yes, you may go." He gave 
approval. " And the girl?" 

" She's to be taken to my quarters," Thorval answered curtly. 

The Earthman went out, quite unperturbed at the sight of the 
girl being led away by the guard. 

The Rehabilitation Director dropped his fake arrogance and sat 
down with a wry grimace. " All right— say it." 

" I don't need to." 

" I know — it won't work." 

Yet for one moment it had seemed reasonable to hope that striking at the basic, biological urge of humanity would awaken, if only 
partially, the old spirit of Earth. If they had decided to mate, surely 
the feeling was strong enough to cause some resentment, even in 
them. 

" Perhaps it needs time," he said. " It has to sink into his 
mind. He needs to brood on it." 

" Not a chance," Orare said decisively. " That kind of thing 
was quite usual with the soldiers of the previous governors." He 
shrugged. " Try letting him think she's your mistress if you like, 
but I'll wager you don't get far. He'll merely pick someone else." 

" What about the girl?" 

Orare grinned sardonically. " She'll become your mistress if 
you want her to." 

"Don't be a fool," Thorval snapped shortly. "I haven't an 
interest in the girl personally. She can be kept in my quarters for 



DEBT OF LASSOR 



47 



the time being though. Let the soldiers taunt him with it. The least 
change in his attitude is to be reported to me." 

Orare shrugged, as if he knew already what the report would be. 

Thorval wrenched open the door that led into the room where 
the girl was confined. She was sitting on the edge of a large chair, 
her hands quietly folded and somehow her attitude increased the 
irritation already smouldering in him. 

" Stand up ! " he ordered curtly. 

Unhesitatingly, she obeyed. She was slender and healthy. A 
well-kept animal, he thought bitterly. 

" You remember the man you were to have mated with?" 
" I remember him." 

" He has now requested permission to marry someone else." 
" He knows I am no longer available." 

Thorval restrained an impulse to shake her. " He hasn't remembered you for very long. Don't you feel any resentment because 
of that? Don't you hate me for preventing you mating with the 
man you chose?" 

" Hate and resentment?" She looked faintly puzzled. " What 
are they? And you are one of the Masters. It is for me to do as you 
wish." 

" Jaros ! " He swore in his exasperation. " Must you sound so 
much like an automaton? And, another thing, you will no longer be 
called by a number. You will have a name." He thought for a 
moment, then remembered a guerilla leader who had been great in 
Earth's history, a woman who had died tragically. " Jory Kildane 
. . . that will be your name in future." 

" Yes, Master," she acknowledged tonelessly. 

" And in the name of Lassor, don't call me Master ! " he snapped 
irritably, inflamed again and feeling the name he had given her was 
an insult to the past. That great woman and this . . . this robot. " I 
have a name, too, and in future you'll use it." 

" Yes, Thorval," she replied, with exactly the same shade of 
tonelessness as before. Already exasperated, it was enough to completely infuriate him. He shook her violently and pushed her with 
equal violence back into the chair. She landed in a heap and he 
waited tensely for any sign of resentment, for any flicker of life and 
hatred in the dull eyes. 

With quiet acceptance, she straightened herself, mutely awaiting 
further orders or further violence, whatever he chose. 



48 



NEBULA 



Grimly he pulled her up and shook her again. " Hit me, damn 
you! Hit back!" 

She blinked slightly. " You wish me to hit you?" 

He thrust her down into the chair again. Of course she would 
hit him — if he ordered her to. He swore again and stalked out. 

Orare was in his office when Thorval arrived there. He looked 
up enquiringly. " How did she take it?" 
" Need I say?" 

For a moment he stood there undecidedly. He had been optimistic when he first came to Earth. He still was, in a way, but he had 
a better understanding now of what faced him. There had to be 
some way to break the shell that surrounded them — and he was sure 
that it was a shell, not just an empty husk. 

" Perhaps we could try educating them," he said aloud, then 
quickly corrected himself. " No, I doubt if that would work." His 
mouth twisted wryly. " As you said, Orare, animals can be taught 
tricks, but there's no reason behind it. Even the children ... it 
must be something inherited. We've got to find some way to break 
through that shell before we can do anything else to help them." 

" Any ideas?" 

" None at all, I'm afraid . . ." He broke off suddenly, his eyes 
narrowing, because, quite frighteningly, he knew how it might be 
done; frighteningly, because it could be either inspiration or ruin. 

" There may be a way," he said slowly, and cautiously outlined 
the plan which had gradually been taking shape in his mind. 

"You're crazy!" ejaculated Orare when Thorval finished speaking. 

" Perhaps, but it might work. I can't imagine anything else 
which could." 

Orare made a bewildered gesture. " I can't agree with you — and 
frankly, you'd be staking your whole career on it. Probably your life 
too," he added grimly. " I suppose you know what will happen if 
it fails." 

Thorval smiled, but with the same grimness. " I'm willing to 
chance it. Stronger measures are needed than those we've been using 
so far. I'm certain that this is the only way." 

He had to force himself to be confident, convince himself that 
he would succeed, or it would not have been possible for him to take 
the first few steps along the road he had decided to follow. 



DEBT OF LASSOR 



49 



In Factory No. 93, Sector 19, Division 21, the workers discovered their overseers had been issued with whips. None of them 
questioned it. It wasn't in their nature to wonder or question. During the day, when they felt the sting of the whips, they merely, with 
deeply instilled obedience, increased their speed. • 

The stop-work sirens went two hours later than usual that evening, but they still didn't murmur or enquire about the reason for it. 
More tired than usual, with the increased speed forced on them during the day and the extra hours worked, they returned to their 
quarters and found the evening meal cut by half. In the morning 
they were roused tw® hours earlier, still tired and sleepy. 

By the end of the week their bodies were beginning to rebel, but 
their minds still did not question. They were slow at their work and 
felt the stinging blows of the whips more frequendy. Still there was 
no reaction from them. 

All over Earth it was the same. Work was heavier, the hours 
longer and every minute made increasingly more unbearable. Overseers and guards began to ill-treat the Terran workers with deliberate 
and carefully calculated cruelty. Drunken soldiers raided their setdements, smashing houses and carrying off their women. Men were 
also taken from their homes and reports circulated freely of the tortures they had been subjected to in the " sporting " games of the 
soldiers. 

Even the air they breathed seemed different. It lived now, and 
it throbbed with fear; alive with hatred and resentment. 

To add to that, they suddenly found they no longer had numbers, 
but names. They gave their usual unconcerned blink. Some might 
even have gone so far as to wonder why. 

" Still no reaction," Orare reported. " It had better happen 
soon." He shot a grim glance at his companion. " I suppose you 
realise the news of what you're doing here has already reached 
Lassor? A commissioner is on the way out to investigate." 

Thorval nodded. " I heard." 

After what he had done during the last few weeks, it had come 
to a simple statement of the position. Either the people of Earth 
came back to life — and he retained his own — or they were both 
failures. 

" What about the girl?" Orare asked. 

Thorval shrugged. " Still the same. I've got the room swamped 
with sub-sonics, but they seem to be doing about as much good as 
everywhere else on the planet." He stood up and took a couple of hel


so 



NEBULA 



mets out of a case nearby. " Better wear one of these. The beams will 
affect us, even if they can't seem to touch the minds of the Terrans." 

When they entered the room where she was confined, the girl 
who had been No. 59471 and was now Jory Kildane, was standing 
in front of a large screen that mirrored a tall, spreading city. The 
film was old and flickered slighdy, but it was still clear. 

" An old city that was called New- York," Thorval said quietly. 
" These pictures were taken by spies before the conquest and sent 
back to Lassor." He flicked a switch and another city was there, 
serene and gracious. " London . . . centuries of tradition behind it." 
He caught the girl's shoulders, turning her to face the screen again. 
" Look at it, Jory. Your people built that city." 

Obediently she looked. No comment, no expression. 

" Well — what do you think of it?" 

" It is pretty." 

"Pretty!" Even Orare, because of his longer association with 
this race, more used to their dull acceptance of whatever happened, 
seemed to be catching something of his companion's irritation. " Is 
that all you can say? Doesn't it make you feel anything? Patriotism? Pride in your race?" 

Thorval smiled slightly. " So, it's getting you as well." He 
looked at the girl. " Well, Jory? Doesn't it make you feel any of 
those things?" 

She blinked stupidly and began the parrot cry, " I do not understand ..." 

" But I hope you do one day — and fairly soon at that," he added 
somewhat grimly, remembering the Commissioner on the way from 
Lassor. 

It seemed impossible to Thorval, belonging as he did to the alien 
race that had destroyed the city, that he, personally, could feel the 
rising excitement he was trying to instil into this woman of Earth. 

He flicked over the switch again and this time one of the small, 
ancient spacefields appeared on the screen. Slender rockets stood on 
their tails and blaring, stirring music rolled around the room. 

" Look at them," he said. " That is your race, Jory. Reaching 
for the stars — a right we denied them. Look at it and keep on looking." He swung round. " Come on, Orare." 

They went out and he locked the door after them, while inside 
the room the girl stood still and silent before the screen, with the 
music beating around her and invisible sub-sonics tearing at her 
mind. 



DEBT OF LASSOR 



51 



Factory 93 was drawing near to the end of its day shift. No. 
19567, now commanded to take the name of Paul Hilton, worked a 
machine that hissed out clouds of hot blinding steam. In the past 
it had not done so, but something had gone wrong and the overseer 
had not bothered to have it rectified. Almost dropping with fatigue 
and pain, he staggered as another boiling blast washed over him, stinging and scalding his exposed skin. A numbing bewilderment had 
been growing in his mind for days and with it a strange memory of a 
girl. He had chosen someone else as companion, but their union had 
not yet received official approval — and now he found he didn't want 
this second choice. It was the girl he had chosen first he wanted, the 
girl he had been ordered to give up. 

But he shouldn't want anything that the Masters owned, nor 
should he resent the fact that they had the power to take what they 
wanted. It was strange. Why should it come to him now when it 
never had before? 

His mind was so preoccupied with these new thoughts that it did 
not follow what his hands were doing and a second blast of steam 
scalded his skin. He staggered back with the shock of it and something that stung more than the boiling steam licked across his back. 
He winced, looked up and saw a Lassorian uniform. He thought of 
the weeks of pain and hunger, of the blows and the taunts — above all 
of another Lassorian and the girl he had chosen first. 

The whip fell again — and then it happened. 

He had never felt anything like it before. Something snapped 
like an overtaut rein and tearing fury boiled up in bis mind. It was 
a red mist that deadened everything but the need and the desire to 
kill. He wanted to destroy anything and everything within reach 
and his hands reached out for that purpose. An incoherent noise 
growled deep in his throat and his weakened hands found maniacal 
strength to catch the thonged whip and swing it wildly against its 
owner. Then he dropped the whip, because that was not enough. He 
wanted to kill with his bare hands ... to tear and scratch and see 
blood on them. Then something caught him from behind, slipped 
over his head and down his body to bind his hands at his sides, where 
they still twitched spasmodically as the growls muttered hoarsely in 
his throat. 

It had happened at last. 

What would he be like, Thorval wondered, as he waited for the 
man to be brought to him, this first of them, after a thousand years? 
He remembered them striding proudly through the old film-shots 
and he smiled, knowing that his faith in the spirit of the old race had 



52 



NEBULA 



been justified at last. It had been crushed for two hundred years 
and sat on for another eight hundred but, given the chance, it had 
sprung back with all the triumphant resiliency humanity had been 
famous for. 

They brought the Earthman in at last, but the Lassorian found 
none of the triumph he had expected. Eagerness died and cold 
apprehension crawled in his mind. The Earthman's tunic was torn 
from the fight with his guards and there were streaks of dirt on his 
face and clothing. That did not matter. It was the sign of his 
awakening. It was his eyes. They were no longer lifeless. 

They were the eyes of a feral, mad animal. 

" His mind . . . ?" Thorval's voice was quiet. Had he won and 
lost at the same time? 

One of the guards shook his head. " The doctor at the factory 
thinks it's just a temporary state, brought on by desperation." 

Some of the disquiet died and he walked nearer to the Earthman, who promptly spat something incoherent at him and struggled 
with the guards. 

" Take him to Dorik Rehabilitation Centre," Thorval instructed 
and they took the Earthman away. 

The communicator jangled and he reached out a hand to it. 
While he was speaking Orare entered. The old soldier waited until 
Thorval had finished, then he said quietly: 

" It's the girl. One of the guards took some food into her . . ." 

Thorval looked up quickly. 

"... and she tore him to pieces," Orare finished with a grin. 

Some hours later the communicator on Thorval's desk rang 
again, " This is Dorik Centre reporting. The man and the girl have 
both come out of the madness stage. It was only temporary. They're 
both of high intelligence and are learning quickly under the hypnotutors." 

" Let me know as soon as they are ready for discharge." The 
Rehabilitation Director switched off and looked across at Orare. 
" Well, it paid off, Orare." 

The other nodded. " Yes." Abruptly he frowned. " There's 
something else has me worried. What's it going to be like when we 
finally have this planet restored to its former civilisation? It's not 
beyond reason to wonder if they'll strike back at Lassor. They might 
even unite with other planets to do so. We'd have difficulty defending ourselves from all of them." 

Thorval shook his head. " I don't think that will happen, but if it 



DEBT OF LASSOR 53 



ever does, we still have our space forces. Central Government will have 
made some sort of provision for the situation, if it ever turns up." 

Some provision that would avoid the use of force, if at all 
possible, he thought. The last thing they wanted to do was fight the 
races they had set free. 

Jory came into the office first, followed by the man Paul. For a 
moment diey looked at the Lassorians silently and the latter knew' 
they were at last facing the living reality of the old film spools. 

Finally Paul spoke. " I heard the recording of your speech," 
he said quietly. " I can understand it now." 

" And you?" Thorval looked at the girl. 

She nodded. " Yes. What do you want us to do?" 

" Go out among your people, talk rebellion, stir them up to 
revolt; say anything you like to incite them to break through the 
barriers. You'll also be living proof of what they can become. That 
in itself might be a help. Notify us immediately anyone does 
break and we'll ' capture ' them and take them off to the Centres for 
treatment. As you've probably already realised yourselves, a kind of 
temporary madness is going to be usual when the old conditioning 
breaks, but simple treatment soon completely clears it . . . with no 
damage likely to crop up later." 

" There is one thing though . . ." Paul hesitated. " Why did you 
chose the way you did to . . . bring us through?" 

Thorval hesitated a moment. Finally he got up and stood by 
the window, with his back to them. 

" It goes back a long way and . . . it's something I find difficult 
to talk about." He turned and faced them. " It was the Year of 
Terror that gave me the idea," he added deliberately. He waved a 
hand towards chairs at his desk. " Sit down." Seated himself, he 
went on, " You know that the original suppression of your planet took 
two hundred years. Rebellions were always breaking out. In desperation, the central government on Lassor decided to put a stop to this 
insubordination once and for all. They sent a succession of specially 
trained governors and occupation troops to Earth. We have old 
records that tell us in rather too clear detail some of the things done 
during that two hundred years. It was two centuries of murder and 
terror for your people. Children were burned in full view of their 
parents, men forced to watch their wives and daughters violated only 
to be tortured themselves later, radioactive dust was sprinkled on what 
villages and settlements still survived. Some of the atrocities were 
too revolting to commit to record, but they came down more or less by 



54 



NEBULA 



word of mouth. There was a final year worse than anything that had 
gone before. They called it the Year of Terror and that is what 
finally made your race what they've been for the last eight hundred 
years. A new governor took over then, with normal occupation 
troops." He paused and they waited patiently for him to go on. 
" For eight hundred years you lived a quiet, peaceful life, although, 
of course, you had no will power and no initiative. I tried everything else to bring you back and then decided to use the process that 
had made you what you were. Further cruelty. I had to bring you 
out of the dull, obedient rut you seemed so firmly settled in, so I faked 
another reign of terror. I had to make you live again, even if it was 
by hatred." He shrugged. " It worked." 

That was all. No mention of what it would have meant if it had 
failed. But, surprisingly, they thought of that. 

* What if it had failed though?" Jory asked. " What would it 
have meant for you personally?" 

" Courtmartial and a firing squad," Orare said shordy, before 
Thorval could evade the answer. " If you ever get around to planning 
to attack us, just stop and think for a moment that a Lassorian was 
willing to risk his career and his life for Earth." 

" Don't get dramatic, Orare," Thorval interrupted, with a gesture 
that dismissed the matter. " It was something that had to be done." 

" We won't forget that Lassor gave us back what they once took 
from us." Paul smiled. " We may even like to think it was the old 
Moranian race, assimilated by Lassor, that brought about the change 
in the Lassorian race." 

The communicator on the desk awoke with an excited clatter. 
Thorval reached out a hand to it, glad of the interruption. "What is it?" 

" The Commissioner from Lassor has arrived, sir." 

He looked at the two facing him on the other side of the desk 
and he smiled, because the flame had never died. It still burned 
behind locked doors and slowly those doors were opening. 

" Ask the Commissioner to come in," he said. 

N. K. HEMMING 



STUART ALLEN 



Conflagration 



They offered a prize beyond the reach 
of wealth — and with historic implications 



" To me," said Edward Conklin, " the problem is a simple one. 
To stay in circulation we've got to circulate." 

" Sure," said the circulation manager. He shifted uneasily on 
his chair and wondered what was coming next. 

" To circulate," continued his boss, " we have to sell papers. 
More papers, if possible, than all our rivals put together." He rested 
the tips of his fingers together and nodded as if he had just solved all 
the secrets of the ages. Brennard gave a noncommital grunt; he 
had a shrewd idea of what was heading directly for him. He wasn't 
mistaken. 

" The trick, then," said Conklin ponderously, " is to find some 
way to make the Public buy our papers." He uncoupled his hands 
and pointed a thick finger at Brennard. " And that, as circulation, 
manager, is your job." 

" Sure," said Brennard again. " Have I denied it?" 

" No," admitted Conklin. " You haven't denied it, but " 

He picked up a paper from his desk. " Your contract," he said pleasantly. " I notice that it's due for renewal very shortly now." 

For one wild moment Brennard was tempted to tell the fat slob 
what to do with his contract. Sanity came just in time. He had a 

55 



56 



NEBULA 



wife. He had children. He had an expensive home and he had 
bills. How he had bills ! He managed a sickly smile. 

" I've done my best, Mr. Conklin," he said. " But things aren't 
easy." For once in his life Brennard didn't have to exaggerate the 
truth. 

It was a worrying time. The good old printed word had fallen 
so far from favour that a man who now read a book was regarded as 
something slightly queer. With television in every home, public 
screens on every corner and portable sets for car and office the oldfashioned news dissemination channels did not stand a chance. With 
whisper speakers and subliminal gimmicks to contend with they had 
to scramble for the crumbs from the advertising tables. Reporters, as 
such, were an extinct species, all they did now was to subscribe to 
the news services, doll up the stuff with an amplitude of adjectives and 
illustrate it with posed stills. They worked under the deadening 
knowledge that, no matter how fast they operated, they could never 
beat the almost instantaneous telenetwork. A scoop, like hand-set 
type, was a thing of the past. 

Conklin coughed and managed, surprisingly, to look almost coy. 

" I've been giving the matter some thought," he confessed. " It 
seems to me that what we need to spur circulation, is some form of 

competition. I " He broke off, staring at Brennard. " Is 

something wrong?" 

What was wrong, though Brennard couldn't tell him so, not if 
he wanted to keep eating, was that no one should ever tell their 
Grandmother how to suck eggs. Brennard had been in the newspaper game since he could remember. Conklin on the other hand, 
had purchased the paper as a means to dodge overheavy income tax. 
To him it was a new toy and, unfortunately, one he knew nothing 
about. If he had, he wouldn't have thought up such a stupid idea. 
Brennard didn't tell him that the idea was stupid, instead he brought 
him up to date. 

" We've tried competitions," he said wearily. " We're still trying 
them, but then, so is everyone else." 

" Perhaps." Conklin was stiff. " But if we had something different; something spectacular?" 

" You think that it hasn't been tried?" Brennard took a deep 
breath. " The Daily Reflector is offering a two- week vacation on the 
Moon. The Clock a four-week supply of household groceries. The 
Lampoon a round trip to Mars and a canal excursion as an extra to 
any couple married within the past year who give the right answers. 
The Daily Post offers six weeks at the North Polar resort and The 



CONFLAGRATION 



57 



Daily Toiler all Union dues for the entire family for life." He spread 
his hands. " They are running at the moment. Past competitions 
include almost any and everything you can dream of." He dropped 
his hands. " Naturally, we have run, and are running, similar competitions ourselves." 

" With any success?" 

"We hold our own," confessed Brennard. "We just manage 
to hold our own." 

" That proves my point," said Conklin triumphandy. " We're 
following where others lead, we should reverse that, lead where others 
will follow." He looked at Brennard as if expecting an answer. 
" Well?" 

" Well what?" Brennard was genuinely puzzled. 

"Well, can't you see that what we want is something new? 
Something different?" Conklin picked up the contract again with 
what, Brennard thought, was a significant gesture. " I'll be studying 
the paper from now on and I want to see something new. Something startling. Something which will make the competitions run by 
our rivals seem small and childish in comparison." He dropped the 
contract. " Need I elaborate?" 

" No," said Brennard heavily. He felt suddenly old. 

Passing the buck is not confined to the armed forces. From boss 
to circulation manager; from circulation manager to Chief Editor; 
down through the associate editors; sub-editors, copy-editors, proof 
readers and cub-rewrite men then, because it has nowhere else to go, 
up again to the sub-editors until it finally lands on some unfortunate. 

" You sent for me, sir?" Julian Cody shifted from one foot to 
the other as he stared around the inner sanctum of the Chief Editor's 
office. Brennard, sitting to one side of the desk, coughed out a lungful of smoke and stared reproachfully at the owner of the office. 

" Is this the best you can do, Sam?" 

Sam Quashman shrugged as if the matter was of no importance 
and, to him, it wasn't. With his knowledge and experience he could 
have been editing the telenetwork newscasts at twice his present 
salary. The only reason he remained on the paper was because he 
had an old-fashioned hankering to do a job he liked and, he claimed, 
working at the top pressure demanded by the newscasts would have 
frayed his nerves. 

" Take it or leave it, Jack," he said carelessly. " Cody is the 
only idea-boy we have around here." 

" Then I'll have to take it." Brennard knew that he had no 



58 



NEBULA 



option. Idea-boys found a ready home elsewhere, unlike circulation 
managers who couldn't operate if they had nothing to circulate. He 
glowered at the youth. " Well?" 

"I've been giving it some thought, sir," said Cody. "I've 
always considered that we're wrong in offering our readers something 
they can obtain for themselves." He glanced quickly at the two 
men. " You see what I mean? No matter what the competition 
is, in essence all the competitors are offered is money. A glittering 
prize, perhaps, but always with a monetary option." He swallowed, 
his Adam's apple bobbing in his scrawny throat. " I think that is 
wrong." 

" You do?" Brennard tried not to be sarcastic, but after all, he 
had selected and launched most of the competitions himself. 
" Yes, sir, I do." 

" You don't regard money as important?" 

"Naturally, but if we're going to offer money then offer a lot. 
A million, say, or more." 

" If I had a million to offer I know who'd win it," interrupted 
Quashman. He winked at Brennard. " Don't you, Jack?" 

Brennard frowned at the levity. " We haven't that much 
money," he snapped irritably. "A few thousand, yes, much more 
than that, no. Not," he qualified, " unless the idea warrants it." He 
didn't want to damn the flow before it started. 

" Then that's out," said Cody regretfully. " That leaves us with 
the need to find something which money can't buy to offer as a 
prize." 

" Which is?" Brennard lit another cigarette and settled himself 
more comfortably in his chair. If Cody wanted to think of something 
which money couldn't buy then he was in for a long wait. Cody 
fooled him. 

" Time travel," he said. 

" Time travel?" 

" Time travel. Going back in time," explained Cody. " Temporial journeying. Expedition into the past. Visiting history. Time 
travel." He seemed, so Brennard thought, a little impatient. Quashman voiced his objection. 

" Impossible ! " he snapped. " It can't be done." 

": It can be done," said Cody. He elaborated. " I know a man, 
a scientist, and he can do it. It's expensive, of course, but it can be 
done and," he tapped one finger against the palm of his other hand, 
" it isn't something which you can buy." 

" Why not?" Brennard pounced like a tiger. " Security?" 



CONFLAGRATION 



59 



"In a way. There is a danger that, if someone goes back in 
time, they will do something so as to alter the present." Cody looked 
apologetic. " Some hothead, for example, might want to kill Oliver 
Cromwell or tip off Napoleon about Waterloo, things like that." 

" And that would be bad?" 

" It's all very problematical, but Smyth, the inventor, says that 
it might be fatal." 

" Nice," sneered Quashman. " So what good is the thing to 

us?" 

" With appropriate safeguards there shouldn't be any real 
danger," said Cody. " We'll send someone back with the winner so 
as to keep him out of trouble and it needn't be a long trip, in fact it 
can't be a long trip, it takes too much power to keep a thing in the 
past." 

" Trouble," said Quashman. " I can see it coming. I can feel 
it in my bones." 

" No trouble," said Cody, defending his idea. " Smyth 
wouldn't just let anyone go but he'd trust us to take the necessary 
precautions. And we could get permission from the authorities, if 
we had to, where an individual couldn't." He made an emphatic 
gesture. " And if we could swing it then we'd be able to offer our 
readers something they couldn't get in any other way." 

His final point won the argument. 

The mechanism of the competition was so simple that Brennard 
could have done it in his sleep. All the reader was asked to do was 
to mark a coupon from one to six, each mark being his choice of what 
the judges would consider the most attractive woman. For eyeappeal the women were almost nude. For business reasons each competitor was required to send in a batch of five coupons accompanied 
by a small fee. Brennard took care to see that the rules incorporated 
the usual safeguards. 

" No employee or relative of employee to be eligible," he droned. 
" The winner will be the entry first opened which contains the correct 
result as determined by the panel of judges. The editor's decision 
shall be final. No correspondence will be entered into on this competition " He threw down his copy. " In other words we pick 

the winner and no one can do anything about it." 

" Let's make sure we pick a good one this time," warned Quashman. " Remember Waterman?" 

" I remember." Brennard shuddered. Waterman had been 
selected to win a season ticket to an Oriental Joy House and had died 



60 



N E B U LA 



of acute frustration within two weeks. No one had noticed that he had 
been eighty years of age. Not until it was too late. 

Cody came bounding into the office. He, naturally, had been 
selected to accompany the lucky winner of the Most Fabulous Competition of All Time! The youngster actually seemed eager to go. 

" Smyth says that everything is ready," he reported. " He 
wants the data on the winner, weight and so on, so as to adjust the 
machine. And, of course, he wants to know how far back to send 
him." 

" We won't know that until we pick the winner," said Brennard. 
He had been cunning in this competition, giving himself a double 
let-out. Not only did the competitor have to mark his entries but 
he had also to state which era he wanted to visit and his reasons for 
doing so. By this Brennard hoped to weed out the most obvious 
cranks. 

" Well?" Cody had been in the game long enough to have lost 
his illusions. " How about picking one out now?" 

It was only the third day of the competition but already there 
were over a hundred thousand completed entries from people who had 
managed to accumulate the five necessary coupons. The next two 
days would more than double the amount and a further batch would 
arrive after the five-day coupon run. The fact that those people 
wouldn't stand a chance of winning didn't bother anyone in the office. 

" Why not?" agreed Quashman. He became suddenly busy at 
his desk. " Just run down to the post room and pick yourself a 
companion. The quicker we get this thing over the better I'll feel." 

" I'll come with you," said Brennard, he didn't want a repeat of 
the Waterman incident. He followed Cody from the office. 

The entries had been stacked on tables in the big dispatch room. 
Brennard went to a heap, tweaked out an envelope, opened it and 
threw it to one side. 

" No good. Woman of seventy-three wants to attend a public 
hanging. Think of how that would look in print!" 

" Here's one," said Cody. " Man of twenty-five wants to visit 
Cleopatra and save her from a Fate Worse than Death." He tossed 
it aside without comment at Brennard's expression. " Or this? Girl 
of twenty-three wants to tie up with Alexander the Great." 

" She does?" Brennard looked thoughtful. " Nice sex angle 
there : " Young girl of seventeen wants to save dynasty " Regretfully he shook his head. " Probably get us sued by someone as well 
as arousing the Morals Committee. And it's tampering with the past. 
Try again." 



CONFLAGRATION 



61 



They tried again, and yet again and again, with Brennard fuming 
more and more as entry after entry was tossed aside. Every crank 
in the world seemed to have come to light, each with his reasons 
for wanting to go back and do something to the past. For a moment 
Brennard was tempted to forget the entire thing and invent both a 
winner and an account of his trip, but discarded the idea after a 
moment's thought. With every other paper in the country watching 
and ready to pounce, it was a risk he dared not take. ■ Not, that is, 
unless he was driven to it. 

" Got it ! " said Cody. He waved an entry at Brennard. " Man 
here, forty-five, musician, wants to go back to Nero's time and listen 
to his lyre playing." 

" Sounds harmless," admitted Brennard. " He say why?" 

" Just that it's of historical interest and that he'd like to do it for 
his own satisfaction." 

" Nero," mused Brennard, his mind already busy with headlines. 
" Wasn't he the guy who fiddled while Rome burned?" 

" Lyred," corrected Cody. " They didn't have fiddles in those 
days." He tapped the entry against his palm. " Yes?" 

So it was decided. 

The winner's name was Peter Freeguard. He was a thin, underfed specimen with sleezy clothing and too-long hair. His fingers 
were stained with nicotine and he chain-smoked constantly. 

" I won a hundred thousand of these things in a competition," 
he explained. " Now I can't break myself of the habit." 

Brennard grunted, not interested in anyone's problems but his 
own. He shoved forward a paper. 

" You understand the terms of the competition," he said. " We 
provide you with transport, free food and accommodation and a guide 
to keep you out of mischief. In return you will obey your guide in 
everything he says and give us a full account of your trip to be used 
as we think fit. Sign, please." 

" What is it?" Freeguard screwed up his eyes and then produced 
a pair of spectacles from an inside pocket. " What's all this about?" 

" A waiver freeing us from any and all liability in case of your 
injury or death." Brennard was impatient. " The usual thing. Sign 
it and let's get moving." 

Next stop was at the costumier's where both Cody and Freeguard were fitted with flowing togas. A professorial type inspected 
them for any anachronisms. 



62 



NEBULA 



"No wrist watches," he warned. "No spectacles, matches, 
modern currency or tobacco." 

" No tobacco?" Freeguard looked sullen. " How do you expect 
me to enjoy the trip if I can't smoke?" 

" No tobacco," insisted the professorial type. " They didn't use 
it then." 

"And how do you expect me to see without my spectacles?" 
Freeguard became even more sullen. " Say, what kind of a swindle 
is this?" 

" No swindle," said Cody hastily. " We can fit you with contact 
lenses, they won't be noticed." 
" And my cigarettes?" 
" No cigarettes." 

Freeguard looked considerably crestfallen but raised no further 
objections. From the costumier's they went to where Smyth waited 
with his machine. Both men were carefully weighed and stood 
around, shivering a litde, as Smyth made his calculations. 

" I can give you three days," he announced. " At the end of 
that time you'll be snapped back into the present. Good enough?" 

" Let's go," said Brennard eagerly. Freeguard shook his head. 

" Not until I get my contact lenses," he insisted. " I don't want 
to wander around as blind as a bat. And I want to take some paper 
and a pencil and my hearing isn't so good, so I ought to have one of 
those hearing aid things and " 

Brennard sighed as he listened to all the things which Freeguard 
thought he should take with him. Some of them made sense, the 
aspirin, for example, but each item meant a large load of trouble and, 
as Smyth pointed out, the extra mass would mean less time in the 
past. Finally Brennard jerked his head and drew Cody to one side. 

" Think he's sold us out?" The suspicion was a natural one. 
Some other newspaper could have got to the winner and come to an 
agreement with him to louse things up. 

" I don't think so." Cody was thoughtful. " I guess that it's 
just the fear of the unknown." 

" That or he's got some private scheme in mind which we know 
nothing about." Brennard pulled at his lower lip. " But we've gof 
to keep him happy, that's the main thing. Better fix him up with 
what he thinks he must have and then ride hard on him to see that he 
doesn't misuse it." He glared at Cody. " Understand? If he gets 
into trouble then I'm holding you responsible." 

Which, Cody thought, was slightly unfair. 



CONFLAGRATION 



63 



Three days later Cody sat wearily in the Chief Editor's office 
and stared at Quashman and Brennard. The youth looked the worse 
for wear. His toga was rumpled, torn and filthy. His hair was singed 
and he had a gash on one cheek. He stunk of manure and woodsmoke and his eyes held a wild, trapped expression. Freeguard had 
returned with him but Freeguard was in no condition to talk. 

" He'll probably die," said Brennard sombrely. " He'll probably 
die and then we'll be accused of murder and all the rest of it." He 
dropped his head into his hands. " I wish I were dead." 

" Snap out of it," said Quashman. He glared at Cody. " Well?" 

" It was a bust," said Cody. He moved on his chair and winced 
at a twinge of pain. " That Freeguard ! " 

" What happened?" Quashman wanted to get to the heart of 
the matter, he had a deadline to make. 

" We went back," said Cody suddenly. " That part worked all 
right. We stood in the machine and Smyth pulled a lever and suddenly we weren't in the cellar below the presses any more, we were 
standing by the Colosseum. I recognised it from pictures, though, 
of course, it looked a lot newer than it does now." He winced again 
as he altered position. 

" There were a lot of people around, some dressed in togas and 
some ill a sort of knee-length tunic. There were women too, classy 
dames and what must have been slave girls." He sighed and a wistiul expression came into his eyes. Quashman saw it and rapped 
impatiently on his desk. 

" Never mind the women. What happened to Freeguard?" 

" I'm coming to that," said Cody. His Adam's apple bobbed in 
agitation. "Well, the first thing to hit us was that we didn't know 
a word of the language. That didn't matter so much as long as we 
just kept moving around, there were a lot of odd types in Rome at 
that period and we were taken for a couple of strangers. We even 
managed to get something to eat and drink by using sign language. 
They didn't argue about taking those gold coins you had made but 
I'm sure they short-changed us on the deal." 

" What happened to Freeguard?" said Brennard. He lifted his 
head and stared sickly at Cody. " He looks as if he'd fallen into a 
combine harvester." 

" He got roughed up a little," admitted Cody, " but it was his 
own fault." Anger darkened his thin features. " That nut ! You 
know why he wanted that paper and pencil and hearing aid? You 
know why he wanted to hear Nero playing his lyre while Rome went 



64 



NEBULA 



up in smoke?" He almost gobbled at the memory. " He wanted to 
take it all down. He wanted to copy the tune so that, when he came 
back here, he could make a disc and sell it as a Pop record." 

" Smart idea," said Brennard thoughtfully. " Why didn't you 
think of that?" 

" Did he get it?" Quashman was practical. Cody scowled at 
their lack of sympathy. 

" No. he didn't get it, and serve him right." His scowl deepened. " After we'd eaten and drunk some of their sickly wine we 
had to find somewhere to spend the night. Rome was pretty full 
about that time, big doings at the Colosseum what with a new parcel 
of Christians ready for burning and being flung to the lions. Anyway, 
after a lot of wandering around I finally managed to get us fixed up 
in a loft down in the poorer section of the city. It was a crummy 
place, half-full of rat-infested straw and it stunk like a hen-yard. We 
rested for a little while and then I discovered that Freeguard had 
cheated us. He'd managed to bring some cigarettes with him and he 
just lay there smoking like a chimney and complaining about the 
smells." 

" So they found you, figured you for a couple of wizards and 
threw you in the jug," said Quashman. He nodded. " I thought 
so." 

" Then you thought wrong," snapped Cody. It was clear from 
the way he spoke how shaken he was. " I managed to persuade 
Freeguard to watch himself and got his promise that he wouldn't 
smoke in public. That didn't cause the trouble." 

" It lets us out anyway," said Brennard. He became more 
cheerful. "We warned Freeguard against pulling a fast one like 
that." 

" So what happened?" snapped Quashman. His patience was 
running out. Cody sighed. 

" We'd timed ourselves to hit the year in which Rome was due 
to go up in smoke," he said. " The next thing was to get close to 
Nero so that Freeguard could hear him play his lyre. That wasn't 
easy. In fact that was downright impossible." He stared at their 
blank expressions. " Nero was on the Palatine Hill," he explained. 
" To reach him meant passing a haggle of guards and other officials. 
With a command of the language and plenty of gold for bribes I 
could have managed it but we had neither. The best I could do was 
to get a couple of seats at the arena and hope for the best. Nero 



CONFLAGRATION 



65 



used, sometimes, to take advantage of a captive audience when he 
wanted to perform. But even that didn't work out." 

" A pity," said Brennard. " That would have made a good eyewitness account:" 

" I'd left Freeguard in a tavern while I reserved the seats and 
when I collected him he was as drunk as a newt. He was smoking, 
too, but he threw away the butt when he saw me. I figured that the 
best thing to do was to get him back to the lodging and out of harm's 
way. Freeguard was getting some pretty queer looks by then, but 
we never made it." 

" No?" said Quashman. 

" No," said Cody. He looked suddenly haggard. " You can see 
what happened, can't you? We'd gone back to a time in which Rome 
was due to go up in smoke and that's just what happened. How I 
escaped in one piece I'll never know; if it hadn't been for a handy 
sewer I guess that I'd be worse off than Freeguard, but I was lucky 
at that. The machine snatched me back just in time." 

" And Freeguard?" 

"To hell with Freeguard!" Cody swore with unsuspected 
bitterness. " He caused it all ! He caused everything, the destruction of Rome, the works! Him and his damn cigarette butts!" 



STUART ALLEN 



KENNETH BULMER 




Wisdom of the Gods 



More and more, the wisdom of these ancient aliens was 
making itself felt. Was its- only power to be one of evil? 



Illustrated by Kenneth Ban 



SYNOPSIS OF PART ONE 

Two hundred and fifty million years ago — give or take ten million — a spaceship crashed upon Earth. She contained a Galactic 
Intelligencer, an encyclopaedia of galactic civilisation's knowledge. 
Over the years the spaceship vanished and the encyclopedia was 
entombed in coal. 

In the present day the Ancient Railways Preservation Society, 

67 



68 



NEBULA 



headed by Lord Ashley (known as Jeffers) and Beagle, a nuclear 
physicist, and Rodney Winthrop, a mathematician, run a small railway from the village of Nether Ambleton. Walter Colbome, a historian, is the stoker. His sister, June, is undergoing surgery for 
cancer, and he is trying to secure a job as assistant lecturer, a post 
which Lord Ashley can help him secure. 

Unknowingly Colbome throws the encyclopeedia, embedded in 
a lump of coal, on the Saucy Sal's fire. In the resultant soundless 
explosion of mental force all those people who are nearby receive 
scattered items of information. Colbome receives the most, and his 
mind is numbed. Sally Picton, a local reporter, also receives a 
heavy charge. 

When a number of people scream gibberish and die, and when 
a panel of schoolboys give top-secret nuclear information on TV, 
Sir William, head of Nuclear Intelligence Department Five, sends 
John Roland to investigate. 

Tom, a tramp, then reveals that he has the index of the G.I. 
Roland overhears this in the lounge of the Golden Lion, the inn 
where Lord Ashley is staying and which becomes the Headquarters 
of the Ancient Railways Preservation Society. Nether Ambleton is 
now a village where no-one dares speak of the G.I. for fear the information which springs into the minds of others will be fatal. 

Neither Lord Ashley nor Beagle received any alien knowledge 
as they were outside the sphere of the explosion. Colbome can 
summon up no fresh knowledge in his mind and he realises that 
when he does remember, he will spend the rest of his life answering 
questions. The prospect appals him. 

Then he realises that when he does remember, he might easily 
have information which will kill him or drive him insane. And the 
same is true of Sally Picton. 

PART TWO 

And even as he shrank from the fear corroding his system, 
that apocalyptic vision blossomed again as once it had before; but 
this time it was close and detailed and infinitely frightening. 

He saw with dreadful clarity what his future life would surely 
be. Knowing the feelings of men like Lord Ashley and Beagle 
and Rodney Winthrop, knowing of their dedication to science and 
the technological processes, knowing, too, the stubbornness and 
consciousness of right that ran through them unremittingly, he saw 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



69 



in that flashing stroke of revelation what, lay in store for him. He 
would be regarded as an encyclopaedia. He would spend the rest 
of his life being asked questions, and dredging up the alien answers; 
all his life, sifting the billions of facts that now buzzed unknown 
and buried in his brain. 

His own life, his aspirations as an interpreter of history, would 
be as nothing. . 

But, before that blighting future, would the alien wisdom 
gathered by creatures long-dead from their starry homes, festering now 
in his numbed mind, break free in an avalanche of destruction? 



CHAPTER VII 

The hoary stones of the friendly little hump-backed bridge had 
probably been in the same service long before the Romans came 
with their meticulous road and bridge-building programmes. Certainly, when the humble artisan lifted his head to watch the knights 
and their ladies trot gaily across the bridge over the Amble, the 
stones On which he worked were ancient. During the smokeblackened period of great Victorian ironwork the little bridge had 
kept its character, grown its moss, chinked a bit of mortar out, here 
and there, in hospitable fashion so the birds could find a cranny in 
which to nest. Only on the north-west approach was there any sign 
of newness. Here a few fresh stones— still of local rock and part of 
the feeling of the bridge and its environment — replaced those that 
had been smashed into chips one dark night in 1940. The Ancient 
Celtic bard, the Roman Centurion, the knight in full panoply of mail 
— all could have trod those worn stones and felt at home. 

Until the armoured car poked its 37 millimetre gun arrogantly 
down the whitely dusty road, and bestrode the bridge approach with 
its heavy tyres that looked like cracked lava petrified around its 
wheels; until then, perhaps, the shades that once had crossed the 
bridge on their way to Nether Ambleton would have felt at home. 

John Roland stopped his car on the near side, switched off, 
and then lit a cigarette before walking slowly across the bridge 
towards the officer who stood leaning against the rough metal of 
the armoured car. The officer wore battle-dress, with holstered 
service revolver and steel helmet, and his face, young and freshly 
laundered, was set in a blank expression that Roland recognised 
sympathetically was the youngster's attempt at cold efficiency. Very 
probably he had cold inefficiency and doubt gnawing at his stomach. 



70 



NEBULA 



And then, again, probably not. He would have had that trained out 
of him, at the very least. Roland, feeling insecure, tried to take 
comfort from the thought. 

" Hot day," the officer said, pushing himself upright. 

"Useful breeze, though." 

" Yes. Want anything special?" 

"Waiting for my chief. Thought I'd drive out and make sure 
he got through without trouble." 

" After the fuss you kicked up about keeping everyone tightly 
locked in the village perimeter, Mr. Roland, and the telephone calls 
that went out, I wouldn't let the C.I.G.S. through here without 
your say-so." 

Roland blew smoke, feeling like a second-rate ham. " Just so 
long as we keep everyone in the village and the holiday camp and right 
across the promontory to the Bay in, and just so long as we keep 
everyone else out — we'll do all right. My chief was the man who got 
things moving, not me.' 

" Colonel Starkie was very impressed, I can tell you that." The 
young lieutenant wrinkled up his nose. " Mind you, we don't know 
a thing about what's going on. Rush down there, he said, and 
cordon the place off." A bird trilled suddenly, very sweetly, from 
the woods across the river. " I can't say I relish the waste of time." 

"You'll have your hands full when the reporters get to hear 
of what's going on." 

" What is going on?" 

" You'd be happier not knowing, believe you me." 
" Polder?" 

"No, thank God. It's not a case of radioactive dust and milk 
and frightened families and children who might — well, what's the 
use." He ground the half-finished cigarette into the dust of the 
toad. " It could be a whole lot worse. But it isn't Polder. Now — 
hold it — I hear a car." 

They both walked round to the front of the armoured car. 
Before them the road unrolled, dipping and winding, running 
through pleasant countryside of rounded green hills broken here 
and there by the warmer colours of the ripening wheat. Small 
farming country, lush and quiet and restful. Roland wondered just 
what horrors had been unloosed upon that peaceful scene by the 
secrets that had exploded from an egg of inconceivably long-dead 
knowledge. 

A Hillman Minx rolled up to the end of the bridge and stopped 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



71 



under the stare of the pointing gun. Two men clambered out 
and puffed up to Roland and the lieutenant. 

" Say — what's the idea? Nether Ambleside this way?" 

" Amblefield," the other said. " You always were a lousy 
reporter for names." 

Roland looked at the lieutenant, and made up his mind. He 
liked what he saw. The lieutenant said calmly : " I'm sorry, this 
road's blocked. You cannot get through to Nether Ambleton." 

" Ambleton," the first reporter said. " See, muggins, just what 
I said." 

" You said no such thing," the second retorted. Then : " If 
this road's blocked what's the quickest way through?" 

The lieutenant broke the news gently. " I'm rather afraid 
that no-one is being allowed into or out of the village." 

The first reporter's notebook was in his hand bare moments, it 
seemed, before the second's camera had been taken from the Minx. 
"Plague? Foot and Mouth? Polder?" 

The second newsman was lining up angles on the armoured 
car. A soldier wearing a beret put his head out the turret and 
smiled ferociously, showing all his teeth. 

" I'm afraid I have no information," said the officer. 

" Censorship; okay — got that. Who do we see?" 

Roland waited until the photographer had shot two frames and 
was fishing for the third in his bag, and then he said: "A Press 
Bureau will be set up in due course. You can have it on the record 
that Polder is not affected. Off the record, there's nothing you guys 
can do to break this story. It'll be military business from now on." 
He stopped speaking as the photographer, sensing the voice of 
authority, lined Roland up in his sights. Roland said smoothly: 
" Please do not waste a plate on me, friend. If you do, I'm afraid 
I'll have to confiscate your camera." 

" Tough," the photographer said. He hesitated, glaring through 
the finder; then he lowered the camera. 

A second car pulled up, spurting dust, and two men leaped out, 
cameras and notebooks rampant. " You lousy s.o.b.'s sent us on the 
wrong turning," the first one said unpleasantly. Then he chuckled. 
" And much good it did you, too, you twisters. What gives?" 

As the lieutenant and the other reporters filled in the newcomers, Roland walked a little distance off. He was annoyed that 
Sir William hadn't arrived before the newsmen. If they decided t» 
shoot a plate off on the mysterious man allowed through the barriers around Nether Ambleton, Sir William would be most dis


72 



NEBULA 



pleased. Roland thought back to his hectic night of activity; phoning 
through for authority to close off this area, getting the military in, 
briefing the police, personally rounding up the leading actors in this 
incredible happening. He could still only half believe in it all even 
now. But that amiable and astute old peer, Lord Ashley, was not 
a man to fool with nonsense. For all his playing around with steam 
engines, Lord Ashley was a brilliant man, handicapped only in that 
people just wouldn't or couldn't accept him as an equal, merely 
because he happened to have been born a peer. That was his misfortune; not his fault. 

Sound of an approaching car cleared Roland's mind. He 
shouted across to the lieutenant and then ran fifty feet along the 
road. He stopped the car, a late-model Bentley whose sleek lines 
were muffled by the white summer dust, and, opening the driving 
door, said : " If you'll push over, Sir William, I'll drive her in whilst 
you do the face-covering act. Newshawks, baulked, are like baying 
hounds." 

" By God, John," Sir William said, sliding across to the passenger seat. " I've done all you asked. Military, police, arbitrary 
powers — there are some exceedingly short-tempered officials in town 
right now who were hauled out of bed in the middle of the night, 
ha! — purely on the strength of my trust in you. The steps we've 
taken are bound to raise questions in the House. If your story doesn't 
hold up— God help you!" He chuckled, then, and laid a hand on 
Roland's on the steering wheel. " God help both of us, rather." 

" I can explain exactly what has been happening," Roland said, 
putting the car into motion. " When you've heard me out you'll 
understand why I couldn't say more than I did over the phone. That 
is, if you believe me." 

" I've heard a lot in my time." 

Roland guided the car past the temporarily withdrawn A.F.V., 
waved to the lieutenant, not envying him his task, and then drove 
straight into the village road, ignoring his own car. He could always 
pick it up later. He might need the walk in the fresh air, too. 

Sir William lowered his copy of the Times from his face, 
tossed the paper onto the back seat, and said: "Well, John?" 

" How do I begin?" Roland said. He took a grip on himself. 
Hell, he was an agent of N.I.5 used to handling the fantastic emergencies of the nuclear age; this last occurrence must be looked at in 
that light as being just another standard emergency. He rounded 
a tricky corner, where a decaying red-brick barn hovered over a 
ditch and a broken-down five-barred gate gave access to a rutted and 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



73 



caked courtyard. The Bentley soared smoothly over the uneven 
road surface, and as it settled down Roland knew that what had been 
happening around here was nothing of normalcy, that ordinary 
measures would fail. He went on : " The situation is potential 
dynamite. I told you that two men have died — or been killed — and , 

a third driven insane. The cause " he swallowed, and went on 

doggedly: "The cause needs explanation and understanding with 
an open mind." 

" Are you suggesting that I'm narrow-minded and unable to 
comprehend murder?" 

" No, Sir William. Trouble is, I hardly believe the thing myself." 
Ahead the road dipped. He could see the red roofs of the village, 
the grey spire of the eleventh century church and the gilded railing 
around the roof of the Golden Lion. Roland switched off the 
ignition, bad driving, but setting a term to his decision. He brought 
the car to a halt and set the handbrake. " Listen to the end," he 
said firmly. " Hear me out." 

Sir William, quite obviously, had sensed the current of unease 
and uncertainty in his lieutenant. Now, he produced a cigar, cut 
and pierced it, and setting fire to it, said, between sucks : " Don't 
be too long, John. I must telephone the P.M. and confirm die 
measures so far taken." 

" Right," Roland said. " Something like two hundred and fifty 
miUion years ago a spaceship crashed upon Earth killing its crew, 
and " 

He stopped speaking and smiled wearily at Sir William. " You 
promised," he said. " Let me finish." 

The cigar retrieved from, the floorboards, Sir William put it 
back between his teeth, breathed deeply, and nodded. Roland went 
on speaking. 

" Aboard this spaceship was an encyclopaedia. It was in the 
form of a reservoir of facts, stored in an object about the size of a 
walnut. If this object became exposed to naked flame it would 
explode and scatter all the information it contained indiscriminately. 
Normally, in use, if you wanted to know anything, you apparently 
framed the question in your mind and directed it at the encyclopaedia 
which at once reacted and placed the required information intact in 
your brain. You must understand that this information comes to 
us from a source that, I would suggest, is unimpeachable." 

" Who?" 

Roland paused, and then said : " Since you ask, a tramp." 
" A tramp?" 



74 



NEBULA 



"A gentleman of the highways and byways. He cannot read 
or write and speaks the Queen's English in an extremely free 
adaptation. Yet we have heard him talking in a manner normally 
associated with a scientist, dealing with stars and the Galaxy and 
alien beings and giving us an understanding of how the Galactic 
Intelligencer worked. The G.I. was the name of this alien 
encyclopaedia." 

" A practical joke ! " snorted Sir William around his cigar. " A 
hoax. Another Piltdown Man, dressed in different clothes to suit 
the modern taste." 

" You might very well come to that conclusion merely on the 
basis of what I have told you. But there is more." 

" Well, go on, go on." 

" The spaceship crashed, the encyclopaedia was buried with it 
in its protective box. This was during the Carboniferous Period of 
the Palaeozoic Era which ended about two hundred and twenty 
million years ago in the eruptions of the Permian Period." Roland shut 
his eyes, checking. " Yes, that's right. During the Carboniferous 
Period, as everyone knows, the forests laid down the coal seams of 
today. The trees were subjected to immense pressure. They compacted down — do you know, I found out that it took thirty years 
of plant growth to make up a single inch layer of coal." 

"Spare me the awe, John. Get on with it!" 

" Well, the ship was crushed. I assume it can be taken for granted 
that nothing remained. The protective box around the G.I. 
must have gone, too, leaving the walnut-sized encyclopaedia firmly 
embedded in coal. So it lay, through the millions of years. Who 
knows what has happened to its makers? Where did the civilisations that bore it depart? Why was there no rescue? These are 
questions that we shall never know, for the encyclopaedia cannot 
contain knowledge of events after its fall upon Earth." 

" But how " Roland smiled slighdy to himself. Sir William 

was being gripped by the grandeur of the conception, of this egg 
of knowledge lying for all the years, embedded in the bosom of the 
Earth, waiting until the day it was unearthed . . . 

" That egg was mined recently. Where, we don't know, 
although a check will be carried out on that. The consignment of 
coal might be traceable back to the mine. Anyway, the encyclopaedia in its coal sheath was part of a load of coal bought by the 
Ancient Railways Preservation Society and was used by them in 
their locomotive, the Saucy Sal. Their stoker, a man called Walter 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



75 



Colborne, threw the encyclopaedia on the fire. The flames touched it. 
It exploded." 

" And everyone around received a charge of ancient and alien 
knowledge, implanted in their minds!" said Sir William. "I find 
this incredible, to put it mildly. But one thing gives me hope. 
Quite apart from the fact that I trust you implicitly, John." 

He stabbed with his cigar at the ignition. " Start up, John. I 
happen to know Lord Ashley, the guiding spirit in the Ancient Railways Preservation Society. If old Jeffers, as well as you, says it is so 
— it must be so; even if I still can't believe it. Drive on." 



CHAPTER VIII 

The nerve centre "of the Operations Room had been set up in 
the long, low-ceilinged upper chamber of the Golden Lion, and the 
scene it now presented was at once impressive, amusing, anachronistic 
and disturbing. 

Lord Ashley and Sir William presided. On the wall between 
two windows, tightly closed for security reasons, had been pinned a 
large scale Ordnance Survey map of the district. Imposing red lines 
had been ruled methodically upon it, and flags and coloured pins 
indicated Colonel Starkie's defensive positions, together with a 
detailed personnel break-down appended in one corner. This was 
the military position map. 

Everyone ignored it. They concentrated instead on the second 
Ordnance Survey map — an older and more tattered edition — -which 
was pinned somewhat jauntily between the Stag at Bay and the left 
hand one of a pair of antlers that had been presented to the Golden 
Lion by a long-dead local landowner whose wife would no longer 
countenance the waste of the maid's time in dusting them. This map 
had no official title. Upon it the most conspicuous landmark was a 
heavy red line which indicated the track of the Ancient Railways 
Preservation Society's line. At a point rather closer to the Bay than 
to Nether Ambleton was a tear. This hole had been torn as the 
result of frenzied poking by excited gentlemen pointing out the 
exact position where the Encyclopaedia had blown up. 

The most potent symbols on this map, however, were the small 
— but growing — clusters of drawing pins. Each pin represented the 
known whereabouts of an individual who had travelled on the train 
on the day of the explosion. 

Beagle, his long lemon face showing the suspicion of a flush, 



76 



N EB ULA 



and Rodney Winthrop, clad again in one of his revolting shirts, were 
engaged in a heated argument. The cause of their argument sat 
happily in a deep armchair, quaffing the unceasing procession of 
pint tankards that was passing before him. Tom, the tramp, his 
mole-skin waistcoat unbuttoned, boasted that he had never refused a 
drink in his life. His only fears now were that it might be necessary 
to lower the flag on that proud record. 

Three tape recorders whirred hypnotically on the long table, 
tended by members of Sir William's staff. A mournful major stood 
at the window, gazing gloomily down on the queue below. The vicar, 
who had been admitted because he had not been on the train and 
who had experience of Group Dynamics, was working on notes for 
a suitable sermon the coming Sunday. 

The long table was littered with papers, note-books, brief-cases, 
cameras, walking sticks and the Colonel's Sam Browne, which was 
too tight for him. 

The local landowner and representative of the gentry, Norman 
Leighton, who had been known to press half-a-crown into the grimy 
hand of a fourteen year old boy to walk past the Church after 
morning service and say: " Good morning, Squire," Leighton had 
made his money as a tycoon of the metal industry. This meant that 
he had started as a rag-and-bone man and, on the declaration of 
peace, had bought up huge amounts of army surplus and sold it with 
a fine disregard for the petty restrictions of legal commerce. He 
had been admitted to the Operations Room only because he was a 
justice and could therefore give an extension. This he had done. 

. Sally Picton had volunteered to take notes; but as she was a 
prime witness this had presented certain difficulties, only resolved by 
Sir William's masterful stroke of diplomacy in importing the tape 
recorders. Now, she sat near the door and wasn't sure whether to 
laugh or cry. 

Outside, in the ante-room, was where the work was being done. 
Here, sitting on cane chairs before a baize-topped card table, John 
Roland and Constable Evans were interviewing the residents of the 
village. They tried to be kind, and not to frighten anyone. They 
asked a standard question. " Were you on the train?" 

If the answer was " No," the culprit was told, sternly, to leave 
and skulked downstairs with the feeling that he had somehow let 
down the Empire. 

If the answer was " Yes," the lucky man or woman was told to 
go through into the Operations Room. 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



77 



How long it was before they discovered who was lucky and who 
not, remained to be seen. 

Inside the Operations Room, amidst the flurry of activity, lay 
the cause of all the disturbance, Walter Colborne, his mouth open, 
and mumbling idiotic childish gibberings interspersed with bouts of 
cretinous glee. 

Sally Picton looked down on him and sighed. 

There was a disturbance at the door. Constable Evans pushed 
his country-nurtured features around the door and said huskily: 



Gennelman wants to come in, Mr. Leighton." Constable Evans 
spoke naturally to Leighton, as the known and local seat of authority. 
Leighton started to say something about : " Tell him to take his 
turn," when Sir William intervened. 

"Was he on the train, constable?" 

" Nossir." 

" Well, he can't -" 

The words were drowned by a furious voice, a gesticulating arm 
seized itself fast around the constable's neck. The arm withdrew — 
as did the head of the law. A slight, pregnant pause. Then a small, 
dapper man with snapping black eyes and rosy cheeks, strutted into 
the room, breathing heavily. He was followed by what at first sight 
might have been mistaken for a great ape escaped from some zoo. 
Both men, for man the second undoubtedly was upon close inspection, 
wore raincoats and felt hats tipped down in front. John Roland 
sidled in after them and strode purposefully towards Sir William. 

" Claims he's a Scotland Yard superintendent, Sir William," 
Roland said softly. 

" Well, is he?" 

" Yes." 

By the time the situation had been explained to the C.I.D. man 
and he had been prevailed upon to partake of a drink, — at the 
expense of the government, he was informed,— -his incredulity and 
contempt were apparent. His name was George Brown, and he 
maintained the normal scepticism such a name automatically conferred upon its owner. 

"Lot of nonsense," he said tartly. He glared at Colonel 
Starkie. " I may say that certain quarters regard the bringing in of 
the military with some misgiving." 

Colonel Starkie heaved himself to his feet. Up to now, he had 
been enjoying this litde break from the routine chores of barrack life 
buried in the country. He had deep-set eyes, thin sandy hair and 
a sharp expression, and had proved himself in the mud of the winter 



78 



NEBULA 



campaign of '44-'45 to be an exceedingly brave and intelligent 
officer. Now he rumbled ominously : " It's only by the skin of our 
teeth that I haven't declared martial law." 

At these apocalyptic words the gloomy major involuntarily 
turned from the window and took a half-step into the room. 

" And, if this rubbish I'm told is true, as you obviously believe, 
why haven't you done just that?" asked Brown. 

" Well " Colonel Starkie paused. 

" Fact is, my dear fellow, if I did they'd want forms filled in in 
triplicate up at Horse Guards. I've never been fond of red-tape. 
And we're getting along very nicely." 

" The police have a right and a duty to be " 

" We have the able assistance of Constable Evans," pointed out 
Sir William, enjoying this, and quite determined that Superintendent 
Brown of Scotland Yard should not find out that he was dealing with 
the head of N.I.5. 

Super Brown did not exactly grit his teeth; but everyone 
winced. 

Lord Ashley sat back. Whilst Beagle and Winthrop were 
still getting the tramp to talk, were still prying into his brain and 
dragging forth all that Tom knew of the Galactic Intelligencer, he 
was prepared to delay indefinitely before he interrupted them. He 
had had a long and bitter experience of the way authority in its 
different guises loved to foul itself up deciding who was going to do 
what. Until they'd decided who was handling this, he was calmly 
going on doing things in his own way. He would not have been 
surprised if a battleship had heaved up, and a Vulcan had landed in 
farmer Longland's pasture, and an admiral and an air marshal had 
stormed in, demanding that it was their pigeon. Lord Ashley was 
already building his dreams of the future. 

Sir William said icily : " What were your first reactions, Superintendent, when you heard that an atomic bomb had been dropped 
on Hiroshima?" 

Brown's rosy and healthy cheeks grew even more ruddy. He 
started to say something, paused, and then, obviously changing his 
mind, said a little sulkily: " Well, it took a bit of believing at first. 
But that was normal. I mean, we knew work had been going on 
along those lines." 

" Like all thinking men, Super, you were incredulous. It took 
a bit of thought before you realised that science had taken a fifty 
year leap in the few years since Fermi and Rutherford. We have a 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



79 



situation here, not quite parallel, but similar enough that serious 
thought must be given to it." 

" It's serious all right," Brown said. " I'm not satisfied with 
the reports on the deaths of these two men. I should like to request 
your co-operation in any enquiries I may see fit to make." 

" The local police " said Leighton vaguely, with some idea 

of asserting his importance and displaying his knowledge of forensic 
procedure. 

" I have complete clearance from the Chief Constable," Brown 
said stiffly. " He is happy to co-operate fully." 

Most people listening knew what that meant. 

A sudden shout from Beagle drew their attention. 

Tom was nonchalantly scratching under his right armpit. He 
was also, with his unsure right hand, drinking from his flagon; the 
resultant movements were of an infuriating nature to Beagle, who 
was vainly attempting to persuade Tom to continue talking from the 
implanted memories of the G.I. 

" Go on! Go on! What comes after: ' Emergency repairs to 
mark nine nuclear reactors?' Something about supplies." 

Tom withdrew the flagon from his Hps. His glazed eyes brightened, like the sun shining through mist. His leathery face crinkled 
into what passed for a smile. " By gum," he said in his husky voice. 
" That be interesting, that be. Catching them litde critturs by 
thinking at 'em." He looked benignly on Beagle. " I'll have to try 
that yon up in Squire's woods. You make me the box o' tricks, like, 
and I'll split the bag with you." 

Beagle said, very patiently : " All right, Tom. It's a deal. Now 
just think how you make the ' box of tricks.' 

" Oh, I dunno that. Not nohow. Tain't here, in me head, like. 
You follow me, zur?" 

Winthrop let out a sharp exclamation and Beagle sagged back, 
defeated. " Yes," he said resignedly. " I follow. You know about 
these gadgets. But someone else knows how to make them." 

" Providing," Lord Ashley observed, " someone else happened 
to have their head in the line of that bit of flying information." 

The three scientists looked as though at a single command across 
at the snoring and disgusting bulk of Walter Colborne, supine on the 
bench. 

" Poor devil," said Lord Ashley. " He caught most of it. 
Numbed his brain. I can't say I blame him." His tall frame leaned 
over, peering across at Colborne. His eyes caught Sally's and he 
smiled. 



83 



NEBULA 



" Don't worry, my dear. We'll be gentle with him." 

Sally nodded. She could not find it in her to reply flippantly, 
as her life-time training dictated. She couldn't say, with a saucy toss 
of her head : " Why should I worry? He's none of my business." 
For she knew, helplessly, that he was very much her business. And 
the knowledge was strangely comforting, a warm friendly niche in 
her mind that had had solemn and alien thoughts impressed upon it. 

Colborne snorted, and muttered, twisting on the bench. He 
flung an arm out, and his hand touched Sally's. Like the twining 
fronds of plants, their hands clung. 

" Hullo," said Beagle. " He's coming round." 

Lord Ashley said : " I hope he doesn't run into any knowledge 
that will destroy, his brain. What he now knows is dynamite; and 
not only to him, but to the whole world." 

Colborne opened his eyes and said: "What hit me?" 



CHAPTER IX 

" Just because I was late you didn't have to hit me over the head 
with the fire shovel, Beagle," Colborne complained bitterly. He 
swung his legs over the side of the bench and stiffly sat up. He 
reeled back against the wall, his face grey and the stubble showing 
strongly, and tried to focus his eyes. 

Someone said : " Snap out of it, Walter." 

Someone else, someone with a heavenly voice, said : " He'll be 
all right in a minute. Let him come round in his own time." 

"Luvverly," Colborne said. Then: "Drink. I would like a 
drink of water." 

The glass, thrust cool into his hand, stung him into greater 
awareness of his surroundings. Cautiously, he opened one eye. Light 
drilled like a dentist's instrument of torture. He winced and closed 
the lid firmly. He drank water, rinsing out his mouth, and feeling 
pains shooting through his head with the movement. He had to play 
this delicately, with an exquisitely fine touch. Otherwise he was 
sunk; and would sink into the horrors of that future life that had 
haunted him since the tramp's revelations. 

Anyway, he had an infernal headache — quite unlike that other 
feeling of head-bursting from which now, thank God, he was relieved — and there was little play-acting about his drawn face, screwed 
up eyes and haggard look. 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



81 



" How do you feel, Walter?" asked Lord Ashley. 

Colborne took his time about answering, and then said: 
" Lousy." He licked his lips and shuddered. " God, what a hangover." 

" Can you remember anything " Beagle began. 

Lord Ashley cut him off with a quick movement of his hand 
and a murmured : " Take your time, Walter." 

Colborne grimaced. He knew what it was all about. He knew 
what these buzzards wanted. They wanted to pick his brain clean, 
strip it of the alien knowledge that had poured in from out a splitting 
lump of coal. Only — they weren't really buzzards, were they? Not 
Jeffers, and Beagle and Winnie? They were his friends. Then Colborne remembered his prevision of his future, and of the way these 
friends would prod and probe and dessicate him, in the cause of 
science. He felt at once small and alone and afraid. 

That feeling was intensified by the uproar in the room, which 
he vaguely recognised as the upper chamber of the Golden Lion, 
although its new furnishings, the maps, the tape recorders and the 
bustling people, intent on their interviewing and recording, created a 
sort of circus whirl in his head, and shrank his spirit still further into 
its shell of obscurity. He wanted to get away from it all and curl 
up and sleep. 

Someone gave him some pills, and then, at a brisk command 
from an army colonel, an army medico walked in and genially shot a 
hypo into his arm. Shortly thereafter he really did feel better, and 
there was no longer time or excuse for procrastination. Now, he had 
to face up to his ordeal. 

From the tightly closed windows came a hubbub in the street. 
Children's voices raised in laughter and excited shouts and indignant 
denials that they weren't playing fair. Everyone ignored the noise 
floating on the warm summer air; as though on cue, all faces turned 
in Colborne's direction. To seize on any excuse, to postpone the inevitable time when he must make his stand, one way or the other, 
Colborne began to enquire what was going on and who were all these 
people. As he learned their names and looked at the maps and 
reports, the picture filled in. 

" You've made quite an operation out of it, Jeffers," he said, 
smiling weaklv. 

Lord Ashley shook his head. " Not really me, Walter." He 
gestured towards a competent looking individual in inconspicuous 
grev. " John Poland here, he's the driving force behind the organisation, with help from Colonel Starkie." Looking at Roland, 



NEBULA 



Colborne caught a glimpse of a familiar face; then he remembered. 
Roland had been the man who had lounged casually up and stood 
listening when old Tom the tramp had been pouring out the first 
astounding news of the Galactic Intelligencer. That the man had 
believed it, and had had faith in his belief enough to bring in his 
superiors and the military impressed Colborne. Roland would bear 
watching in this game he meant to play. 

Tom had been temporarily forgotten and now he was cheerfully 
guzzling the unending row of pint flagons. His eyes were fast becoming glassy. Lord Ashley saw this and shouted at Beagle : " Hey, 
Beagle! Tom'll be incapable of answering questions in a minute. 
Then," he added with a sidelong glance at Colborne, "that'll make 
two of 'em." 

" I'm perfectly all right," Colborne said with dignity, " thank 
you." 

Beagle's attention had been taken from Tom by his fierce argument with Superintendent Brown. Winthrop had joined the discussion. The C.I.D. man's supercilious expression and his maddening 
insistence on undisputable facts were both rapidly maddening the 
scientists and turning the discussion into a wrangle. Colborne listened with pleasure. 

" I always thought you scientists prided yourselves on sticking 
to the facts," said Brown. 

" So we do. But when the facts are as plain as. they are in. this 
instance we don't go on blinding ourselves to the obvious." Beagle 
was getting wrathful. 

"Where do you think Tom picked up all this stuff he's been 
telling us, Super?" demanded Winthrop. 

" Stuff's right. Why — it's a practical joke. And I can assure 
you it won't backfire on the public. Oh, no! The taxpayers won't 
pay for all this. Either you and your associates will pay up or we'll 
find out just who is behind this tramp and his wild stories." 

" What about all the village people who were on the train when 
the encyclopaedia exploded?" 

" This could be a cheap plot to get publicity for the village and 
the holiday camp. Those people who run some holiday camps — not 
the reputable ones — will go to any lengths to secure publicity. I 
know. I've had some." He grimaced, and shook imaginary water 
from his hands, a typically French gesture. " Little green men from 
flying dustbin lids. Oh, yes. We know." 

"Listen Super," Colborne said distinctly and belligerently. 
"Don't you go mixing the Ancient Railways Preservation Society 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



83 



up with those cheap charlatans. That won't do you any good at all." 

Superintendent Brown rounded on Colborne, his face no longer 
ugly, suddenly smooth and menacing. "Are you threatening the 
police, by any chance?" 

" Call it that if you like. We're a reputable association. Not 
half-witted fanatics. Don't forget it." 

Lord Ashley intervened before the policeman could work off 
the ire simmering in his breast. " Whilst that is quite true, we seem 
to be wandering from the point." He looked up as a fresh burst of 
noise and laughter and the quick clatter of running feet sounded from 
the windows. " We as a Railway Preservation Society were drawn 
into this by pure chance. It's lucky that we have among our members 
so many distinguished men of science. At least, we have been able 
to get on the job of tracking down all the information from the encyclopaedia with open minds. I hate to think what might have been 
the consequence had this happened somewhere where the general 

reaction would have been such as " Lord Ashley hesitated, har
rumphed, and then Beagle finished it for him. " Like your crass and 
mind-bound stupidity, Super. That's who." 

Colborne was really enjoying himself now. He stood up and 
went across to the window for some fresh air. The argument was 
generating enough sparks now for no-one to pay him any attention 
as he pushed up the catch and opened the window. Fresh, sweet, 
head-clearing air poured in. 

" All right," Superintendent Brown was saying, his voice icy 
with suppressed rage. " If you're so all-fired clever, how is it that 
if all the people who were on the train received a charge of this wonderful alien knowledge that you, Lord Ashley, and you, Professor 
Beagle, who were actually on the footplate at the time of the alleged 
explosion did not receive any information?" 

Beagle said: " Good Lord!" 

Lord Ashley said : " Very fair, Super, very fair question." 

Colborne turned from the window and said : " The answer is 
simple. The explosion occurred actually inside the firebox, surrounded on all sides but one by metal. The whole thing was like a 
gun. The explosion of the information, if you can follow that concept, was funnelled out in one direction. It went right down the 
line of carriages. Those people whose heads were obscured by other 
heads, or by metal, were not affected. Those with their heads out 
of the top of the carriages received some radiation. Lord Ashley 
and Professor Beagle were leaning outside the cab at the time and its 
metal walls protected them." 



NEBULA 



" Protected? Walter," said Lord Ashley wryly. 

Sir William had remained silent. Now, he said with a little appreciative nod of the head towards Lord. Ashley: "The clincher, 
Superintendent, is the overwhelming proof afforded by the reports 
we are receiving from people who were on the train. The knowledge 
they have could not have been obtained on this Earth, outside the 
pages of science fiction magazines. And what they are telling us 
has the ring of truth." 

" And," Beagle said hody: " The difficulty is getting it out of 
them. We have to dig around and ask leading questions. You have 
to start their minds working before you can get the stuff you want 
out." 

Winthrop carried that thought on. " And the man who is a 
sort of index, Tom, here, is rapidly getting drunk." 

Colborne welcomed every single one of these diversions. They 
prolonged the inevitable moment when he must give a straight answer 
to the question he must be asked. He still had not completely made 
up his mind to deceive his friends. He was frightened, alone, trying 
to see a clear path through the tangled trail between his duty and his 
inclinations. That a definite decision was upon him he knew. He 
turned again to the window and leaned out, breathing deeply. They 
couldn't trap him into answering random questions with specific 
alien answers. You had to lead into the subject of which you wished 
to acquire information; you had to frame a question, and then, if you 
knew the answer, there it was, hanging like words of fire in your 
mind. If you didn't know the answer, you could keep a blank, unintelligent face. It might be tricky. 

Across the street children with cowboy hats and masks and toy 
six-shooters were playing cowboys and Indians. That fairyland 
would still go on, he supposed, if the whole world turned into automotive robots. Young and innocent and not understanding what 
was really involved when they shouted " Bang ! " and " You're dead ! " 
and their friend obligingly fell over, only to rise again and, in his 
turn, shout " Bang!" 

When they were older they might press triggers and push buttons and, without having to shout " Bang ! " would send men whom 
they had never seen to roll and lie in the dust. Only, then there 
would be no turn for getting up and being the good man. Then 
everyone would be the bad man. And by then it would be too late to 
teach them anything else. 

From the shop-window shadows a boy pranced, brace of six


WISDOM OF THE GODS 



85 



guns proudly pointed. Above him the old daub and wattle fronts 
rose, leaning and ancient and friendly, their shop signs creaking 
slightly in the faint breeze, the whiteness of the paint and the blackness of the wood somehow right and proper in this quiet country 
village. The lath and plaster looked, frail as it was, as though it was 
prepared to stand another four hundred years to add to the four 
hundred already past. 

" Walter," Lord Ashley said, speaking very kindly. " Have you 
fully recovered? Can you tell us now if you remember, that is, if any 
information is now open to you? Your brain received by far the 
largest part of the G.I. Can you tell us, now?" 

Colborne put both hands on the winefowsill. They were trembling. He looked down, feeling sick, hating the world, hating the time 
for decisions that must always come, hating the inner convictions that 
he was a weakling, unable to make up his mind. 

The boy dressed in his cowboy clothes down there saw a friend 
come out of the shadows of the Golden Lion's porch. Colborne saw 
the newcomer, a lad foreshortened into almost nothing but his cowboy 
hat. The sun glinted from an object in his hands. A gun. Colborne 
could see, quite plainly, the two torch batteries, the little coil of wire, 
the crystal, attached to the barrel of the gun. He saw them only as 
through a mist, a fog conjured up by his agony of indecision. Selfish 
motives pushed at his feelings of duty to tell all he knew for the good 
of science. Without conscious effort his eyes followed the boy below. 

The boy with the two toy six-guns raised them, pointing at the 
boy immediately below Colborne. " Bang ! Bang ! " the lad shouted, 
laughing. 

" Bang!" said the boy below Colborne. 

From the gun in his hand a pale violet beam lanced, lasting a 
heartbeat, flickering out so fast it appeared only a retinal image. 
The boy waving his six-guns vanished. 
The old time-mellowed shops vanished. 

An oak tree whose original acorn of birth must have fallen three 
hundred years ago vanished. 

Four hundred yards away, across the fields, a rick began to burn. 

The shops' upper storeys, left unsupported, fell to earth. Plaster 
and beams and dust puffed out, over the street. The noise was not 
loud. It was more like a long soft sigh. 

A pigeon fluttered onto the top of the rubble. Its wing was 
broken. It stood there, flapping, dazed, frightened. 



86 



N EBU L A 




Colbornc turned round, facing into the room. 

" I'm sorry," he said firmly. " I can't recall a tiling." 



CHAPTER X 

Sir William's big Bentley pulled into the side of the road and 
the passengers alighted. 

Beagle pointed up the grassy slope to the railway line. " Just 
about there. We were just going into the downward run. You 
remember, Jeffers, you commented upon the speed." 

" That's right, Beagle," Lord Ashley confirmed. " I was looking out this side. The crossroads just ahead were passing my view 
at the time." 

Colborne looked back. " We swung round that bend so fast 
I fell against you, I think," he said. 

" Well, let's get on up there," Sir William said. The other 
cars had pulled in neatly to park behind his Bentley, and now 
Colonel Starkie and the Engineer officer scrambled along the bank 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



87 



and they all went up, striding over the grass and the daisies. Puffing slightly, they stood on the metals of the track. The boots of 
the soldiers scuffled loudly on the ballast. 

The Engineers soon had their instruments set up, and their 
officer balanced his map and oriented it with the landscape. v He was 
a tall, thin, intense man, devoted to his work, who had never seen a 
gun fired in anger. He had no wish to. Mapping, as an art, he had 
explained, was not surpassed by the masterpieces of Michelangelo or 
Leonardo. Now he began laying off lines, working with sure, swift 
economy of purpose. 

Colborne walked a little way off and sat down on the bank. 
He picked up a handful of pebbles, tossed from the ballast, and 
began to throw them idly down towards a clump of bushes. Lord 
Ashley strolled up and sat down beside him with a little grunt of 
effort. 

There was a short silence. Colborne felt acutely miserable. 
" Pity your brain's still numbed, Walter," Lord Ashley offered 
at last. 

" Yes," 

" Those kids. Damned shame. Damned stupid. Just the 
sort of idiotic tragedy we're trying to avoid." 
"Yes." 

" It affected Sally pretty rottenly, Walter. She's a fine girl." 
"Yes." 

Another silence followed that. Then, speaking with a remote 
unfeeling voice, Colborne said " Still, the military have that violet 
beam weapon now. Should prove pretty useful in a war." 

It was Lord Ashley's turn to be taciturn. " I suppose so," he 
said, with a sideways turn of the head. His wise old eyes regarded 
Colborne steadily for a moment. He remained still and uncaring 
of that level gaze. 

At last Lord Ashley said : " I expect there's a defence for it. 
Some sort of screen. We'll have to find the person who knows that." 

" If someone received that information." 

" Oh, I know it's a chance. But, then, it all is, isn't it? I 
mean, the good comes with the bad in any phase of civilisation." 

" Only sometimes the bad runs ahead of the good. Seems 
that it always does, too, for some odd reason." 

"I wouldn't say that. Not always." 

" Nuclear science is as good a point as any. First we blow 
people up. Then, in between finding out better methods of blowing 



88 



NEBULA 



them up more spectacularly and in more wholesale doses, we tinker 
about with peaceful uses. Cancer, for instance. Power. You tell 
me which way it works." 

" I can't pretend to answer for the mysteries of history, Walter. 
All I know is that if you give mankind anything like a decent chance 
he'll opt for the good things. And by that I don't mean good in any 
wishy-washy way. Most of the great advances in science that have 
been perverted to warlike ends started off with a vision for die good 
of mankind. Circumstances force men to abominate their own 
creations." 

" Funny, though, how good man is at devising means to destroy 
other men. He's got a knack for it." 

" When you've been a weak and unarmed and unarmoured 
creature for a few thousand years, you develop that kind of knack. 
We wouldn't be sitting here if, a few thousand years ago one of our 
ancestors hadn't thought of hitting a sabre tooth with a big club, 
instead of letting the beast eat him up. That kind of conditioning 
can't be worked out of your system in the few generations that 
intervene." 

" Okay, then. Let's not monkey around any more with wholesale means of destruction until we can control our fighting instinct." 

Lord Ashley produced his pipe. He did not light it but turned 
it thoughtfully between his fingers. " You point to people being 
killed by aeroplanes. I point to people being saved by the flying 
doctor services, being able to get from one end of the world to the 
other, perhaps for a vital mission. You point to men killing others 
with rifles; I point to the times when man lived by his weapons, and 
when to be without weapons was to starve." 

Colborne threw a stone. " The ratios are so out of proportion 
— I'm no mathematician, but you know what I mean — that one just 
doesn't balance the other." 

" I'll quote, roughly, if I may? Whereso there is one good man, 
there will I spare a multitude of sinners. Something like that." 

" Oh, I'll grant you that," Colborne said fretfully, standing up 
and kicking his last stone into the air. " I'll say that the average 
man is fundamentally peaceful and wants to live in peace. But you 
know the answer to that well enough. Tell him that that other 
man, over the hill, has a yellow face or beats his slaves in his factories, and, hey presto! there's a uniform on his back, a gun in his 
hand and all humanity squeezed out of his heart." He laughed 
harshly. " Until you can convince me that the men who tell other 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



89 



men are fundamentally decent when they gang up together, then 
I'll interpret things as they are, not as I'd like them to be." 

" Hey ! You two ! " Beagle's thin imperious call rang out. 

They both turned. Lord Ashley put his cold pipe between his 
teeth, grunted again as he levered himself up. His tall body leaning into an invisible wind, he went off up the track towards the 
group, without looking back at Colborne. 

" All mapped up," Colonel Starkie said. " We've got all the 
lines ruled out to a millimetre. Right, Harrison?" 

" That's right, sir. I've quite finished now," the Engineer 
officer said, rolling up his maps. 

The Colonel sniffed, and then swung round and gave energetic 
orders to the soldiers with the instruments. The ensuing bustle 
of efficient departure gave time for Colborne to simmer down. He 
had made up his mind. The only trouble was, it appeared that 
Lord Ashley had seen through his deception. Well, he comforted 
himself, so far no awkward questions had cropped up that might 
bring a betraying gesture from him. 

The summer breeze flirted with men's hair, sported about the 
trees, quivering the leaves; high white clouds tumbled in fairy 
castles against the limpid depths of the sky. Around him there was 
a quickening spirit of being, of aliveness, as though all the little lives 
that were being acted out in that land and skyscape were somehow 
joined to his, part of one whole. 

He went slowly down to the waiting cars. 

As he sat in the rear seat of the Bendey, he could not take his 
thoughts away from that child, whiffed into nothingness by the black 
alchemy of some alien star. It had been abundantly proved that the 
knowledge received unwanted had a deadly power. It was dangerous in the wrong hands. 

Colborne hoped that his hands would prove strong enough to 
guard the deadly secrets entrusted to him. 

So far he hadn't even bothered to find out what he did know. 
He had shied away from that new area of awareness in his mind as a 
blind man shies away from some unfamiliar echo on a foggy night. 
What fresh facts lay in his mind could continue to lie there, undisturbed, untroubled. He thought of his mind like some modern 
version of Pandora's Box. The slightest chink, the merest suggestion of raising the lid; and they would all come boiling out, good and 
bad, to engulf the world in a bath of flame. 

He had made up his mind, quite sincerely, that he wished to 
save the world as it was. Widi all its imperfections, it could yet be 



90 



NEBULA 



worse still with devilish instruments like that violet beamed gun let 
loose and on the prowl. 

The cars started and rolled back to Nether Ambleton through 
the gende countryside. 

A message was waiting for Colonel Starkie. It was from the 
lieutenant out on the bridge. The reporters, it said, were growing 
tough. They demanded to be allowed to send one representative to 
interview the top man. Colonel Starkie crumpled the form under 
the protesting eyes of the major — who was responsible for paper 
work — and barked out his considered opinion of reporters. He 
finished: "And you can tell them no-one's coming in here. Noone at all, understand?" 

Lord Ashley said : " Just a moment, Colonel. I'd rather like 
to discuss this with you and Sir William." He smiled at Superintendent Brown. " And ycu, of course, Brown." 

The upshot of that discussion was that a form was decided upon 
and a certain story was to be released to the Press. Lord Ashley 
twinkled one of his favourite jokes. " Oh — and, when they arrive, 
111 expect the age-old report. You know — ' There are four reporters, 
my Lord, and a gentleman from the Times.'' That is a splendid 
example of something; but what, I don't think I'll mention right 
now." 

Those who had heard it before laughed along with those who 
had not. To Colborne, it was still more than funny, it summed up a 
whole civilisation, a whole way of life and manner of thinking. That 
that world was now long dead sometimes made him wonder. And 
then, looking around, he always knew that it was better so. Just. 

Some time after that, Colborne saw Lord Ashley spend a considerable time speaking on the telephone. Before the reporters 
arrived, an ambulance had driven up, let into the perimeter through 
a little-used byway and unobserved by the reporters. The doctor 
aboard was, Colborne felt, in any case a useful addition to their 
strength. All available medical strength had been used up. Even 
the pigeon with the broken wing had been carefully tended by 
Leighton's head gamekeeper until the arrival of the vet. 

Beagle and Winthrop had sobered Tom up and were busily 
running over tapes with him. The tramp had first inquired who the 
*ell was speaking like that. He had flatly denied the possibility that 
it was himself. He still didn't believe it, even when Beagle ran a 
recording, and then played it back before the tramp's very ears. 
However, he was quite anxious to co-operate when the beer flagons 
were judiciously kept at arms' length until he did. 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



91 



Watching the scene, Colborne wondered what carrot might be 
used to tempt him. He was roused as Lord Ashley came over, with 
his winning smile about to pass the finishing post, and with the 
newly-arrived doctor in attendance. 

" Oh, Walter, this is Doctor Cremieux. I want you to have a 
thorough check-up. Now, no arguments. You've been through 
some remarkable experiences lately, to put it mildly." He chuckled. 
" And the ambulance driving off at the right time will add a splash of 
colour to the story we're going to spin those newshawks." 

Colborne thought he detected an odd note of strain in Lord 
Ashley's chuckle. But he was too strained himself to take too much 
notice of little indications now — however much he had once prided 
himself on telling how other people felt by their mannerisms. 

The army medico came back into the room, reported to Colonel 
Starkie and was brusquely told to- go into a huddle with Beagle and 
Sir William. Passing them, on his way to the door with Doctor 
Cremieux, Colborne caught the gist of their conversation. It seemed 
that a story was being cooked up to satisfy the Press. Something 
about a disease that had to be kept under control. Danger of tactile 
infection. 

Sir William said bluntly: " Tell the deputation that if they come 
we can't let 'em out. They can talk by the field telephone the army's 
set up. It won't satisfy them;, but it'll keep 'em off our necks for a bit." 

John Roland observed "drily : "If I know the Press nothing'U 
keep them off our necks for long. And once that sort of story goes 
the rounds all hell will bust loose. You've only to look at the military 
precautions we're taking." 

Beagle said : " That's out of my line." 

Colonel Starkie said gruffly: "Well, it's not really mine. But 
we cannot allow the truth to be known yet. Any story is better than 
that one. Agreed?" 

Doctor Cremieux coughed discreetly, caught the eye of his army 
colleague, and said precisely: "It might be better if the infection 
were droplet, airborne — tactile diseases may be combated by wearing gloves." 

And so Colborne went out to the solemn nodding of heads. He 
wasn't sure if they were nodding so sagely over Cremieux*s last remark, or the reflection that the Press didn't give up so easily. 

The last thing he heard was the army doctor saying : " I'll requisition facemasks right away. You'll enjoy wearing those . . ." 

An odd feeling of conspiracy, of being in the know, obsessed 
Colborne as he went down the old inn stairs and out into the street


92 



NEBULA 



and, refusing to sit in the back, found a seat between the driver and 
me doctor. It was not at all difficult to keep his eyes away from the 
gap in the row of shops opposite and the hastily piled rubble shovelled 
back from the street. He could still see that child, waving his pitiful 
toy guns, the instant before his awful dissipation. 

By the time the ambulance had traversed the main street and 
was wheeling around the corner past the corn chandlers, Colborne 
saw through the side window a Hillman Minx roll up to the Golden 
Lion and two men jump out and, arguing violently with the soldier 
on sentry duty, disappear within. He wondered how the army medico 
was going to deal with the obvious tardiness in the arrival of his antisceptic face masks. That, he^d find out when he got back. The 
ambulance rolled past the soldiers guarding the perimeter across the 
by-road, and set off into the countryside. Colborne, disinclined for 
conversation, shut his eyes and leaned back. There seemed to be no 
hiatus before he was opening them again and seeing and hearing the 
bustle and subdued frenzy of a large hospital around him. He was 
ushered out and up in a lift and so through into a large, airy, bright 
and quiet room on the top floor. 

In the scrubbed whiteness, with the gleam of chrome and the 
strange other-worldly atmosphere of ranked banks of dials and meters 
he was jerked out of the spiral of his own self-centred thoughts, and 
guilty memory shot off at a tangent. He stopped stockstill. 

" Holy smoke ! June ! I've completely forgotten her " He 

swung on Doctor Cremieux. " Look, doc, can I use your phone? I 
must ring Saint Angelo's at once." 

" Saint Angelo's?" the doctor said on a rising inflexion. 

" Yes. My sister's there. Cancer. Had a big operation the 
other day and all this fuss has driven it right out of my mind. 
Thoughtless idiot! Ungrateful slob — where's the phone?" 

" Just a minute, just a minute." Cremieux raised his hands in 
protest under Colborne's torrent of words. " You are here for a 
check-up, young man. I'll get through to Saint Angelo's for you. At 
once, I promise you. Who is it?" 

Colborne didn't stop to argue. He knew that the doctor, in 
dealing with familiar channels, would get through three times as fast 
as he would. He gave him the details. Cremieux immediately picked 
up the phone and put the call through. " Now," he said professionally, cradling the phone. " Just put yourself in my hands. Come over 
here." ' 

Colborne submitted to various checks. Some, he recognised; 
some, he didn't. At one stage he had to balance mercury in a glass 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



93 



column by breathing out. The mercury fluctuated like a ball on a 
waterjet in a shooting gallery. At another point electrodes were 
fastened to his head and he lay down, thinking about June. Then 
his blood was taken, a sample drawn with expert precision — he didn't 
even feel the prick of the needle. He lay there, thoughts now of his 
guilty load of alien knowledge banished from his mind under the far 
more pressing impact of his callous disregard of his sister's well-being. 
If she'd died. ... He refused to allow that possibility to exist. He 
willed it to be not possible. The threat of it lay over him, stultifying, 
choking, making him, if he could only let himself see, aware of his 
own instability under the new experiences weighing him down. 

" Well, doc," he asked, sitting up wildly. " Is she all right?" 

" Take it easy, take it easy," Cremieux said softly. " Yes. Of 
course she's all right. Angelo's is a first-rate shop. Of course, the 
news is not all good " 

" Tell me!" 

" Your sister unfortunately shows a recurrence " 

"Oh, no! Not that! They said they'd cut it all out. They 
said . . ." 

Cremieux spread his hands. " Cancer. It is a very strange thing. 
No one can really tell. It takes a long time. She will have " 

" Of course ! And in that time? What will she be doing? Feeling?" Colborne's frustrated feelings boiled up in him. What could 
anyone do against the dark forces that swept in from nowhere over 
a bright life, selecting, it seemed at random, any target that was 
defenceless and helpless before it, striking it down mercilessly — and 
friends stood about quite unable to do a single simple thing to relieve 
a moment's agony. He was sweating now; he must be partially 
deranged. June, of all people, would not want him to carry on like 
this. But the time for cheerful acceptance was past. He felt he had 
to shout aloud his hatred of whatever black fate it was that stalked 
carelessly into ordinary people's lives, laughing with insane glee at 
destruction and agony and the blighting of all hope. 

When he had mastered himself, when he had overcome that 
dreadful spasm of grief and wrath, he said: "Thank you, doctor. 
You have been very kind." 

Cremieux was obviously embarrassed. Even for a doctor, callous in the normal friendly way, he had been shaken by Colborne's 
spasmodic utterances. He put it down, Colborne guessed, to the 
events of the past few days. And, who was to say he wasn't right? 

" If you will put your coat on, we can return," Cremieux said. 

Going out, Colborne for the first time became conscious of the 



94 



NEBULA 



three silent men in grey who followed him and the doctor, men who 
had the wary-eyed look that he recognised in John Roland. So there 
had been no chances taken on this jaunt outside the Nether Ambleton 
abattoir. 

" Will I live?" he asked, with a pathetic flicker of that old jaunti
ness. 

" Possibly," answered Cremieux. And then he added : " I, personally, can only give you another fifty years of life. Beyond that 
it's entirely up to you, or Providence." 

" Providence," Colborne said. It was a curse. 



CHAPTER XI 

Colborne asked the driver to stop on the corner of the High 
Street. 

"Here," he said to Doctor Cremieux, handing over a couple 
of coppers. " As I don't suppose for one moment you tryst me, 
would you mind nipping over to that newsboy and buying a paper?" 

When the doctor came back, the headlines stared hard and 
black at Colborne. The Press had wasted no time at all, and with the 
cheerful acceptance of the infallibility of the newspaper, millions all 
over the world were now reading of the occurrences in the sleepy 
little hamlet of Nether Ambleton. At least,' Colborne thought sourly, 
reading this rubbish. As the ambulance started again, he said : " They 
must have fed them a sweet line. Look at this. ' Mystery ailment 
near Polder. Atom brains refuse comment but say no danger.' " 
He snorted with disgust. " What the hell they mean by atom brains 
is anybody's guess." 

Cremieux said quietly: " So they've decided to tie it in with 
Polder." He stared at the shops fleeting by. " After they'd agreed 
to use the disease story. I wonder what went wrong." 

"Probably your opposite number in the mob didn't get those 
face masks through fast enough. Although that's probably not the 
answer, anyway. Seems to me that an old lady only has to fall down 
the backstairs and sprain her ankle within fifty miles of a nuclear 
power station and all the yellow sheets immediately blame the pile. 
Ignorant layabouts." 

" Still, this might not be clever " 

" Of course it isn't clever ! I can see half the county skedaddling off unless a satisfactory answer is forthcoming. And pretty 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



95 




poor answers they'll get in the House. Someone must have the 
breeze up, all right." 

" You sound particularly vicious, Colborne." 

" Do I? I wonder why that is?" 

Colborne shut his lips after that and the drive proceeded in 
silence. They left the town and purred quietly through leafy lanes, 
heading back to Nether Ambleton. 

They went past the barriers easily enough, still keeping to the 
byways, and, all too soon for Colborne's peace of mind, the roofs 
and chimneys of the village showed through the greenery of summer 
trees. There was hidden deep down in him a sense of shame in 
meeting Lord Ashley and Beagle and Winthrop again. An odd sort 
of feeling compounded of guilt over a partially-felt betrayal of what 
they stood for, a defiant stand for what he believed in, and what he 
recognised for a stubborn feeling of resentment that it should have 
been him, Walter Colborne, selected for this outrageous act, angered 
and isolated him; 

The ambulance dipped to a depression in the road and a startlingly loud crash of glass, followed by an oath from the driver, 
shook them all into shocked alertness. 



NEBULA 



A hole had appeared in the side window. Glass lay in small 
shards across their knees. The driver pulled out a handkerchief and 
dabbed his ear. The handkerchief came away red. 

" Drive on," Cremieux said evenly. 

" It's only poltergeists." Colborne was savage with his irony. 
" Don't worry about them. Windscreen smashing is as good a way 
as any to enliven the waiting till you get your ticket for hell." 

" I dunno who it was," the driver said darkly. " But I'd like to 
put the toe of my boot to him." 

The crash of heavy automatics came clearly to them from the 
rear of the ambulance. Looking through the little window, Colborne 
saw the rear doors open and two of the plain-clothes men leaning 
out and firing. They looked cold and hard and merciless. He turned 
round and looked through the windscreen. 

" I always thought firing on an ambulance was regarded as 
unchivalrous; but I suppose if the ambulance fires back that's 
underhand." 

" What on Earth is going on ! " demanded Cremieux. 

As no-one had any idea, no-one said anything. 

" They might know something at the Golden Lion," the driver 
said. The ambulance swept past the corn chandlers and pulled up outside the Golden Lion. The Hillman Minx was still there, parked untidily against the kerb, and a soldier with a rifle and fixed bayonet 
stood over it as though he were a legionnaire defending Fort Zindeneuf. 

Colborne jumped out and ran round to the back. He was 
almost decapitated by the swinging door as the agents sprang out, 
alert and suspicious. Colborne staggered back and fell flat on his 
back. From his reclining position, he looked straight up and saw the 
sentry's legs and battledress blouse looming menacingly over him. 
The rifle and bayonet looked, from his angled view, like a spaceship 
waiting to take off. The sentry had not moved a muscle. He stood, 
aloof, self-contained, on guard. 

Colborne said something and then scrambled up. He turned 
on the agents. 

" What the blazes is the idea? I thought you were along to 
protect me, not to knock me flat?" 

The three men stared silently at him. Cremieux walked almost 
stealthily up and took Colborne s elbow with altogether too familiar 
a manner. " Now, just come along, Colborne " 

Colborne shook free. " What was all that shooting?" 

The agent who had knocked him down said : " Sorry you fell 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



97 



over, sir. That shooting," he crinkled up his eyes. " Someone 
fired a rifle at the ambulance. Sounded like a .22 to me. Caught 
a glimpse of someone moving in the trees. Couldn't stop. No 
orders." 

" All right," Colborne said, annoyed at making a fool of himself. " We'd better report it to Colonel Starkie and get an armoured 
regiment out hunting the poacher." 

" Poacher? This time of day?" 

" There's a lot been happening around here recently," Colborne 
said darkly. He stalked off and went into the pub and up to the 
Operations Room. He wanted to see Sally. 

Cremieux followed him, swinging his brief case, which bulged 
more than when he had left, Colborne noticed. 

Lord Ashley greeted him with an outfiung newspaper and a 
trembling and indignant finger. 

"I know, I know, Jeffers," Colborne said crossly. "Yellow 
journalism trying to throw a scare into their sinking circulations. 
Where's Sally?" 

Beagle said : " She went out about an hour ago, said she needed 
some fresh air." 

" What ! " Colborne told them of the shooting incident. Colonel 
Starkie got on the ball with commendable swiftness. 

Lord Ashley's paper lay on the table where he had flung it. He 
and Doctor Cremieux were off in a huddle in a corner. Beagle and 
Winthrop joined them. Tom, the poacher, was lying full-length on 
a settle, on his face the blissful look of one who is utterly and disgustingly drunk. Superintendent Brown and his ape-like assistant had 
vanished, and Leighton was squiring it down in the private bar below. 
The Operations Room looked singularly cold and empty and cheerless. Although it was high summer, Colborne shivered. 

Idly, he glanced at the paper thrown down. He had no idea 
where Sally had gone; but he knew it wouldn't be far with the soldiers 
and police on guard. He had no real fears of her safety; just that he 
felt that there was a time and place for a little anxiety; it toned up the 
nervous system in those around him. 

The story in this newspaper was much the same as in the one 
he had asked Cremieux to buy for him. There was no sign of a reporter in the Operations Room; but Colborne guessed that the car 
he had seen drive up as the ambulance left, the car with the remote 
sentry guarding it, would not be leaving Nether Ambleton for a time 
yet. And the story sent out from here, after it had received the usual 
quota of inane sub-editorial crossheads, made lurid reading. Col


98 



NEBULA 



borne turned the pages in slow resentment, angered that there existed 
people willing to believe all that they read. 

The headlines held his attention. He began to read an inside 
story, written with all that heavy-handed humour of a revolting coyness that characterised some papers' attitude towards slightly off-beat 
events in the world. 

" Self-professed high priest lands in U.S. Ignatius Q. Hackensack, recently respected industrialist, on his return from England 
where he had been a member of a trade mission, immediately on stepping from the Constellation, began an impromptu open-air religious 
revivalist meeting at Idlewild Airport. The meeting took place 
between the two wings of the Arrivals Building, but quickly spread to 
interfere with the working of the South-East taxiways. Police were 
called but were unable to disperse the crowds. Mr. Hackensack 
was taken into custody in order to prevent a riot." 

There followed a garbled version of what the deranged industrialist had been preaching. Reading it casually, Coiborne's attention sharpened. There was a grim familiarity within him as he read 
on. The man had chosen as his slogan: "Planetary solidarity is 
essential." He was preaching a survival religion; a means of life 
related to unspecified deities that, he claimed, enabled anyone to 
go on living in the most adverse circumstances. He spoke of a " revealed vision". He indignantly denied a suggestion that he heard 
voices in his head. What he had to proclaim to the world, he said, 
had come to him in an apocalyptic stroke from on high : " The letters 
of blood stand in my mind and I share them with the world." We 
must all work together, he said, and render our devotions to the 
mysterious beings who were able to control the world and guide our 
destinies, to close our ranks against any invasions from outside, and 
never to lose faith that one day " They " would come. " They " 
would not leave us to be cast away alone on the surface of this world. 

Colborne sighed. He looked across the room at Lord Ashley 
and his friends talking earnestly with Cremieux, then he looked about 
for John Roland. Colborne knew who he was by now, although he 
was not quite clear as to the tie up with Sir William. Roland came 
over at Coiborne's nod. 

" Another one for you, John," Colborne said. He pointed out 
the item in the paper. Roland read carefully. 

" It's not my pigeon; but I'll get the boys on to it. Interpol will 
b~ n'eqsed — if surprised— that we can put some work their way. Work 
of this nature, that is," he added. He went off to the phone. 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



99 



" See if you can find out where he had this ' apocalyptic stroke 
from on high,' John." 
" Wilco." 

George Friant, his wispy beard barely visible, his twitching 
fingers and thumbs doing a rhumba, put his head round the door, 
looked about him, and then crept stealthily in. He motioned to Colborne. The room seemed very quiet after the excitements, and there 
was quiet dust drifting in the sunbeams from the windows. Friant 
looked worried. 

" What's up, George, someone scratched the paint?" 

" No, thank goodness, old boy. Haven't had a lot of time with 
the engine since this fuss started." 

" Didn't know you were involved; How come?" 

Friant's restless fingers rubbed with a dry, rasping sound. One 
day someone was going to lean over and clap a rat-trap around his 
hands out of sheer self-defence. 

" Member of the Ancient Railways," Friant said. " We're all 
persona very much grata around here these days." 

" You surprise me." 

" Yes. And, of course, I was interested, too, and wanted to get 
into the act." Friant smiled disarmingly. He wasn't too bad a guy, 
Colborne had to admit; and he had his uses where the coachwork was 
concerned. Friant went on : " Thing now is that there's a character 
downstairs wants to see the senior military officer. I've been handed 
the job of liaison by Jeffers, and so I'm liaising " 

" Lazing, you mean," Colborne said unkindly. 

" says he's Brigadier Thomas Graham and the looey below 

wants to know if he should send him up." 

Colborne recalled the name. He wondered if the pukka sahib 
would bow to the inevitable and admit that there had been an explosion in the firebox — although, come to think of it, the soldier's 
main argument had been that the explosive agent had not been a 
grenade. And he'd been right. Then the implications struck Colborne. 

" Sure," he said. " Send him up right away. I'll inform Jeffers 
and get Colonel Starkie." 

" Wilco," said Friant, vanishing. 

By the time the erratic painter reappeared with the Brigadier in 
tow, Lord Ashley's conference had broken up and they and Colonel 
Starkie, with Sir William, made an imposing little reception committee around the table. 



100 



NEBULA 



The preliminaries took no time at all. Graham had been on the 
train; most of them knew that; but had had to leave on business immediately afterwards. Coming back to his lodgings in Nether Ambleton, where he and his wife were spending a quiet holiday, he had been 
met by the barriers. His rank and demeanour had brought him 
through to Friant's lieutenant, and thus to the Operations Room. He 
smiled in a manner Colborne could only think of as frostily, as he 
said : " Apparently there was something to this young man's story of 
an explosion. I have heard some details; but I'd like to know what 
is going on." He ceased smiling, and added : " My wife is worried." 

Colonel Starkie explained. The Brigadier took it quietly. At 
last, in a pause in the conversation, Lord Ashley said cautiously: 
" As you were on the train, Graham, you very probably have some of 
this information buried in that head of yours. You know what happened to three people with pieces of this learned shrapnel in their 
brains. The trigger words haven't yet been spoken. When they are, 
you will become aware of the knowledge you possess. That knowledge might very well drive you insane, or kill you, or turn you 
into a homicidal maniac, or have no effect whatsoever. We " 

" I'm a soldier," Graham interrupted. " Colonel Starkie here 
probably knows my record " 

" Indeed, yes. Very distinguished." 

" and I'm quite used to taking calculated risks in my profession." His face sagged a moment, then tightened. " That is, in 
my late profession." Colborne remembered the way the Brigadier 
had said : " Retired." Graham went on : " It seems to me, from 
this violet beam weapon, and other things, and the way in which 
civilians chose to be made aware of what lay in their minds, that if 
you intend to ask me if I want to go ahead — well, you needn't. I've 
already made up my mind." 

Just like the man, Colborne reflected wryly. Straight in and 
damn the jumps. Very probably he'd had quite a success that way. 
But what good would that do if a crawling tendril of alien information sucked the sanity from his mind? All kinds of information had 
been in the encyclopaedia. Anything — literally anything — could now 
be lodged in a human being's brain. He stared at Graham as Lord 
Ashley hesitated. Sir William, so alike and yet unlike the peer, took 
the initiative. Sir William spoke clearly. " I feel that your attitude 
is the only correct one for a servant of the Crown. Even though 
you may be retired, your duty is quite plain. But we like to know 
where we stand. Have you, Brigadier Graham, ever heard of the 
Galactic Intelligencer?" 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 



101 



There were the usual fear symptoms. The cramps, the sweats, 
the flushes, the stifled cry of amazement. They were familiar 
symptoms in cases where information quite out of the ordinary was 
present. In mild cases, the information could be acknowledged without a watcher being aware. This time, it seemed, they'd struck pay 
dirt. Although, what it might be, no-one, not even Beagle, would 
care to hazard a guess. 

"Good God!" the Brigadier said. He found a chair and sat 
down, heavily. His eyes were staringly focussed on nothing, and he 
sat bolt upright, one hand twisted behind him on the rail of the 
chair. His face registered much what it would have done had he 
seen the Coldstream Guards doing a battalion rhumba during a 
Trooping of the Colour. 

Then, without warning, he threw back his head and burst into 
laughter. 

The others sat, petrified and waiting. 

Graham, spluttering and gasping, wiping the tears from his 
eyes, sobered up and said, between racking bouts of semi-insane 
laughter: "What did the ten-legged Pruill from Antares IV say to 
the Sirian water-eating plant? No, wait, it'll kill you." He suffocated in his own chortles, and then, braying it out : " No dice today." 
Saying it out loud nearly ruptured him. He rolled about in the 
chair, gasping and choking, red faced, the tears streaming down his 
cheeks. 

Gradually, the ring of frosty faces was borne in on him. He 
looked around, gurgling weakly, saw the expressionless faces. " Don't 
you see? Ten-legged — that's the ' d ' in front of ice ... Ice . . . 
Water-eater ... How else could you eat water . . . Funniest thing 
I've heard in parsecs . . . And here's another one " 

" Just a moment, Brigadier," Lord Ashley said gently. 

" Yes? What is it? I've another one here, even better — . — " 

" Not just now, thank you. If you don't mind. You see, this 
humour, well, it's " 

" But surely you must see how funny it is?" 

Colborne had had great difficulty preventing himself from bursting into delighted laughter. Not from the alien pun-type joke; but 
from the very ludicrousness of the situation. Here they had been, 
sitting tensely awaiting some dread revelation — perhaps the antidote 
to the violet beam weapon — and all they'd got was the comic section 
of the encyclopajdia. 

Really — it was beyond a joke! 



102 



N £ B U L A 



•* My wife was terribly upset about my headache, and when I 

fainted " he spread his hands. " Weil, she was frantic. But 

when I tell her all these wonderful jokes she'll know it was worth it. 
My land, yes!" 

" Nothing else?" asked Lord Ashley. 

" Eh? Oh, some equations. I can see 'em flaming away in my 
mind every time I dodge around the jokes, if you follow me." 

" Yes. We know how the information appears." 

Graham tensed, sitting up. "Hold it. Now — wait a minute. 
Good God! The beginning of the equations — I can't pretend to 
understand them — indicate that this is some sort of weapon. Yes. 
A weapon that makes cobalt bombs look like Christmas crackers. 
The power — all from — yes— here " 

He seized a pencil and, with the eager help of Beagle and 
Winthrop, began to scribble rapidly, turning out a flowing four pages 
of complex equations that looked to Colborne like the aftermath of an 
ink-drunk spider. "That's all there is — at least, all I have. But 
there is more of it. That I know. Someone else has the rest." 

Colborne, staring at those spidery tracks, struggled to keep his 
face impassive. He knew what had hit those others, now. He was 
now experiencing all the horror of feeling your mind a receptacle for 
thoughts you had not put there of your own free will. But on top of 
that, over-riding any feelings of personal discomfort, came the dread 
knowledge that this super-weapon, the ghastly object that could 
destroy a planet's life, the murderous instrument that could be built 
from the complete set of equations, could only be built if he chose 
to give up what festered in his own brain. A sheet of figures rose 
ki his mind, figures of fire, beginning where those scribbled by the 
Brigadier left off. 

As though drowning he fought to keep his head above the tide 
of emotion choking him. He stared round the table, lips firmed 
down, eyes open, teeth jammed down hard on his tongue. Lord 
Ashley was staring at him. Staring, staring, staring. So was Beagle. 
And Winthrop. Looking at him. Studying him as though he were 
a bug under a microscope. Not saying anything. Just sitting and 
staring. Staring . . . 

At last, Lord Ashley said in his gentle voice : " Walter, it's no 
good, you know. You had an electro-encephalograph test at the 
hospital. Cremieux. brought your charts back. We've been studying your encephalic rhythms." 

" Is that important?" Colborne didn't realise he had spoken. 



WISDOM OF THE GODS 103 

" Oh, yes. You see, Walter, your encephalic rhythms show all 
the normal pulses — plus a completely alien pulse no-one has seen 
before — except where knowledge of the G.I. is possessed." Lord 
Ashley's face was sad and grave and compassionate. " I'm afraid we 
know you know." 

KENNETH BULMER 

(To be continued) 



A SOCIETY FOR YOU. 



Says Peter Hamilton : " The Fan World has long needed an organization to interest outsiders in becoming fans, as without this ScienceFiction Fandom would soon die an introverted and unlamented 
death." 

THE BRITISH SCIENCE FICTION ASSOCIATION has recently 
been formed to forestall this prophecy, and to cater to the needs and 
pleasures of Science-Fiction Fans. 

JOIN NOW! Send YOUR subscription (Members £i per annum; 

Associates — under 18 — 10/-; Overseas membership 
10/- or equivalent in local currency) to The Treasurer 
B.S.F.A., A. H. Mercer, 43/4 Newark Rd., North 
Hykeham, Lincoln. 

Enquiries to Sec. B.S.F.A., E. Bentcliffe, 47, Alldis 
St., Gt. Moor, Stockport, Cheshire. 



S-F LENDING LIBRARY — QUARTERLY JOURNAL INFORMATION BUREAU. 



DONALD MALCOLM 



Who Rules In Space 



In this interesting and up-to-the-minute article, a well-known 
contributor to our pages discusses some controversial points in 
International Law regarding space travel and the colonisation of 

other planets. 



In a recent exchange of notes between Marshal Bulganin and 
President Eisenhower, the Russian Premier, as he then was, stated 
that the U.S.S.R. was willing to discuss a ban on the use of " cosmic 
space " as a theatre of military operations. 

The implications behind such a ban raise important questions 
in international law. Do the Russian and American satellites violate 
the sovereignty of every nation they pass over? A country's air 
space extends up to — where? Could a spaceship captain, merely by 
landing on the Moon and planting the flag of his State, lay claim to 
our whole satellite as one of his State's possessions? Fortunately, 
international lawyers are alive to the need to solve these problems, 
only a few raised by the progress of men into space. 

Some Latin American countries recently suggested tentatively 
that the present 3-mile limit of territorial waters should be extended to 
200 miles. You can well imagine the farcical situations, as well as the 
more serious aspects, that would accrue from the adoption of this 
limit. 

By international agreement, all nations with a seaboard have 
jurisdiction within the 3-mile limit. Also, each country " owns " the 
air space above the country. Air space extends up to the " top of 
the atmosphere ". Fine — if we knew exactly where the atmosphere 
ends and space begins. Planes have been forced down by States 
who considered their passage a violation of their air space. Before 
space flight becomes practical, the questions posed at the beginning 
of : this article must be answered. 

The International Air Transport Association's legal adviser John 

104 



WHO RULES IN SPACE 



105 



C. Cooper, reminds countries that the Chicago Convention, 1944, 
binds national signatories to recognise that every State has complete 
and exclusive sovereignty over the air space above its territory. He 
considers that the " territory of each State should extend upwards into 
space as far as the scientific progress of any State permits such State 
to control space above". It is doubtful, however, if this ruling 
would be popular or even practical for reasons that are obvious. 

Here we may consider briefly the question of artificial satellites. 
All the nations participating in I.G.Y. have tacitly agreed to the 
passage of satellites over dieir territory, so that the first poser seems 
to have more or less solved itself. In this, we can see a glimmering 
of hope for agreement over the other problems. 

Ideally, the " air spaces " agreement should be extended to 
include interplanetary space. But, unfortunately, any examination 
reveals this solution to be untenable. 

A ship, either leaving or returning to Earth, would inevitably 
cross a section of space belonging to some nation or other. To complicate matters, who decides where a State's jurisdiction in space 
ends? The problem of control of even a small volume of space 
would provide many headaches. And that volume would increase 
with height away from the planetary surface. 

The law applying to the high seas might fill the bill. The seas 
are free to all and no country may claim to any part, nor police any 
part, of them. Outer space should have similar laws applied to it 
and space stations and space ships must have the same laws applied 
to them as govern vessels on the high seas. 

The " territorial waters " of space could be defined as that 
part of Earth's atmosphere above a nation's territory and ending, perhaps, at a 550-mile level. Although it is not known exactly where 
the atmosphere tapers oif into the void, air of any appreciable density 
is virtually non-existent at this altitude. As no artificial object can 
last in the atmosphere, manned space stations would orbit above 
550 miles, thus safeguarding them from continually infringing anyone's " territorial waters ". 

In interpreting the law as applied to space vehicles, an American 
ship, for instance, would carry the Stars and Stripes so that the 
normal jurisdiction of the United States could be exercised on 
board as is done on sea-going craft. 

What of the law as applied to the Moon and the planets? Can 
they be considered as res rullius, free for occupation, so that one 
State could conceivably claim the Moon? 

On Earth, if a country wishes to have her claim to a certain 



106 



N E ft If L A 



piece of land recognised, she must prove that she controls and 
administers the territory. Planting the flag is meaningless, here, or 
on the Moon. Even assuming that a nation has a fleet of ships and 
established bases, she would have a hard time convincing all other 
countries that her claim to the Moon, with all its natural and mineral 
wealth, was absolute. As other States acquired space fleets, the 
claim would become increasingly hard to maintain. 

International control of new worlds — providing, of course, that 
there are no tenants already there! — -seems to be the solution. A 
body analogous to the International Trusteeship Council of U.N.O. 
could govern the newly opened-up planets and regulate communications and travel between them. Should disputes arise, they could 
be referred to a specially selected panel of space lawyers attached 
to the International Court of Justice at the Hague. 

C. E. S. Horsford, writing in the Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, said, "The political consequences of any substantial conquest of space are so far-reaching that an international 
body would seem to be essential. So great would be the need that 
it should certainly not be impossible to create agreement through 
international co-operation." 

For thousands of years, men have looked longingly through the 
window of the atmosphere at the majesty of the Universe. Now 
they stand at the door, ready to be initiated into the mysteries 
awaiting them. 

Will the door open? Yes, if they can frame a code of space 
law, agreed upon and adhered to by the nations of the Earth, the 
problem will be solved and the human race will claim its heritage. 



DONALD MALCOLM 



NEW BOOKS 

on rocket technology, 
astronomy and spaceflight 

ALSO TELESCOPES AND 
CELESTIAL GLOBES 



Write today for our list. We 
are special'nts and will be glad 
to provide advice, help or 
guidance. 

Please write to 



INTERPLANETARY PUBLISHING CO. 
12 BESSBOROUGH GARDENS, LONDON, S.W.I 



New Hard-Cover Science Fiction Reviewed by 



KENNETH F. SLATER 



From Faber & Faber comes 
BEST SF THREE, which I 
think can be fairly called a very 
good book in a welcome series. 
Edited and with an introduction 
by Edmund Crispin, the 224 
pages of this work contain eleven 
stories. One of these show that 
Mr. Crispin is extending the field 
of his selection — he has timejumped back to October, 1942, 
and picked Murray Leinster's 
THE WABBLER from Astounding Science Fiction (American 
edition). This story, only nine 
pages long, is a gem, cut and 
polished by a master-craftsman. 
Written without any human or 
even humanoid characters, it is 
the example of the possibilities 
and scope of science fiction writing. It is also a timeless story — 
I'd never realised that until now; 
when I originally read it, in a battered copy of the magazine which 
had finally caught up with me 
down on Salisbury Plain after it 
had taken a detour round the 
Shetland Isles and sundry other 
places, I instinctively made the 
" hero " of British design and the 
scene of action Germany — or 
German coastal waters, rather. 
But Leinster avoided such dating 
references and a modern reader 



might well fit entirely different 
people and places to the story. 
Good work, Mr. Crispin — I trust 
your exploration of the past of 
science fiction will uncover some 
equally timeless tales. 

All of the other stories are 
worthwhile and, for fifteen shillings, this book is a very necessary addition to the " must 
keep " shelf, and of course an 
essential item for you to read, 
even if you only borrow a copy. 
Incidentally, I understand that a 
soft-cover edition of BEST SF 
(one) will be available shortly, at 
around six shillings. Watch out 
for it if you missed the first of 
this series. 

Also from Faber & Faber 
(rapidly reaching the level of 
Britain's best and most persistent 
publisher of science fiction) is 
THE DOMES OF PICO by 
Hugh Walters (196 pp., 13/6), a 
sequel to BLAST OFF FROM 
WOOMERA which was published in 1957. Primarily a 
juvenile, it should not be overlooked by the adult reader. Mr. 
Walters has had much to contend 
with in writing a sequel to a story 
which was scened in the not-sodistant future, and which concerned Britain's first man-carry
107 



N EB U LA 



ing rocket to go above the atmosphere. A string of assorted satellites and sputniki which didn't 
exist when he wrote the first 
book, for instance. Usually, 
efforts to write sequels to stories 
which history has by-passed are 
not too effective, but this time I 
think the author has managed extremely well, and the rather 
frantic and hectic re-writes which 
I am sure must have occurred are 
not obvious. 

But despite that, some parts of 
the story I just can't swallow. In 
the first book, photos taken of 
the moon from above the atmosphere (Earth's) revealed the presence of some domes, almosr 
certainly artificial. Now to these 
domes has been added a cone, and 
from this collection of constructions a neutron stream is emitted. 
A neutron stream of such intensity that all the atomic piles on 
earth run wild, apparently irrespective of location. The governments of the world decide that 
something must be done to put 
the domes out of action, and the 
British, American and Russian 
governments take the lead. The 
Woomera range is decided upon 
as the most suitable for the blastoff, while American rockets with 
Russian warheads are to be used 
to home on a pilot beacon which 
will have to be dropped on the 
site by a human-guided rocket. 
Chris Godfrey, a young hero of 
the first British rocket, is talked 
into the job of piloting the 
rocket. Unknown to him, and 
kept secret from the majority of 
the people of the world — including those working on the project 
— is the fact that not only is his 
survival unlikely — it is impossible ! 

To keep him alive close to the 



source of the neutron bombardment long enough to drop the 
beacon into position, the cabin of 
the rocket must be so heavily 
shielded with lead that insufficient 
fuel for return can be carried. 

As others on the project are 
told of these facts, or as they become aware of them, the position 
becomes tense. Sir Leo Frayling, 
in command, the man who has 
always known that it will be 
necessary to sacrifice Chris, 
ploughs down all opposition, and 
carries the project through. And, 
in the end, by using the duplicate 
but unshielded rocket, manages to 
save Chris, although at great personal risk. 

Having sunk my differences 
with Mr. Walters, I quite enjoyed 
the yarn. If those differences — 
or at least a couple of major ones 
— are not apparent to you from 
my comments above, you should 
enjoy it equally. If they are 
apparent, you can make your 
own mind up. A couple of things 
come to mind, here. Why is it 
that, in " close to here and now " 
stories even smallish stretches of 
the unlikely can spoil a yarn, but 
in " far from . . ." tales the 
imaginative acceptance of lessthan-plausible distortion of the 
future is so much more elastic? 
And in view of the (at the 
time of writing) heralded imminent American rocket-to-themoon, how Mr. Walters will manage to fit in the sequel to this 
book? For sequel there must be, 
the reason for the domes and 
cones of Pico has yet to be given 
us. Mr. Walters must either beat 
the rocket with his book, or else 
have another difficult revision session — I believe him capable of 
either, but I'll be waiting with 
most pleasure for the latter!. 



NEBULA No. 33— 



saiiw 




News and Advance Film Reviews Direct from Hollywood's 



FORREST J. ACKERMAN 



" The more preposterous a 
horror film is, the more the audience seems to enjoy laughing at it. 
Those who seek such pleasures 
should have plenty of fun at 
FIEND WITHOUT A FACE, a 
wildly gory fantasy," is the 
opinion of one fellow reviewer. 
Another agrees, " Easily one of 
the goriest horror pictures in the 
current cycle, it oozes and 
gurgles with Grand Guignol 
blood and crunching bones. 
Story, direction and acting are 
primitive, but the macabre effects 
will satisfy even the most jaded 
of the bloodthirsty." 

FIEND WITHOUT A FACE 
had its genesis in 1930. In the 
beginning it was called The 
Thought-Monster, and it appeared in Weird Tales magazine. 
Like Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley 
110 years before her, young 
author Amelia Reynolds Long 
was also a teenager when she 
wrote and sold what editor 
Farnsworth Wright described as 
" A goose-flesh story of the sudden and frightful deaths caused 
by a strange creature in a panicstricken village." 

In the original story the scien


tist recorded in his notes : " I 
shall create a mental being by 
the concentrated power of pure 
thought!" As November the 
24th happens to be my birthday, 
the experimenter's entry in his 
diary for that day amuses me: 
" The strain of my experiment is 
beginning to take my strength." 
Ofttimes nowadays I have the 
same feeling about reviewing the 
latest scientifilms : the strain of 
finding new ways to describe how 
abominable the snowmen are 
saps my waning strength, while 
it keeps me hopping to keep 
coping with the depredations of 
the flea-men from the Dog 
Star ... 

FIEND WITHOUT A FACE 
has set some sort of record for 
typographical errors. It has 
erroneously been referred to in 
print as FIELD WITHOUT A 
FACE, FRIEND WITHOUT A 
FACE and FIEND FROM 
OUTER SPACE ! 

Filmed in England (with 
special effects created in Germany), the faceless FIEND takes 
place in the vicinity of a U.S.Canadian air base and radar 
station located in the backwoods 

109 



110 



NEBULA 



ONE GUINEA PRIZE 

To the reader whose Ballot Form 
(below) is first opened at the 
NEBULA publishing office. 

All you have to do, both to win 
this attractive prize and to help 
your favourite author win the 1958 
Author's Award, is to number the 
stories in this issue in the order of 
your preference on the Ballot Form 
below, or on a postcard if preferred 
and mail it immediately to 
NEBULA, 159 Crownpoint Road, 
Glasgow, S.E. 



Talk Not At All 




Way Out 




Mute Witness 




Debt of Lassor 




Conflagration 




Wisdom of the Gods Pt. 2 





Name and Address : 



Miss J. A. Wood of Wallington, 
Surrey, wins the One Guinea Prize 
offered in Nebula No. 30. The final 
result of the poll on the stories in 
that issue was : 

1. THE WANTON JADE 

By E. C. Tubb 21-6% 

2. JOURNEY TO THE 

INTERIOR 
By Brian W. Aldiss 16-2% 

3. P.S. 

' By Eric Frank Russell 15-9% 
3. LONE VOYAGER 

By Donald Malcolm 15-9% 

5. NOTHING FOR MY 

NOON MEAL 
By Harlan Ellison 10-6% 

6. TRAINING AREA 

By E. R. James 9-9% 
6. THE COVETOUS 

By H. Philip Stratford 9-9% 
The result of the poll on the 
stories in this issue will appear in 
Nebula No. 36. 



of Canada, where the American 
"Operation Dewdrop " is attempting to improve its Arctic Circle 
warning screen by a nuclear 
step-up of power. A retired 
scientist in the area takes advantage of the governmental, stockpile of energy by siphoning off 
some to employ in his personal 
unorthodox experiments in psionics. His theory crystallizes 
dramatically and disastrously 
when his concentrated thoughts 
condense into the form of 
aerial craniums with spinal appendages that exhibit a sinister 
passion for strangling human 
beings. " A combination between 
a scorpion and a spider " is the 
description of one viewer; 
" winged hamburgers " the tasty 
word-picture of another. Complete with ketchup and relish, it 
might be added, when the thotpropelled brains are bashed by 
bullets. 

But have no fear: brawn 
triumphs over brain. Contemporary columnist Jack Moffitt 
has summed the situation up in 
a " nut " shell when he observes : 
" By the time of the picture's 
conclusion the protagonists, like 
scripter Herbert Leder, have 
been through too much to , distinguish between a brain and a 
thought." 

The Fair Warning Dent., a 
new service to NEBULA 
readers : 

Watch out for 

THE PHANTOM PEOPLE. 

THE BRAIN SNATCHERS. 

WILD WOMEN OF 
WONGO. 

THE ASTONISHING 12INCH PEOPLE. 

And THE HIDEOUS ROCK 
U>- ROLL CREATURE ! 



WALTER WILLIS writes for you— 



Many of you, I know, are in 
the habit of going to see a 
science fiction film every time 
you're down in the dumps (convenient, because that's where 
they're usually playing these 
days) and you may have noticed 
that often there are other films 
in the programme. These are 
sneaked on by the management 
in a feeble attempt to discourage 
you from waiting for the sf film 
to come up for the third time, 
and the result of this unethical 
practice is that acknowledged 
masterpieces of the cinematographic art like I WAS A TEENAGE THING and THE EARWIGS FROM OUTER SPACE 
are flanked by fillers with queer 
names like SHANE and HIGH 
NOON. As a result of a lifetime's 
study of the cinema as an art 
form (my mother used a lot of 
jam) I am in a position to explain 
some of the oddities of these 
supporting films to you fellow 
science fiction fans, so that you 
may be able to gain some slight 
interest from them as you sit 
there patiently munching your 
potato crisps and waiting for the 
real programme to start. (A 
member of the younger generation reading over my shoulder 
queries that reference to getting 
into cinemas for jamjars. Appar


ently nowadays they have to surrender other articles — razors, 
bicycle chains . . . .) 

In the first place perhaps I had 
better warn you that these 
" westerns ", as they are called, 
are pretty fantastic. Far-fetched, 
I would call them, and you'll 
have to exercise your credulity 
pretty hard. Unlike science 
fiction, which takes place in the 
infinitude of the future where 
everything is possible — even 
likely — they are set in an era of 
the past which is not only imaginary but frankly impossible. 
However, many of the plots are 
obvious adaptations of the plots 
of some of our lesser science 
fiction writers and with a little 
imagination you should be able 
to visualise them as a sort of 
half-baked science fiction. It 
helps that the scenery is vaguely 
reminiscent of that of Mars or 
the Moon. The local inhabitants 
are made up of two races living 
in a symbiotic relationship, one 
biDed and humanoid, the other 
quadruped. It is obvious that the 
quadrupeds are the ruling race 
because none of them is ever hurt 
in the frequent ray-gun battles in 
which the humanoids fall like 
flies. Obviously they are protected by force-fields. They transport the humanoids about in 

III 



112 



N EBU LA 



cages called "wagons", obviously much against their will 
because they're always trying 
from inside to turn the wheels 
backwards and go in the opposite direction. 

The humanoids are of two 
kinds, the normal ones and the 
evil mutants. The latter are unable to face solar radiation and 
spend their time in banks and 
offices further protected by black 
clothes and moustaches. The 
normal humanoids are protected 
from them by an ability to move 
their own guns and deflect the 
bullets of their enemies by telekinesis. Further evidence of this 
telekinetic ability is shown by the 
recurring episode of the small 
town newspaper. This scene has 
always been a favourite of mine 
as an amateur publisher and 1 
have studied the details very 
carefully. Briefly, what happens 
is that the villain holds up the 
newspaper editor at i ay-gun 
point and forces him to run off, 
there and then, a special edition 
containing false news. I have 
studied this newspaper office 
very carefully and the only equipment seems to be a flat-bed 
proofing press and an old man 
with a rusty composing stick. It 
would, I calculate, take him 



approximately three days to set 
up one page of the newspaper, 
letter by letter, and another half 
day to run it off on that old press, 
by which time the old man would 
have collapsed from exhaustion 
and the Mon-Tues-Wed audience 
would have gone home and left 
the Thurs-Fri-Sat audience wondering what it was all about. 
Obviously what happens is that 
the stress of the situation awakes, 
the old man's supernormal faculties. This is just one of the unsuspected facets of westerns 
which can be appreciated by the 
science fiction fan. 

Being held up at gun point 
isn't a thing that happens to 
science fiction magazine editors 
much these days, presumably because most of our villains live on 
Mars or even further afield, but 
the stress of the job must be 
pretty tough all the same. Just 
think, for example, the time it 
must take my boss Peter 
Hamilton to re-arrange the words 
of all the stories so that all the 
lines end neatly together! I hear 
the turnover in some magazines 
has been so rapid the publishers 
were thinking of asking De 
Gaulle to take over. One of the 
most interesting new appointments has been that of Damon 
Knight as the new editor of the 
American magazine, IF. Knight, 
an old time science fiction fan, 
an efficient critic and one of the 
best writers in the field, had a 
previous brief spell as a professional editor of a magazine called 
WORLDS BEYOND. Unfortunately the magazine was sunk in 
the backwash from the collapse 
of the last boom in science 
fiction, but its three issues are 
still remembered with keen nostalgia. 



Telephone DENTON 2940 

EDNA HANSON 

Social Service and Marriage Bureau 

LONELINESS — Pen & Personal Friendships. 
Marriage Partners. All disiricts and aj:3. 
Write tor Brochure with actual photos. 

ALWAYS AT YOUR SERVICE 

591 Manchester Road, Denton 
Nr. MANCHESTER 



CINDERELLA OF THE SKIES — continued from inside front cover 

approach to Earth is some 26,000,000 miles, over 100 times as far. For this 
reason the Moon is the best known of our nearer neighbours in space but 
nowadays is largely neglected, especially in the present century, by the 
professional astronomers. 

During the 17th and 18th centuries, the Moon was the celestial body 
most closely studied and by 1813 various lunar maps had been drawn of the 
surface the Moon constantly turns towards us, also of the one-tenth " round 
the edges " part sometimes shown during the librations. By the 1850's 
the picture drawn of our satellite was of an airless, waterless, bleak, lifeless 
world, alternately scorched by the burning rays of the Sun and exposed to the 
cold of space. The surface was covered by jagged peaks, mountain chains, 
craters, seas of pumice dust and lava, and great ravines. As telescopes became 
larger and photography and the spectroscope confirmed this picture, astronomers' attentions were drawn elsewhere, leaving the Moon chiefly to the 
amateurs. 

Certainly, since then, the picture science has drawn has not changed 
radically, but interest in the Moon is not dead and the old statement that 
nothing ever happens on the Moon should perhaps be changed to " nothing 
much ever happens on the Moon." 

The first indication that changes take place came in 1866 when the 
director of Athens Observatory announced the disappearance of the crater 
Linne. From an easily-seen crater of seven miles diameter, Linne changed 
to an insignificant crater-cone, difficult to see even in large telescopes. 

Other lunar changes have been reported since then by observers, notably 
Dr. H. P. Wilkins, P. A. Moore and K. W. Abineri. 

Although any lunar atmosphere that exists cannot be more than 1/10,000 
as dense as ours, mists have been seen on many occasions obscuring wellknown surface features. On August 2nd, 1939, Moore saw a white mist 
covering completely the boundary and floor of the great walled plain Schick ard, while the interiors of Plato and Conon have been seen mist-filled. 
Possibly these mists are the last traces of volcanic activity. 

Since 1895, a number of observers have studied certain systems of streaks 
or radial bands on some of the inner slopes of many crater walls and on some 
of the crater floors. In the system in Aristarchus, dusky streaks radiate from 
the brilliant central mountain over the floor and up the sides. Various 
astronomers state that these bands become larger and broader as the lunar 
day passes, reaching their peak about lunar noon, and then fading away. 
Moore and Wilkins hold the theory that they may be due to some low 
form of life, probably akin to lichens or fungus. 

A long-standing argument among astronomers is the origin of the most 
prominent surface features of the Moon, the craters. Ranging in size from 
Bailly, 170 miles in diameter, to thousands of smaller craterlets a few yards 
across, they are scattered over the surface of our satellite, often arranged in 
chains as if along fault-lines. Large craters often have smaller ones superimposed on them, with still smaller craters destroying parts of the walls of 
the latter. This effect is well-shown by the upper of the two photographs, 
taken by the 100-inch reflector at Mt. Wilson. The other photograph, of the 
region about the crater Copernicus, is by the 200-inch Hale telescope. 

The parts of the lunar surface free from craters are likely to be formed 
from solidified lava under a few millimetres of pumice dust. One theory 
seeks to explain the craters as products of volcanic action, while the other 
main theory holds that the impact of giant meteors — debris left over when 
the Solar System was formed 4,000,000,000 years ago — would cause craters 
of the form and range in sizes seen on our satellite. Recent support has been 
given to the meteoric hypothesis by the noted British astronomer Gold. In 
fact both processes probably played their own part in carving the majestic 
features of the Moon. 

Perhaps we shall know the answer to all these problems by the end 
of the century when the first Moonbase is established. 



