SCIENCE FICTION 



The Dark Backward edmond Hamilton 6 

Science: The Big Bang isaac asimov 19 

Cosmic Casanova Arthur c ci.arke 23 

Ground Leave Incident (short novelet) hog Phillips 30 

Books: On Hand . . .Offhand theodore sturgeon 57 

Flecgl of Fleegl cordon r. dickson 60 

A World Named Miry Robert marker 77 

Buy Jupiter! isaac aslmov 84 

The Comedian's Children (novelet) theodore sturgeon 88 

Venturlngs the editor and judith merril 5-129 

Cover by M. S. DoUens ("Niglit on Titan ") 
from "The Comedian's Children" 

Interior illustrations by Gtunta and Schoenhcrr 

Joseph W. Ferman, purlisher Robert P. Mills, editor 

Venture Science fiction Moaoiine, Vol 2, No. 3, Whole No. 9, May, 1«8. Published 
bi-monthly by Mercury Press, inc., al 3SC a copy. 12-issue subicripl'ons $4.00 in U.S.A. and 
. ii,'-,- s Conado end the Pan American Union; $5.00 In all othsr countries Publication 
office-. CorKO'd. N H. Editorial and General offices. 577 Madison Ave New York 22. N. t. 

Entered at v J doss matter at the Post Office at Concord, NH. under the act of March J, 

1879. © 1°SS, by Mercury Press, Int.. All righlt reserved. Protection jecured under fhe 
International Copyright Convention and the Pan American Convention. Printed in U.S.A. 
Ail submission! mast be accompanied by stomped, self addressed envelopes. The publisher 
oiiumei no responsibility (or return of unsolicited manuscripts. 

Iiooe Astrriov, Contributing Science Editor Theodore Sturgeon, took Editor 

Anthony Boucher, Advisory Editor Norma Levin*, id/tonal Assistant 

Gcorye Softer, eirt Oirec'o' 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



Secrets 
entrusted 
to a 
few 




THERE are some things that cannot 
Se generally told— things you ought to 
knew. Great truihi are dangerous to 
some— but factors for personal power 
and accomplishment in the hands of 
those who understand them. Behind 
the tales of (be miracles and mysteries 
of the ancients, lie centuries of their 
secret probing into nature's laws— 
their amazing discoveries of the hidtfen processes of man's mind, and the 
mastery of life's problems. Once shroud* 
ed in mystery to avoid their destruction by mass fear and ignorance, these 
facts remain a useful heritage for the 
thousands of men and women who privately use them in their homes today. 
THIS FREE BOOK 
The Rosicrucians (not a religious 



organization) an age-old hrotherhood 
of learning, have preserved this secret 
wisdom in their archives for centuries. They note invite you to share the 
practical helpfulness of their teachings. 
Write today for a free copy of the 
book, "The Mastery of Life." Within 
its pages may lie a new life of opportunity for you. Address: Scribe S.X.E. 

i -SEND THIS COUPON
■ Scribe S.X.E. 
i The ROSICRUCIANS (AMORQ 
l Sin Jose, California 

i Please -end me ihtf/t* book, Tbt Mastery 
i 0/ Lift, which ex plains how I miy learn to 
1 use my faculdea aid powcri of mind. 

I Name 

, Address 

■ Ciiy 



SBe Rosicrucians (AMORQ SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA. U. S. A. 



~]/en1u rings 



• This issue contains, among other rare items, four contributions from 
two writers; a science column and a short-short from Isaac Asimov, and 
a book column and a novelet from Theodore Sturgeon. Such localized 
prolixity might give the impression that Venture is absorbing the total 
output of the two distinguished gentlemen (the distinguishing beard of 
the one is very nearly equalled by the doctorate of the other); and we 
feel we should disabuse you of such an Idea. We must admit, grudgingly, that we can't actually use all of the results of their seemingly 
limitless talents, and that you can find their science fiction elsewhere. 

• Pom. Anderson's 'The Game of Glory," in our last issue, has brought 
numerous enthusiastic letters, and we've asked Mr. Anderson for another 
Captain Flandry novelet. In this connection, Mr. Anderson's special 
talent for the high-quality adventure story will shortly be on display in 
another field— look for his story "The Trader and the Vikings" in the first 
issue of Jack London's Adventure Magazine, on sale soon. Among other 
authors in the issue will be Ernest Hemingway, James M. Cain, and 
C. S. Foresteh. Don't miss it! (Advt.) 

• In last issue's "Venturings," we carried a few paragraphs by Alfred 
Bester which began, "Science fiction is aging rapidly." Reaction has been 
varied, comments ranging from "shrewd and illuminating" to "what's he 
talking about?", and including the following communication from Judith 
Mcnil, prolific anthologist and able writer: 

• Science fiction, according to Alfred Bester, is "aging rapidly." "If 
we're going to speculate about the future," he says, "let it be in terms of 
the future ... an unfamiliar future. Isn't it time," he asks, "for a new, 
youthful science-fiction to abandon the old stamping grounds and venture 
into unknown lands of its own making?" 

Science fiction, sez I, is maturing . . . slowly. Over the past fifteen 
years, it has gradually developed from "scientifiction," that cubbyhole of 
the dramatized essay, into speculative fiction. And just because I underlined the fiction part, don't think for a minute that I'm underplaying the 
speculative. Nor do I believe that s-f writers today are underplaying it. 

What they are doing— what the good ones are doing— is learning to 
write. If in the course of learning the disciplines of the literary trade, 
the better writers are more frequently than before also disciplining their 
imaginations to some degree, I cannot honestly see it as A Bad Thing. 

In the past three years, I have probably read more published science 

(continued on p- 129) 



THE DARK BACKWARD 

by fDMOND HAMILTON 



In winter, on an island 
off the New England coast, 
you get used to wind-lashed 
surf, to hardship and struggle, 
to the cold, lonely life. 
Maybe you get so used to it 
that you don't want to hear 
when the bright future calls . . . 



IT SEEMS) TO ME THAT IN MY 

sleep a clear voice kept crying 
desperately to me, over and over. 

"Try to remember, Volt You 
must rcmemberf* 

The frantic insistence of tho 
voice bothered me. I didn't want 
to hear it . . . to remember. 

"Vat, don't forget!" 

Don't forget what? No, I 
mustn't think about that Voice, 
50 away. Go away and let me 
sleep, get the hell out of here or— 

I awoke. 

For a moment I lay still, shaken 
and unsure of myself. Then as tho 




The Dark Backward 



7 



dream and the voice faded out of 
my mind, I looked soggily around 
the familiar little bedroom. 

Clothes thrown on the floor, 
and wind-driven rain streaming 
on the panes, and a gray light 
sickly on everything. And Mary 
was gone, and what was the use 
of anything? 

The clock said I had forty minutes to get to my job at the 
island's electric generating station, I dressed, trying not to look 
at Mary's picture on the bureau, 
but that did no good. The room 
was Mary— she had put her own 
sweetness and happiness into it, 
and everywhere I looked I saw 
her, slim and blonde and smiling 
fondly at me, just as when she 
was living. 

I went to the kitchen and 
cooked scrambled eggs and 
listened to the volleys of rain and 
wind kicking up the surf down 
on the beach. No one, I thought, 
would get to the mainland today 
or maybe all week. But in winter 
time, in a New England offshore 
island town, you get used to that. 

That queer dream still bothered 
me, somehow. A fading voice 
frantically trying to make me remember something, something 
important. I thought, the hell with 
remembering. 

I turned on the radio for the 
early news, while I drank my 
coffee. The brisk voice did nothing to cheer me up. It was the 
first winter of the Korean war, 



and the bulletins only made me 
think of the war before that, of 
the stink and mud of the Italian 
campaign, of all the campaigns 
before tliat that I'd gone through. 
And when the war news was 
done, Brisk-voice went on with 
cheery items on how the hydrogen 
bomb was coming, and bloody 
riots in Europe and Africa, until 
I turned it off. 

They can always think up 
trouble for us, I thought, but they 
can't think up any answer to 
things like a sickness nobody can 
cure. Then I told myself that I 
was getting warped. Plenty of 
people were trying hard to find 
answers to things like that, and 
someday they would. But that 
wouldn't bring Mary back. . . , 

The rain hit me like small-shot 
when I locked the door antl went 
down the boardwalk. My cottage 
was one of the newest in town, 
and was out at the edge of town 
with nothing but the big sanddimes beyond it. The dunes ran 
for miles, but you couldn't see 
them with tlu's smother of rain 
coming down. I turned my back 
on them and on the house, and 
clumped along into town, 

The sea was gray and angry 
imder the heavy sky, and the 
white houses and narrow streets 
of the little town looked deserted. I met young Doc Haring 
and he looked at me through his 
rain-spotted glasses as though he 
was not happy with the weather. 



a 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



"A real southwcster, Val. Bet it 
goes on all week." 

"Let it," I said. "I'm not going 
any place," 

"Old man Bartlett is worse," 
he told me. "Got to get along." 

When I got to the little generating station that made electricity 
for Botts' Island, I found Joe 
Klimmer, the night man, dozing. 

"Worst blow so far this winter," 
he said, and yawned, and went 
home. 

I checked the gas-engine and 
the dynamo, and lighted a cigarette, and listened to the wind 
and the rain. 

"Val, don't forget!" 

I wished I could get that dream, 
that voice, out of my mind. If it 
had been Mary's voice, I could 
have understood it, but it hadn't 
bees, fler voice had been low 
and husky and sweet, and this 
voice wasn't like that at all. 

I wondered again what it was I 
mustn't forget. I had a lot of 
things I wanted to forget— the 
times I couldn't get a job, and 
the war that yanked me out of the 
job I did get, and the good 
friends I'd seen smeared by 
mortar-fire, and— 

I got up and checked everything over again, even though I 
knew it wasn't necessary. I kept 
myself busy all day, doing things 
that didn't need to be done. 

Late that afternoon it seemed 
to me that the rain might be letting up a little, and I stopped out 



of the little brick building to 
look. I was wrong, it was raining 
and blowing as hard as ever. 

That was when I saw it. 

It was just barely visible 
through the driving murk, away 
ofF in the distance over the sea. 
It looked like a silver fish, flying 
fast and low. It had no wings, 
and it was shaped like a teardrop. 

The gray smother drove down 
thicker, and it was gone. 

I stood and stared, but I didn't 
see it again. 

A plane? I knew damned well 
that that sleek shape hadn't been 
any plane ever heard of. But 
what? 

I watched and watched, hut 
saw nothing more. Then it got 
dark and Vernon, the second-trick 
man, came to relieve me. 

As I walked back through town, 
I was still wondering about what 
I'd seen. I wanted to keep thinking about it— I didn't want to go 
back to the dark, quiet cottage. 
So I went looking for [Iodic 
Wilkes, our mayor. 

He was locking up his bardware store, the wind whipping his 
topcoat up around his legs. He 
said: 

"Any trouble at the station, 
Val?" 

"No, not that," I said. "But I'm 
wondering if a plane got caught 
in the storm. I saw one— only it 
didn't look like any plane I ever 
saw before." 



The Dark Backward 



a 



He whipped around to face me. 
I'd known Bodie Wilkes all my 
life, and yet there was something 
about his big, ruddy, fleshy face 
that startled me. It was his eyes. 
All of a sudden, it seemed to me 
that they wore* as bright and big 
as moons. 

"A plane? What kind of a 
plane?" 

I told him, and he seemed to 
hang on my every word. But then 
he began shaking his head. 

"Never heard of anything like 
that, Val. Maybe some new experimental model. Which way 
was it heading?" 

"Northeast, I thought." 

Tic continued to shake his head, 
as the wind tlirew stinging rain 
into the doorway where we stood. 

"Well, if there's somebody in 
trouble out there, nothing we can 
do about it. Can't send a small 
boat out in this. But I'll call Coast 
Guard on the mainland, by the 
radio." 

He seemed to have gotten over 
his momentary start, and now was 
buttoning up his topcoat. I left 
him and went on through town. 
But when a gust of rain made me 
turn my head, I saw Bodie Wilkes 
still standing there in front of his 
store, staring after me. 

I wondered why my story had 
upset him so. And what was it 
I'd seen, anyway? That flying 
tcurdrop thing hadn't been a 
plane, experimental or otherwise. 
But what, then? I was still won


dering when I reached my house. 

This was the worst moment of 
my day, this coming home in the 
dark to a dark little house with no 

one in it. I unlocked the dour and 
went in and closed the door on ils 
spring-latch, and was reaching for 
the switch when I stopped. 

There was someone here in the 
dark. I had heard the sigh that 
spring cushions make when someone in a chair gets up. 

I snapped the light on fast. 
Then I got my second big surprise. 

There were a young man and a 
girl here in my living-room. They 
wore clothes such as I'd never 
seen before — one-piece coverall 
garments, not made of cloth but 
of some fabric that shone and 
shimmered as though it had been 
woven out of moonlight. 

The man had a wary, distrustful look on his black-browed, 
aquiline face, as he looked at me. 
I saw his hand come out of a 
pocket, holding a thing like a little 
metal prism, 

The girl said to him fast, "No, 
Jerel Put it away!" 

The man answered her, without 
taking his eyes off me. "Look at 
his face. He doesn't know us. We 
can't take chances." 

The girl stepped closer to me. 
She was not pretty as Mary had 
been, but she was dark and handsome, and her black eyes were 
brilliant with excitement and tension as she looked at me. 



10 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



She said, "Val, don't yon know 
me? I'm Laryl." 

I .stared at her and at the man 
—at their queer clothes and at 
Mir thing the manTteld in his hand. 

"I never saw you before," I said. 
Rainwater was dripping off my 
slicker and making little puddles 
around me on the living-room 
rug. I asked, "Who arc you two, 
anyway? How did you get in 
here?" 

The girl who called herself 
Laryl had a look of pain in her 
eyes now. She said, "After what 
we were to each other, you still 
forgot." 

"Listen," I said. "What is this 
you're trying to pull? I don't 
know you. And no woman was 
ever anything to me, except 
Mary." 

Her hand flashed out and slapped my face. There were furious 
tears in her eyes. "Damn your 
Maryl" she said. "You—" 

"Laryl, wait," said the man 
Jere, and caught her arm. "You 
can't tell him, not that way. I 
warned you. Be careful." 

"Tell me what?" I said. 

The whole thing was crazy. Me 
in my wet slicker standing there 
in my own house, facing these 
two who wore clothes such as I'd 
never seen before, and who were 
trying to make me believe I knew 
them. There was something 
about them so strange, so different, that suddenly I had a cold, 
scared feeling. 



"Whoever you are, get out of 
here," I said. "I don't know what 
you're up to or how yon got 
here but—" 

I was interrupted by a pounding outside my front door. A voice 
called through the door, the voice 
of Bodie Wilkes. 

"Vail Val Adams!" 

The man called Jere moved 
quickly and silently. Fie swept the 
girl to one side and pointed the 
little prism at me, and his face 
was tight and dangerous. 

"Don't unlock that door!" he 
whispered to me. "And keep your 
voice down." 

Laryl, the girl, said in a low 
voice, "It's Carvallo, out there." 

Jere nodded grimly. "I know. 
He suspects." 

"Are you two nuts?" I asked, 
and in spite of myself my voice 
rose a little. "It's Bodie Wilkes, 
our mayor. I've known him all mv 
life." 

Bodie was still pounding on 
the locked door, and shouting. 

"Who's in there with you, Val? 
I can hear you talking. You open 
up!" 

Jere looked at the girl in a 
strained, tense way, and whispered, "There's no time to do it 
the slow way, Laryl." 

She made a gesture of appeal, 
of protest. "Jere, we can't—" 

I'd had enough of them and 
their veiled talk and their incomprehensible references. Something 
about their strangeness scared me 



The Dark Backward 



11 



more and more, and of a sudden 

I remembered that alien icar-drop 
t rait I had glimpsed in the storm. 

I said, "The hell with you, I'm 
letting Bodic in," and turned toward the door. 

There was a little buzzing 
sound and something exploded 
quietly in my head. I went numb, 
and tried to turn, and started falling, and I saw Jere holding that 
prism toward me. 

1 didn't quite fall, for Laryl 
darted forward and supported 
me. And I didn't lose consciousness. It was just that my whole 
Ixxly lost feeling and I couldn't 
make my arms and legs work ami 
my head wasn't quite clear. 

Bodie Wilkes quit hammering 
on the door, and I heard his footsteps as he ran down off the little 
porch. 

The girl Laryl, with her arm 
around me, was amazingly strong. 
She looked at me, and there was 
some strong, strained emotion on 
her dark face. 

'Trust us, Val," she said. "We 
can't explain now—" 

Trust them? I thought foggily 
that that was really funny. Two 
people come out of nowhere 
dressed like no one ever dressed, 
and talk crazy talk and hit me 
with some kind of a weapon I 
never heard of before, and then 
want mc to trust them. 

Jere had sprung to die door 
and was listening. "Carvallo's 
gon*v he told the girl. "To get the 



others. This island is a trap, and 
we've got to get off it fast." 

He Cflme and put one arm 
around me, with Laryl supporting 
me from the other side. 

He said, "Out the back way. 
We'd better get to the flitter 
quickly." 

I sagged between them, feeling 
helpless and wooden and like a 
rag man stuffed with sawdust. 
Whatever that damn prism had 
done to me, the effects were lasting. 

They started walking me back 
through the house, between them. 
My heels dragged on the floor. If 
I could have fought them I would 
have, for underneath my numbness I was more scared than before. 

Botts* Island was a quiet place. 
And I'd lived here all my life, 
except for my war years. First 
with my parents, and later, after 
they died, with Mary for the year 
I'd had with her. And now, of a 
sudden, all this. 

They took me through the 
kitchen, half carrying and half 
dragging me, and out the back 
door. The wind and the rain hit 
us like a fist, and in the darkness 
I could hear the surf groaning 
along the shore. The little white 
houses along East Road, of which 
my own cottage was the last, 
showed a vague glimmer of 
lighted windows. 

Laryl whispered in my ear as 
she helped carry me along. 



12 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



"We're doing this for you, Val. 
YouH be glad later—" 

She and Jere dragged me between then) out of my buck yard, 
and headed inland. I wondered 
vaguely where they were taking 
me. There was nothing inland but 
dunes and more dunes. 

They got me up onto a little 
ridge covered with salt-grass, and 
turned around to look. They had 
to turn me around with them, so 
I saw too. 

Lights were bobbing and flashing around my little house, portable spotlights that threw long 
bright beams through the darkness and rain. There were four 
of the lights. 

Jere muttered an oath. "Carvallo didn't waste any time." 

If that was Bodie Wilkes down 
there, I couldn't understand why 
he would come with others hunting for me, just because I hadn't 
let him into the house. And why 
did they call him Carvallo? 

The four lights back there separated, stringing out in a line and 
advancing in our direction. 

Jere spoke quickly, and he and 
Laryl dropped down, carrying me 
down with them, onto the wet 
grass behind the ridge. 

I knew I had to yell. I tried to 
get the yell out, but my halfparalyzed muscles wouldn't work 
fast, and then Jere's hand closed 
firmly over my mouth. 

Laryl whispered, "They mustn't 
catch us, Val. YouH understand 



soon." And then she added, her 
lips warm against my ear, "I'll tell 
you something. It was me you 
loved, not Mary." 

The men down there were Doming fast, half-running, flashing 
their lights this way and that. The 
angling beams showed me thenwet slickers and their faces. Bodie 
Wilkes was one of them, and Doc 
Haring another, and the other 
two were Johnny Gilson, who 
ran the boat-livery in summer, 
and Joel Vare, the drugstore 
owner. 

I'd known them all since I was 
a boy. But I'd never seen their 
faces as tense and worried as they 
looked now in the brief glimpses 
I got of them as they hurried 
along. 

". . . could have landed on East 
or North Beach, or inland," Bodie 
was saying. "We'd better split 
up." 

I saw Doc Haring run back toward the road, and after a moment his car went racing back 
toward town. The other three 
kept going on diverging courses, 
and my head was pressed right 
into the wet grass as Jere and 
Laryl crouched lower behind the 
ridge. 

I began to feel just a little less 
numb, a little less foggy. But I 
still could hardly move a muscle, 
and I didn't think I could put 
up any fight yet 

After a moment I heard Jcro 
say, "We can't drag him all the 



The Dark Backward 



13 



way to the flitter, one of those 
Keepers is bound to find us before we get there. I'll bring the 
flitter here and well make a fast 
jump." 

As I slowly straightened my 
head, I saw Jere handing Laryl 
the little prism. Then he darted 
away into the gusty darkness, 
heading Into the dunes. 

Three lights were snarking 
around some distance along Shore 
Road , st ru n g on t between the 
dunes and the sea. They were receding now, but I thought a yell 
might still reach them. 

"Don't, Val," said Laryl. The 
prism glinted in her hand. "Don't 
make me do it." 

I stared at the glimmer of her 
face in the dark, and all of a sudden I thought I knew what this 
w its all about. I had cracked up. 

I'd seen it happen in the war, 
to plenty of guys. You take just 
so much and then you can't take 
any more, and you start dreaming 
up things and people that aren't 
there. 

Like everybody else, I'd had 
my troubles. The death of my 
parents in a needless auto crash, 
the long, grim war years, and 
then, after the year with Mary, 
the sickness that had killed her. 
Sure, we all have a grim time of 
it, sooner or later. Mine was 
sooner, and now I'd cracked up. 

I sat on the wet, cold grass in 
the rain and night, with a girl 
who couldn't be there holding an 



impossible weapon on me, and 
watched the lights that I imagined were carried by Bodie and 
Vare and Johnny. It was so ridiculous that I laughed, or tried to. 

"Val," said Laryl, "I know what 
you're going through, how uncanny it all must seem to you. But 
youH be all right soon." 

I managed to speak, my tongue 
thick in my mouth. "I'm all right 
now. I'm fine. Except I keep hearing and seeing you, and I know 
you don't exist." 

She answered with sudden passion, "You tlu'nk so, do you? 
You're wrong. It was your Mary 
who never existed." 

I laughed again, and it seemed 
to sting her for she came closer 
to me and said fiercely: 

"It's tniel If you'd only remember, you'd know it's true. Try to 
remember. Remember Project 
Freewill." 

Projoct Freewill. 

It didn't mean a thing to me, 
that name. It was perfectly meaningless. And yet when I heard it, 
something happened. 

It seemed, for a moment, that 
the whole world, the universe, 
was crumbling around me. It was 
as though I'd been snatched right 
out of the world and was falling 
through empty space that went 
on forever, and voices roared and 
jibbcred in my brain as I fell. I 
made a frantic effort to climb 
back to reality, to the world I 
knew . . . and I succeeded. 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



Revulsion from that unearthly 
shock made me lash out wildly, 
with feeble blows. I knocked 
Laryl away from me and saw the 
prism-thing fly out of her hand. 
Shaking from the uncanny plunge 
into unreality, I struggled to my 
feet, and swayed drunkenly, and 
yelled hoarsely into the windy 
night. 

"Bodie! Bodic Wilkes! I'm here 
—here!" 

I saw the nearest of the three 
lights swing around suddenly and 
starl back toward me. Then there 
was a whistling rush behind me, 
and I stumbled around to see a 
dark bulk Hash down out of the 
darkness. 

It hit the ground and a door in 
it opened, and there was soft light 
inside it— enough to show that 
it was the long teardrop metal 
craft I hail glimpsed over the sea 
hours before. Then against the 
lighted door T saw Jere plunging 
out toward me, his broad shoulders hunched low. 

Laryl had picked herself up 
and was shouting to Mm as she 
ran toward the place where the 
prism had dropped. I tried to 
reach it before her, but Jere came 
between us and his fist knocked 
me sprawling. 

"Laryl!" he cried, and as I tried 
to scramble up I saw Bodie 
Wilkes come up over the ridge, 
his spotlight flashing from one 
hand. And in his other hand was 
another prism. 



He held it out, pointing it at 
Jere, not at me. But there was a 
rattlesnake-buzzing close behind 
me, and Bodies slicker-clad figure sagged and collapsed. 

"You got him, Laryl— out of 
here fast!" exclaimed Jere. "The 
others are coining!" 

He jumped at me, and when 1 
flailed with my leaden arms he 
ignored them arid hit me on the 
chin. The next thing I knew he 
and Laryl were dragging me into 
the teardrop craft, and then there 
was a whistling screech and I felt 
as though I lay on the floor of 
an elevator going up fast. 

After a moment I rolled over 
and with a struggle, sat up. I was 
inside a simple metal cabin. Jere 
sat in front, holding an odd Tshaped lever in his hands, peering 
tlirough a curved, transparent 
window. Laryl was there with 
him, but was watching me and 
holding the prism ready. There 
was an aching pity in her face as 
she looked at me. 

"They'll call the mainland— but 
we may still slip by," said Jere, 
without turning his head. 

The whistling rose to a shriek. 

I looked at Laryl and I said, 
"You killed Bodie Wilkes." 

"No, Val," she said. "He's only 
stunned. And he isn't Bodie 
Wilkes, your mayor. Nothing is 
what you think it is." 

Jere said, still without turning, 
"Don't tell him, Laryl, you know 
it's dangerous." 



The Dark Backward 



L5 



"lie's going to see it in a few 
moments!" she said. "The shock 
would be worse, that way. I have 
to toll him now." 

She said to me, "Look down 
through that window, Val." 

I turned my head and looked 
down. And on the sea below I 
saw a cluster of lights. 

Wo were flying at such speed 
that I saw them for only a moment. But I glimpsed a huddle of 
great barges iloating there on the 
sea, and from them big nozzles 
stuck skyward. 

"A weather-control unit," said 
Laryl. "Anchored there, just to 
create the localized storm that 
isolated your island." 

The lights and the halfglimpsed looming nozzles flashed 
back and were gone. 

"What year do you think it is, 
Val?" she asked. 

1 .stared at her. "It's 1951." 

She shook her head and now 
her dark face and her dark eyes 
had pity in them, deeper than 
ever, and a fear. 

"It's 2188, Val. Over two hundred years from the time you 
tJiink you live in." 

It didn't make any sense to me 
at all, but again I got that unearthly feeling that things were 
crumpling around me, that the 
whole universe was just a painted 
picture that was being torn to 
shreds, and that I was falling out 
of it into an abyss. 

Laryl rushed on. "It's true, Val. 



The world you thought you lived 
in was long ago. Things have 
changed, since then. We've conquered war and nationalism. 
We've conquered the planets. The 
old parliamentary governments 
are gone and we have the interlocking Managerial Boards that 
run the world by careful plan. 
And when any intelligent person 
defies the Boards, he's not punished in the crude old ways of 
prison penalties. He's given an 
object lesson." 

I could only stare at her, and 
say stupidly, "An object lesson?" 

"Correction, they call it," said 
Laryl bitterly. "He's made to live 
for a while in the old anarchic 
20th Century— by making him 
think he lives in 1951." 

"No," I said, not believing her 
but feeling that every word she 
spoke was shattering my universe 
to smaller fragments. "Oh, nol" 

"It's true, Vail It's easy for the 
psychological science of today. 
They numb all your real mem* 
orics of your real life. Then, 
from prepared encephalography 
recordings, they feed a false set 
of memories into your brain. 
And you wake up on Correction 
Island, you and the Others undergoing correction. You have false, 
clear memories of them, and they 
have false memories of you, and 
you're isolated there by storm. 
You think you live in 1951, you 
get fake radio news and newspapers, and you have all the 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



heartaches that people had in 
those old days, all the unnecessary grief from war and sickness 
and misgovernment. The Keepers, 
like Carvallo, see that the illusion 
is kept up and you never suspect 
them because you have false 
memories of them too." 

"But," I said numbly, "beside 
Bodie Wilkes there were Doc 
Baling and Johnny Gilson and 
Joel Vare too—" 

"Carvallo's assistant Keepers," 
said Laryl. "They must have been, 
he'd never let other prisoners on 
the island learn the truth— not till 
correction is over. Then they 
give back your real memories, 
and you're cured of rebellious 
thinking by the terrible experience of 'living* in 1951." 

I whispered, "You're telling me 
that my whole life— that Mary— 
never existed. It's a lie. It's a filthy 
He." 

"Try to remember, Vail" she 
cried. "Yon were one of us— a 
group of young scientists who 
hated the way our work is arbitrarily assigned to us. You helped 
us form the secret resistance 
movement we called Project Freewill, You were the one tbey 
caught and sentenced to Correction Island." 

She added, "Before they sent 
you out, I got to you and tried to 
make you remember your real 
life— to give you a mental block to 
their process." 

And that, I thought, was where 



that voice in my dream had come 
from. 

Laryl was saying, "And when 
that failed, my brother Jcre and 
I came to get you out!" 

Jere said, in a dull, flat voice, 
"And we failed. Look out there." 

I looked out, mechanically. I 
saw four glittering tear-drop fliers 
racing along near us, closing in 
on us. 

A metallic voice spoke from a 
panel in this cabin, "Detention 
order. You will follow us in." 
Jere said heavily, "I'll follow," 
I looked ahead, for there was 
light there. And then I saw the 
mainland coast. There was no 
storm here, and I could see it 
clearly. 

And it was not the dark New 
England coast of farms and scattered towns that I had known for 
what seemed a lifetime. It w;is 
like notlu'ng I had ever seen before. 

North and south, as far as I 
could see, marched great lighted 
pylons, symmetrically arranged, 
the glittering towers of a city that 
went on forever. Over them 
flashed tear-drop flitters like ours 
and our grim escort, and their 
were lights and gliding vehicles 
in the streets. 

"It's not true," I said. "I don't 
remember this. No— I can't—" 

Falling, plunging, into unreality 
with the whole fabric of the universe ripped asunder and my 
mind screaming for something 



The Dark Backward 



17 



tangible to cling to, something 
real . . . 

Laryl, watching me with tears 
on her checks, cried, "Jere, you 
were right. He can't stand it this 
way. Forgive me, Vol—" 

The prism in her hand buzzed 
loudly and I went down into a 
peaceful darkness. 

I came out of that darkness in 
the Psycho- Mechanics laboratories, and I was my own self again. 
The skilled men there had reawakened the memories they had 
previously numbed, and I remembered my life, the real life of Val 
Adams in this year 2188. 

Childhood, boyhood, the 
schools and universities and family and friends— 1 remembered 
all And I remembered Project 
Freewill and the resentment that 
had driven us younger scientists 
into forming that small protest 
against the Boards. The false 
memories of the life of Val Adams 
of 1951-1 still had those too, but 
I knew them now for phantoms 
that had never existed. 

They took me to an office, and 
I sat across a desk from a thin, 
middle-aged and overworked 
man who represented, for my 
minor case, the majesty of the 
Boards. 

"No such premature interruption of Correction has ever happened before," he commented 
worriedly. "It makes things a little 
awkward. It's impossible psycho


logically to give you Correction 
again, or to give it to your two 
friends now that they've seen the 
island and the Keepers." 

He put down the papers he'd 
been looking over and glanced at 
me, speaking in that detached yet 
earnestly anxious way that has 
come to be the mark of a government man. 

"Has the small amount of Correction you experienced made any 
change in your ideas, Adams?" 

"In some ways," I said. "But 
not the way you mean. I still protest til© arbitrary assignment of 
scientists by the Boards. Scientific inquiry should be free." 

He shook his head. "Free is a 
fine word. An animal skulking in 
the forest is free. But we came 
out of the forests a long time ago. 
And every advance we've made 
has meant giving up a little of 
that freedom for the common 
good." 

Ho paused, then said, "You 
lived, for a little while, in the 
days two centuries ago when 
there were no Managerial Boards, 
when nations were free to smash 
each other, when scientists were 
set to making weapons instead of 
fighting the real enemies of man. 
War, sickness, stunted Uv^s*-you 
were for a time one of the people 
who lived in that kind of world, 
and you should know bettor now." 

I thought of the Val Adams 
who had never been, and all lu's 
heartaches, and I shook my head. 



18 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



1 said, "They had painful lives, 
those people, yes. Yet out of their 
pain they built our world. I keep 
wondering what we're building." 

He looked a little unhappy, and 
began neatly stacking together 
the papers he had been examining. 

"I was afraid it would be so," 
he sighed. "Your Correction was 
interrupted by your well-meaning 
friends, and it's not our fault if 
you came out of it with your 
memories and emotions muddled." 

He wrote carefully on each one 
of the three sets of papers, and 
said without looking up: 

"I am sending you three back 
to your regular type of work, but 
at Ganymede Colony this time. 
It's not a comfortable place yet, 
and we shall hope that the Jessorganized state of things there 
will more nearly suit your temperaments." 

He added, as I rose, "In the 
grim old days that you seem to 
think a little admirable, you'd 
have been sent to a prison. They 
even killed people as punishment, 
then. You might think about that." 

My little case was disposed of, 
and I went out. Laryl and her 
brother were waiting in the corridor, and I wondered how I 
could ever have forgotten them. 



"Ganymede," I said, and Jere 
nodded. 

"I know. Well, it'll be different. 
And well keep Project Freewill 
going." 

"Yes," I said. 

He went away, and Laryl came 
up to me, her eyes anxiously 
searching my face. 

"You are yourself again, Val?" 

I took her in my arms, and she 
felt right there. The old love for 
her welled up in me, and I kissed 
her long and hard. "Just the 
same," I said to her softly. "Just 
the same." 

But even as I said it, I wondered. Was I really the same? 
She was the Laryl I'd loved, dark 
and passionate and strong, and 
I remembered and loved her still. 
But now there was someone else 
in my memory, someone who had 
not been there before. A smiling 
giil with yellow hair and happy 
eyes who had never existed for 
the rest of the world, but who still 
did for me. 

I told myself that the corner 
of my mind that kept crying 
"Mary, Mary!" would not yearn 
for a phantom forever. 

But an old poet said that lie 
who lives more lives than one, 
more deaths than one must die . , . 

And I wondered. 



★ ★ ★ 



* SCIENCE * 



Neutronium, as everybody knows, is heavier 
than anything . . . and doesn't exist. 
Dr. AsimoY here gives details of what it would he— 
and what it might actually have been/ 



THE BIG BANG 

by iSAAC AS/MOV 



One of the best-loved (if now 
somewhat old-fashioned) gimmicks in science fiction has been 
that of "neutronium,'' a hypothetica] substance made up of 
neutrons sque-e-e-ezed together 
into contact Such a material 
would be so terrifically dense 
that ordinary matter would seem 
a vacuum in comparison. Globs of 
neutronium would sink (and have 
.sunk, in stories) right through the 
Earth to come to rest in its center; living beings composed of 
neutronium could walk ( and have 
Walked, in stories) through ordinary matter without concern. 

In ordinary matter, the atomic 
nuclei are actual tiny patches of 
this super-dense neutronium (albeit they are made up of protons 
as well as of neutrons.) These 



nuclei, however, are kept apart 
by comparatively voluminous 
clouds of comparatively weightless electrons. It is the nuclei plus 
the electronic froth that make up 
ordinary atoms, and the froth 
keeps ordinary matter down to 
low levels of density. In gases, in 
fact, the atoms themselves are 
separated hy stretches of nothingness, so that density is cut down 
still further and 1 cubic centimeter of air, for instance, under 
standard conditions of temperature and pressure, weighs only 
0.0012 grams. (We put this in 
shorthand by saying the density 
of air is 0.0012 gm/cm 3 . ) To carry 
matters to the extremist extreme, 
the atoms of gas in intcrgalactie 
space are so far apart that the 
density of intergaJactic gas is 0.00


10 



20 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



000000(KXX)000000000001 gm/cm 9 . 

In Liquids and solids, the atoms 
arc in contact and the density depends partly upon the mass of the 
individual atoms and partly upon 
the type of packing. (Oranges 
may be stacked in more than one 
way and some systems of stacking leave more empty space between oranges— and hence a lower 
over-all density— than other systems do. The same is true of 
atoms. ) 

Water has a density of 1 gm/ 
cm s , for instance, and iron, with 
hcovier constituent atoms, a density of 7.86 gm/em 3 . Some of the 
small residual space between ihe 
atoms can be squeezed out by 
placing substances under inordinate pressure, but so little space is 
left that not much is accomplished. For instance, the iron 
atoms at the center of the Earth 
arc squashed together by the mass 
of all the thousands of miles of 
matter pressing in upon it under 
the force of gravitation, hut the 
density of the iron there is increased to only about 12 gm/cm 3 . 

The densest matter that exists 
on Earth is the element osmium, 
which has a density of 22.48 gm/ 
cm 3 . (Its atoms are heavy but not 
the heaviest known. It is its more 
economical packing that makes it 
20 percent denser than uranium 
metal, though the uranium atoms 
are individually 25 percent 
heavier than the osmium atoms.) 

But so far all we have been con


sidering are atoms that have been 
packed closer and closer together. 
There still exist the electron 
clouds between atomic nuclei. 
Under conditions of really great 
pressures, combined with tremendously high temperatures, such as 
exist in the central regions of the 
Sun, the atoms themselves are 
broken up. The electron clouds 
arc stripped away and the bare 
nuclei may then move far closer 
together than they ever could 
anywhere on or in the Earth. 

Thus, although the Sun, as an 
overall average, has a density of 
1.5 gm/cm 3 (just about one quarter the overall density of the 
Earth) its central regions have 
an estimated density of about 
100,000 gm /cm 3 . 

There arc stars in which this 
breakdown of normal matter has 
progressed much further. The socalled "white dwarfs" combine 
the gigantic mass of a star like 
the Sun, with the comparatively 
tiny volume of a planet like the 
Earth. Such a white dwarf would 
have an overall density of about 
1,800,000 gm/cm 3 ; less than that 
at its surface, of course, and considerably more than that at its 
center. 

A white dwarf, then, might 
seem to be pretty close to the 
science fiction creation, neutronium. Actually, it is still far from it. 
Even a white dwarf, with its 
atoms so compressed, is— if you 
ignore the electron froth— some


The Big Bang 



21 



thing like 99.99999 percent empty 
space. 

The atomic nucleus, you see, 
has a density of 100,000,000,000,000 gin /cm 8 . 

If a mass the size of the Sun 
were sque-c-e-e-c-ezed all the way 
down to complete nuclear contact, the result would be a globe 
of matter 25 miles in diameter— 
with all the Sun's mass. The 
Earth, similarly treated, would 
make a globe Ji of a mile in diameter. (If put down in Manhattan, it wouldn't rise much higher 
than the Empire State Building, 
but it would still have all the mass 
of the Earth, of course.) 

To look at it another way, an 
object the size of a child's marble 
(say half an inch in diameter) 
would, if it were made of neutronium, have a mass of about a 
hundred billion tons. 

As a matter of fact, there is one 
place where neutronium leaves 
science fiction and becomes involved in legitimate scientific 
speculation. The Belgian astronomer, Abbe- Georges Lcmaitre, 
was the first to suggest that the 
Universe may have started as a 
single mass of super-dense material (i.e., what we have been 
talking about as neutronium, 
more or less ) and that the explosion of this "primeval atom" set 
in motion the train of events that 
led to the structure of the Universe as we now know it. As a 



remnant of that tremendous explosion—that biggest of all big 
bangs-the Universe, 6,000,000,000 (?) years later, is still expanding, its nebulae hastening 
away from one another. 

Ceorge Camow has taken up 
that notion and extended it. He 
suggests that the original mass of 
squashed neutrons broke up largely into protons, electrons and unimaginable quantities of radiation. 
Within thirty minutes of the big 
bang, the atoms as we know them 
today would be in existence. For 
two hundred and fifty million 
years thereafter, however, the 
density of the mass of radiation 
(radiation has mass, as Einstein 
showed) was higher than the 
density of the mass of matter. 
The intense radiation would, by 
its pressure in all directions, keep 
atoms from coming together. 
After two hundred and fifty million years, though, when the radiation had spread outward and 
thinned to the point where it was 
less dense than was matter, the 
Galaxies started to coalesce out 
of the original cloud of atoms. 

Now, then, how large do you 
suppose Abbe Lemaitre's primeval atom would have been, if it 
represented all the mass of the 
Universe in the form of neutronium? 

Assuming the mass of the Universe to be 10- 3 times that of the 
Sun (a reasonable estimate) and 
doubling that to allow for the 



22 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



possible simultaneous formation 
of an equally massive "anti-Universe" made up of anti-protons 
and positrons 1 , it turns out that 
the primeval atom would be a 
globe with a diameter of some 
1,700,000,000 miles. This is just 
about the diameter of Saturn's 
orbit, so that such a primeval 
atom, containing all the mass in 
existence would fit quite comfortably within the Solar System. 

It seems interesting to me to 
consider the Lemaitre-Gamow hypothesis in connection with Chapter 1 of Genesis, which recounts 
the Biblical creation story. 

Verse 1 reads, "In the beginning God created the heaven and 
the earth." 

If tin's is interpreted as mean


ing that He created all the matter 
and energy that now exists in the 
Universe, it could refer to the 
creation of AbbtS Lcmaitre's primeval atom. 

Having created matter and 
energy, God's first command 
(Verse 3) was, "Let there be 
ligbf. 

If we suppose, then, that at 
the word of command, the primeval atom exploded, and if we 
interpret light as meaning what 
is meant by the more general 
term "radiation"— then with what 
unbelievable eclat and glory and 
splendor that first command must 
have been fulfilled! 



1 Dr. Asimov will expand on the "antiUniverse" in the next isauc of Venture. 



WE'D LIKE TO SUGGEST . . . 

If you enjoy Venture Science Fiction, you will enjoy some of the other 
fine Mercury Publications, now on sale: 

• FANTASY AND SCIENCE FICTION-KffffWj top-flight sister 
magazine features, in its May issue, Robert Sbeckley's ' The Prize of 
Peril," blui slories by old and new favorites Avram Davidson, Gordon 
R. Dickson, Theodore R. Cogswell, many others. 

• MERCURY MYSTERY MAGAZINE-TjWdj B. Dewefs fast, 
tough, hard-hitting mystery novel, "You've Got Him Cold," is featured in MMM's ]une issue. In addition, entertaining fiction and 
non-fiction by popular authors Erie Stanley Gardner, Robert Arthur, 
and others. 

• BESTSELLER MYSTERY No. 209- "Bridge to Vengeance' (formerly titled "The Little Walls" ) by Winston Graham. " . . . a superior 
susbense item," says the N. Y. Times of this tale of a search for a 
killer that ends in danger— and romance. 



COSMIC CASANOVA 



by ARTHUR C. CLARKE 

I was two months out on a solo galaxy scouting trip, 
and I was . . . restless. And then I contacted an unknown 
planet that might be one of Earth's lost colonies. . . . 
Cou/cf be a date was closer than I had thought. 



This time I was five weeks 
out from Base Planet before 
the symptoms became acute. On 
the last trip it had taken only a 
month; I was not certain whether 
the difference was due to advancing age, or to anything the dieticians had put into my food 
capsules. Or it could merely have 
been that I was busier; the arm 
of the Galaxy I was scouting was 
heavily populated, with stars only 
a couple of light-years apart, so 
I had little time to brood over 
the girls I'd left behind me. As 
soon as one star had been classified, and the automatic search 
for planets had been completed, 
It was time to head for the next 
sun. And when, as happened in 
about one case out of ten, planets 
did turn up, I'd be furiously busy 
for several days seeing that Max, 
the ship's electronic computer, 
got all the information down on 
his tapes. 

However, I was through the 
densely packed region, and now 
© 1958 by A 



it sometimes took as much as 
three days to get from sun to 
sun. That was time enough for 
Sex to come tiptoeing aboard the 
ship, and for the memories of 
my last leave to make the months 
ahead look very empty indeed. 

Perhaps I had overdone it, back 
on Diadue V, while my ship was 
being reprovisioned and I was 
supposed to be resting between 
missions. But a Survey Scout 
spends eighty percent of his lime 
alone in space, and human nature 
being what it is, he must be expected to make up for lost time. 
I had not merely done that; I'd 
built up considerable credit for 
the future — though not, it 
seemed, enough to last me 
through this trip. 

First, I retailed wistfully, there 
had been Helene. She was blonde, 
cuddly and compliant, though 
rather unimaginative. We had a 
fine time together until her husband came back from his mission: 
he was extremely decent, but 
thur C. Clarke 
3 



24 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



pointed out, reasonably enough, 
that Helene would now have very 
little time for other engagements. 
Fortunately, I had already made 
contact with Iris, so the hiatus 
was negligible. 

Iris was really something. Even 
now, it makes me squirm to think 
of her. When that affair broke 
up — for the simple reason that 
a man has to get a little sleep 
sometime — I swore oft women for 
a whole week. Then I came 
across a touching poem by an old 
Earth writer named John Donne 
— he's worth looking up, if you 
can read Primitive English — 
which pointed out that time lost 
could never be regained. 

How true, I thought. So I put 
on my spaceman's uniform and 
wandered down to the beach of 
Diadnc V's only sea. There was 
no need to walk more than a few 
hundred metres before I'd spotted 
a dozen possibles, brushed off 
several volunteers, and signed up 
Natalie. 

That worked out pretty well 
at first, until Natalie started objecting to Ruth (or was it Kay?). 
I can't stand girls who think they 
own a man, so 1 blasted off after 
a rather difficult scene that was 
quite expensive in crockery. This 
left me at a loose end for a couple of days; then Cynthia came 
to the rescue and — but by now 
you'll have gotten the general 
idea, so I won't bore you with 
details. 



These, then, were the fond 
memories I started to work back 
through while one star dwindled 
behind me and the next flared 
up ahead. On this trip I'd deliberately left my pin-ups behind, 
having decided that they only 
made matters worst?. This was a 
mistake; being quite a good artist 
in a rather specialized way, I 
started to draw my own and it 
wasn't long before I had a collection it would be hard to match 
on any respectable planet. 

I would hate you to think that 
this preoccupation affected my 
efficiency as a unit of the Galactic Survey. It was only on the 
long, dull runs between the stars, 
when I had no-one to talk to but 
the computer, that I found my 
glands getting the better of mc. 
Max, the electronic colleague, 
was good enough company in the 
ordinary course of events, but 
there are some things that a machine can't be expected to understand. I often hurt his feelings 
when I lost my temper for no 
apparent reason. "What's the 
matter, Joe?" Max would say 
plaintively. "Surely you're not 
mad with me because I beat you 
at chess again? Remember, I 
warned you ! would/' 

"Oh, go to hell!" I'd snarl back 
— and then IVI have an anxious 
five minutes while I straightened 
things out with the disconcertingly lileral-minded Navigation 
Robot. 



Cosmic Casanova 



25 



Two months out from Base, 
with thirty suns and four solar 
systems logged, something happened that wiped all my personal 
problems from my mind. The 
long-range monitor began to 
beep; a faint signal was coming 
from somewhere in the section of 
space ahead of me. I got the most 
accurate bearing that I could; the 
transmission was unmodulated, 
very narrow-band — clearly a beacon of some kind. Yet no ship 
of ours, to the best of my knowledge, had ever entered this remote neck of the universe; 1 was 
supposed to be scouting completely unexplored territory. 

This, I told myself, is IT — my 
big moment, the pay-off for all 
the lonely years I'd spent in 
space. At some unknown distance 
ahead of me was another civilization — a race sufficiently advanced 
to possess hyper-radio. 

I knew exactly what 1 had to 
do. As soon as Max had confirmed my readings and made his 
analysis, I launched a message 
carrier back to Base. If anything 
happened to me, the Survey 
would know where and could 
guess why. It was some consolation to think that if I didn't come 
home on schedule, my friends 
would be out here in force to 
pick up the pieces. 

Soon there was no doubt where 
the signal was coming from, and 
I changed course for the small 
yellow star that was dead in line 



with the beacon. No one, I told, 
myself, could put out a wave 
running this strong unless they 
had space- travel themselves; I 
might be running into a culture 
as advanced as my own — with 
all that that implied. 

I was still a long way off when 
I started calling, not very hopefully, with my own transmitter. 
To my surprise, there was a 
prompt reaction. The continuous 
wave immediately broke up into 
a string of pulses, repeated over 
and over again. Even Max 
couldn't make anything of the 
message; it probably meant "Who 
the heck are you?", which was not 
a big enough sample for even the 
most intelligent of translating 
machines to get its teeth into. 

Hour by hour the signal grew 
in strength; just to let them know 
I was still around and was reading them loud and clear, I occasionally shot the same message 
back along the way it had come. 
And then I had my second big 
surprise. 

I had expected them — whoever 
or whatever they might be — to 
switch to speech transmission as 
soon as I was near enough for 
good reception. This was precisely what they did; what I had 
not expected was that their voices 
would be human, the language 
they spoke an unmistakable but 
to me unintelligible brand of English. I could identify about one 
word in ten; the others were 



26 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



eilher quite unknown, or else distorted so badly that I could not 
recognize them. 

W hen the first words came 
over the loudspeaker, I guessed 
the truth. This was « () alien, nonhuman race, but something almost as exciting and perhaps a 
good deal safer as fur as a solitary 
scout was concerned. I had established contact with one of the 
lost colonies of the First Empire — 
the pioneers who had set out from 
Earth in the early days of interstellar exploration , live thousand 
years ago. When the E mpir e collapsed, most of these isolated 
groups had perished or had sunk 
back to barbarism, Here, it 
seemed, was one that had survived. 

I talked back to them in the 
slowest and simplest English T 
could muster, but live thousand 
years is a long time in the life of 
any language and no real communication was possible. They 
were clearly excited at the contact — pleasurably, as far as I 
could judge. This is not always 
the case; some of the isolated 
cultures left over from the First 
I m pin- have become violently 
/enophobic and react almost with 
1 1 \ s 1 1 r i a to the knowled ge that 
they are not alone in space. 

Our attempts to communicate 
were not making much progress 
when a new factor appeared — 
one that changed my outlook 
abruptly. A woman's voice 



started to come from the speaker. 

It was the most beautiful 
voice I'd ever heard, and even 
without the lonely weeks in space 
that lay behind me I think I 
would have fallen in love with it 
at once. Very deep, yet still completely feminine, it had a warm, 
caressing quality that seemed to 
ravish all my senses. I was so 
stunned, in fact, that it was several minutes before I realized 
that 1 could understand what my 
invisible enchantress was saying. 
She was speaking English which 
was almost fifty percent comprehensible. 

It did not take me very long 
to learn that her name was Liala, 
and that she was the only philologist on her planet to specialize 
in Primitive English. As soon as 
contact had been made with my 
ship, she bad been called in to 
do the translating. Luck, it 
seemed, was very much on my 
side; the interpreter could so 
easily have been some ancient, 
white-bearded fossil. 

As the hours ticked away and 
her sun grew ever larger in the 
sky ahead of me, Liala and I 
became the best of friends, n* 1 cause time was short, I had to 
operate faster than I'd ever done 
before. The fact that no one else 
could understand exactly what we 
were saying to each other insured 
our privacy. Indeed, Liala's own 

knowledge of English was sufficiently imperfect for me to gel 



Cosmic Casanova 



27 



away with some outrageous remarks; there's no danger of going 
too far with a girl who'll give you 
the benefit of the doubt by deciding you couldn't possibly have 
meant what she thought you 
said. , . . 

Need I say that I felt very, 
very happy? It looked as if my 
official and personal interests were 
Deatly coinciding. There was, 
however, just one slight worry. So 
far, I had not seen Liala. What 
if she turned out to be absolutely 
hideous? 

My first chance of settling 
that important question came six 
hours from planet-fall. Now I was 
near enough to pick up video 
transmissions and it took Max 
only a few seconds to analyze 
the incoming signals and adjust 
the ship's receiver accordingly. 
At last I could have my first closeups of the approaching planet 
— and of Liala. 

She was almost as beautiful as 
her voice. I stared at the screen, 
unable to speak, for timeless seconds. Presently she broke the 
silence. "What's the matter?" she 
asked. "Haven't you ever seen a 
girl before?" 

I had to admit that I'd seen 
two or even three, but never one 
like her. It was a great relief to 
find that her reaction to me was 
quite favorable, so it seemed that 
nothing stood in the way of our 
future happiness — if wc could 
evade the army of scientists and 



politicians who would surround 
me as soon as I landed. Our 
hopes of privacy were very slender; so much so, in fact, that I 
felt tempted to break one of my 
most iron clad rules. I'd even consider marrying Liala if that was 
the only way wc could arrange 
matters. (Yes, that two months 
in space had really put a strain 
on my system . . . ) 

Five thousand years of history 
— ten thousand, if you count 
mine as well — can't be condensed 
easily into a few hours. But with 
such a delightful tutor, I absorbed knowledge fast, and 
everything I missed, Max got 
down in his infallible memory 
circuits. 

Arcady, as their planet was 
charmingly called, had been at 
the very frontier of interstellar 
colonization; when me tide of 
empire had retreated, it had been 
left high and drv. In the struggle 
to survive, the Arcadians had lost 
much of their original scientific 
knowledge, including the secret 
of the Star Drive. They could not 
esca pe from their own Sola r 
System, but they had little incentive to do so. Arcady was a 
fertile world and the low gravity 
— only a quarter of Earth's — had 
given the colonists the physical 
strength they needed to make it 
live up to its name. Even allowing for any natural bias on 
Liala's part, it sounded a very attractive place. 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



28 

Arcady's little yellow sun was 
already showing a visible disc 
when I had my brilliant idea. 
That reception committee had 
been worrying me, and I suddenly realized how I could keep 
it at bay. The plan would need 
Lulu's cooperation, but by this 
time that was assured. If I may 
say so without sounding too immodest, I have always had a way 
with women, and this was not 
my first courtship by T.V. 

So the Arcadians learned, 
about two hours before I was due 
to land, that Survey Scouts were 
very shy and suspicious creatures. 
Owing to previous sad experience 
with unfriendly cultures, 1 politely refused to walk like a fly 
into their parlor. As there was 
only one of me, I preferred to 
meet only one of them, in some 
isolated spot to be mutually 
selected. H that meeting went 
well. I would then fly to the 
ca pi ta 1 city; if not — I d head 
back the way I came. I hoped 
that they would not think this 
behaviour discourteous, but I was 
a lonely traveler a long way from 
home, and as reasonable people, 
I was sure they'd see my point 
of view. . . . 

They did. The choice of the 
emissary was obvious, and Liala 
promptly became a world heroine 
by bravely volunteering to meet 
the monster from space. She'd 
radio back, she told her anxious 
friends, within an hour of com


ing aboard my ship. I tried to 
make it two hours, but she said 
that might be overdoing it, and 
nasty-minded people might start 
to talk. 

The ship was coming down 
through the Arcadian atmosphere when I suddenly remembered my compromising pin-ups, 
and had to make a rapid springcleaning. (Even so, one rather 
explicit masterpiece slipped down 
behind a chart rack and caused 
me acute embarrassment when it 
was discovered by the maintenance crew months later.) 
When I got back to the control 
room, the vision screen showed 
the empty, open plain at die very 
center of which Liala was waiting for me; in two minutes, I 
would hold her in my arms, be 
able to drink the fragrance of 
her hair, feel her body yield in 
all the right places — 

I didn't bother to watch the 
landing, for I could rely on Max 
to do his usual flawless job. Instead, I hurried down to the airlock and waited with what patience I could muster for the 
opening of the doors that barred 
me from Liala. 

Ii seemed an age before Max 
com pie t ed the routin e air-check 
and gave the "Outer Door Opening*' signal. I was through the 
exit before the metal disc had 
finished moving, and stood at last 
on the rich soil of Arcady. 

I remembered that I weighed 



Cosmic 

only forty pounds here, so I 
moved with caution despite my 
eagerness. 

Yet I'd forgotten, living in 
my fool's paradise, what a fraclional gravity could do to the human body in the course of two 
hundred generations. On a small 
planet, Evolution can do a lot in 
live thousand years. 

Liala was waiting for me, and 



Casanova 29 

she was as lovely as her picture. 
There was, however, one trifling 
mailer that the T.V. screen 
hadn't told me. 

I've never liked big girls, and 
I like them even less now. If I'd 
still wanted to, I suppose I 
could have embraced Liala. But 
I'd have looked such a fool, standing there on tip-toe with my arms 
wrapped around her knees. 




National Association 
for Mental Health 



Ground Leave Incident 



a short novelet 
by ROG PHILLIPS 

To o young country couple on an isolated, hardship planet, 
a spaceship visit is a special event. There is the trip 
to town, new clothes, the smell of fresh food and spices. . . , 
There are also the hot, demanding eyes of the woman-hungry crew. 



The sound came to Marvin 
down the tortuous twists of the 
pipestem, faint but unmistakable. 
Behind the transparency of his 
faceplate his lean face broke into 
a delighted smile. 

Dropping his shovel, he hesitated for a brief second over the 
almost full bucket of diamond 
clay, then grabbed the honk and 
slipped it into the eye on his belt. 
He caught the small control box 
swinging on its short flexible cord 
from the cable, squeezed his 
thumb down on the black Go 
button, and started walking up 
the vertical side of the pipestem, 
pulled along by the hoist cable. 
A spaceship was coming I 
He was so excited he stumbled 
a couple of times on the two hundred foot ascent and was dragged 
along until he could shove out 
and regain his footing. When he 
emerged from the pipestem he 



could see the vapor trail in the 
blue tinted methane atmosphere. 
There was no question, the ship 
was landing. 

Marvin skirted the small pile 
of unsorted clay and ran to his 
truck. In the ordinary course of 
things he would have brought up 
two more buckets of clay, then 
had his lunch. After that he would 
have gone through the clay, handful by handful, feeling out the 
diamonds and sifting the clay into the bucket for dumping. 

The phone was ringing in the 
truck cab. He picked up the mike 
in the middle of a ring. 

"Marv— " 

"Thelmal" He drowned out her 
voice. "Be ready, we're going to 
town! I'm starting down the 
mountain this minute." 

"I'll be ready, Marvin!" she said 
excitedly. 

Marvin dropped the mike on 



31 



32 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



the (soak, and reached under the 
dashboard to a secret button. A 
square section of the dash dropped down, revealing a viewscreen 
and a row of buttons underneath. 

He pushed one, and the view 
of the kitchen sprang onto the 
screen, with Thelma just disappearing through the door to the 
hallway. He pushed another. The 
view of the bedroom appeared, 
and as he stepped down on the 
damper rod control and the truck 
began to move, Thelma came onto 
the screen, headed toward the 
clothes closet. 

Thelma didn't know he could 
watch her like this. They had 
been married just a little over a 
year, had gotten married as soon 
as he had put up the prefab 
bubble. He hadn't liked the idea 
of her being nil alone there. He 
had pictured her fainting, or being hurt somehow, and lying there 
suffering until he came home at 
supper time. So he had put in 
the spy kits, a couple of electronic 
eyes to a room, and the screen 
hidden in the truck. He didn't 
snoop, he just looked in on her 
several times a day to be sure 
she was okay. But he didn't let 
her know about it because she 
might not like it. 

Marvin sent the truck recklessly down the mountain trail 
and risked a quick glance at the 
screen now and then, grinning at 
Thelma's indecision over what 
dress to put on. 



Filled with excitement, Thelma, 
having decided on her blue dress 
with the white bodice, hastened 
to get ready. There were all sorts 
of things she wanted to buy, and 
she and Marvin had quite a bit 
of money accumulated now. 
There had been several big diamonds in the past few months. 
When M arvin arrived she was 
ready to go, neatly encased in her 
voluminous transparent plastic 
sheathe that wouldn't muss her 
dress, and large plastic helmet 
that wouldn't muss her hair. 

It was sixty miles to town, 
around l'axton Hill. On their 
weekly trips to town, Marvin 
usually closed up the cab and 
turned on the air supply, and 
they took their time. But not now. 
A space ship was down. The 
speedometer needle pushed up to 
eighty and the big tires molded 
to the rocks and bumps with no 
time for jarring bouncing. 

Overhead the twin suns floated, 
brownish red, in a purple sky. 
And soon, around the curve of the 
hill, the city moved into view, 
from a distance looking like a 
cardboard box with a mirror lying on top, with a toy ship near 
it. 

City and ship grew in size until 
the roof of the city was hidden 
and only the hundred-foot-high 
walls loomed into the purple haze. 

They parked near the wall, 
went inside, and checked in their 
gas-tight suits. 



Ground Leave Incident 



33 



They didn't talk much on the 
express-walk to the dock area— 
they were too excited. The platforms at the dock area were already stacked high with goods, 
and more were being wheeled 
from the subway elevators. They 
eagerly sniffed the strange and 
delightful assortment of spice 
odors salted with an ozone tang, 
their eyes trying not to miss anything. They moved slowly, holding hands so as not to become 
separated, drifting along with the 
GTOwd, now and then disengaging 
themselves from the tide of humanity to make their purchases, 
checking off their list, making 
sure their packages were addressed to the right willcall station at the city wall for loading 
onto the truck. 

Thelma was unaware of Claude 
Mathews for a long time. Marvin 
was never aware of him. 

He was tall, dark-haired, with 
black eyes and a round face 
that made him seem a bit fat 
despite the muscular leanness of 
his short body and long legs. He 
was a spaceman. 

'Two days. Two lousy days, 
that's all we've got," he grumbled 
to his companions as they lifted 
ten-pound boxes of tea off the 
conveyor belt. "Six months in 
space and we get two days. How 
you gonna get next to a babe in 
that time?" 

"Do like the rest of us, Claude,** 



a short, heavy-set man said without pausing in his work. "Line 
up at one of the local pro houses 
or forget it." 

"Not me," Claude growled . 
"None of that grasshopper stuff 
for me. I'll make out. But two 
days doesn't give me much time." 
His eyes roved over the slowly 
moving crowd as he worked, pausing hungrily here and there. 

"You could get shot, yon know," 
the blond man said. 

"Not when you size up the 
right situation," Claude said. 
About to set down a box of tea, 
he paused, his eyes on a girl in a 
blue dress with white bodice that 
accentuated her slim waist and 
full hips and breasts. Her hair 
was a rich golden color, her face 
pretty, with pale skin and full red 
Hps. Her eyes were Urge, wideset, 
and deep blue. His pulse quickened, just looking at her. 

The man with her— undoubtedly her husband— was a nothing. 
Hie dimc-a-dozen solid young citizen type, medium height and 
build, angular face— an unimaginative worker type. 

The couple disentangled themselves from the slowly moving 
crowd and pushed toward the 
hawker. Claude slowly set the 
box of tea down and moved within hearing. 

The couple were buying twenty 
pounds of tea. The girl was taking a pencil out of her purse and 
crossing off something on her list. 



34 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



Claude grinned to himself. That 
kind was a pushover. 

He listened while she gave her 
name to the hawker for the willcall ticket. Mrs. Thelma Lake, 
willcall station five. Address, bubble seven, Tedrow Valley. He 
fixed it in his mind. 

He leaned against the stacked 
tea and studied her hungrily. She 
sensed his stare and turned 
startled eyes on him. He grinned 
slowly into her eyes. She tried to 
look away, her white face slowly 
growing flushed, her nostrils flaring as her breathing became more 
rapid. 

Suddenly she turned away. He 
continued staring at the back of 
her neck, and knew that she felt 
his star**. 

"Me," lie said softly to himself, 
"I've got it made." 

Marvin brought the tmck in 
through the big airlock when they 
got home— BH extravagant procedure using up three pounds of oxygen. But, he pointed out, it would 
take almost two pounds to get 
everything in through the smaller 
lock anyway, and this way he 
could drive the truck right up to 
the storeroom and unload. 

The twin suns were setting 
when they finished unloading. 
Thelma and Marvin stood arm in 
arm beside the truck, watching. 
It was one of those rare sunsets, 
with a clear purple sky changing 
to the indigo of night, Alpha 



plunging down below the horizon 
as though in free fall while Beta 
hung suspended on a sawtooth 
of the distant Minor Range. 
It happened that way just once 
every three years, and it was supposed to bring good luck to see 
it. 

It was an anniversary for Thelma and Marvin. Tliree years ago 
they had been standing arm in 
arm watching Beta rest on the 
mountains, when Marvin had told 
her he now had enough money for 
them to be married and live by 
themselves. . . . 

Marvin put an arm around 
Thelmas shoulders and squeezed 
lightly. 

"Maybe next time, three years 
From now, there will be three oi 
us standing here." 

"I hope so," Thelma said, snuggling closer. . , . 

Claude Mathews parked at a 
lookout point on Paxtorj Hill overlooking Tedrow Valley, and 
studied his newly bought map 
for landmarks. After a while he 
got out of the rented car and 
studied the valley through his 
fieldscope, turning the light amplifier on full to got a sharp image 
on the screen. Here and there 
through the blue, early morning 
mist were glossy inkblots that he 
knew must be petroleum pools. 

He found bubble seven almost 
at once, but he also located the 
other glass domes in the valley, 



Ground Leave Incident 



35 



and studied them, to be familiar 
with their location in relation to 
number seven. There were ten 
altogether, scattered out, and the 
main road took an erratic course 
that carried it within a mile or 
two of each of them. 

Finally, satisfied that he knew 
the details of the valley, he settled 
down to watch bubble seven. 
There were lights on in the house, 
and a small truck inside the bubble parked near one wing of the 
house. 

He had learned that most of 
the men in Tedrow Valley worked 
diamond mines. Pipestem clay deposits that assayed about five hundred karats a ton, most of it very 
small diamond grains suitable 
only for industrial uses. 

If Marvin Lake worked such a 
mine, he should be leaving soon, 
and if no one else lived with the 
Lakes, then Mrs. Thelma Lake 
would be alone. . . . 

His round face broke into a 
smile as he saw a man come out 
of the house and get into the 
truck. He watched the truck move 
into a short extension from the 
bubble and stop. A truck airlock. 

A few minutes later the truck 
moved away from the bubble. He 
watched it creep along the valley 
floor, ignoring the vaguely defined road, and head toward the 
hills on the other side of the valley. 

Claude kept the truck on the 
viewscrcen until it left the valley 



and vanished part way up a distant hill. Then he got back in the 
rented car and started down into 
the valley, driving fast. 

The memory of Thelma Lake's 
face rose in his mind. Wide set 
large blue eyes, slightly parted 
full lipsHe jerked the wheel, bringing 
the car away from the edge of the 
sheer drop on the right side of 
the road. His heart was pounding violently, but not from his narrow escape. 

In the valley he cut off from 
the road, and parked the rented 
car in a spot he had picked out 
where it couldn't be seen. 

He continued on foot, checking the landmarks he had picked 
out from the lookout point. There 
were ten hours of oxygen left in 
his rented, lightweight, landside 
suit. He could not afford to get 
lost. 

He would have preferred his 
spacesuit. He was used to it and 
it was more functional. But it 
would have marked him a mile 
off as a spaceman to anyone who 
happened to see him. 

After he had walked a mile he 
stopped at a small pool, dipped 
a plastic-gloved finger in the 
black oil, and smeared it over his 
faceplate, thin enough so he could 
see out, but thick enough so that 
it would be difficult for anyone 
to make out his features. 

When he came within sight of 
his destination he began stagger


30 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



ing and stumbling, stopping often 
to rest. He knew that somewhere, 
a few hundred yards out from 
the bubble, he would trip an 
alarm signal. He had to get into 
the bubble, and he hoped that 
Thefma Lake would open up for 
a stranger apparently in trouble. 

Of course, she might call her 
husband before she let him in. 
The tnick certainly would have a 
radiophone. If she did call, however, there was a good chance 
Marvin Lake would be down in 
his mine and not hear the phone. 

When he was thirty yards from 
the smaller airlock he saw her 
come out of the house and look 
toward him. He staggered and 
went to one knee, then picked 
himself up and staggered on 
toward the airlock. 

He saw her half turn, as though 
to go back into the house. Then 
she came running toward the airlock. She was wearing a long blue 
housecoat, and under it, hanging 
below the housecoat, a sheer pink 
nightgown. 

Claude Mathews grinned. 
Probably, like many married 
women left alone, she went back 
to bed for a while after the old 
man left in the morning. 

He staggered into the airlock 
and collapsed. He saw her fumbling with the controls, smiling 
encouragingly at him, and knew 
that she had not been able to 
see his face behind the oil on his 
faceplate. 



When Marvin reached, the mine 
he swung the truck around and 
parked it as usual. Today he felt 
lazy. He would bring up three 
more buckets of clay and take 
things easy. 

Before going down he went 
back to the truck and switched, 
on the secret viewscreen. Thelma 
wasn't in the kitchen. He looked 
at the kitchen for a moment. It 
was very empty without her in it. 

He switched to the bedroom, 
and ho saw her back in bed, 
asleep. A tender smile tugged ;it 
the corners of his mouth. Thelma 
had had an exciting time in town, 
and they hadn't gotten to sleep 
until after midnight. He hoped 
she would sleep until noon. 

Switching off the screen, Marvin went back to the mine and 
hooked the cable to his belt. 
Down at the bottom of the pipestem he took the pick and broke 
loose enough of the whitish clay 
to fill the bucket twice, his experienced eyes watching for large 
pebbles that, under their rough 
opaque surface, would be diamonds of several karats. The hope 
of finding one of those was the 
thrilling part of mining. 

He had one— he had found it 
a year ago-that assayed a possible nine karats. He was keeping 
it as a surprise for Thelma. One 
of these days he was going to have 
it cut. It would cost quite a bit 
to do that, but the finished stone 
would be worth a small fortune. 



Ground Leave Incident 



37 



He shoveled the bucket full, 
hooked it onto the cable and sent 
it up. When it reached the surface the automatic trip would 
take over and dump it, and send 
it back down. 

While he waited he sifted 
around in the clay, putting the 
two or three small stones he found 
in the pouch at his belt. 

The trouble with him, he decided, was that he was lonesome 
for Thelma. Or maybe he was 
fust lazy this morning. 

The bucket came back down. 
He shoveled clay into it, resisting the desire to go up above. 

He would have liked to have 
stayed home today, but he and 
Thelma had thrashed that out 
long ago. Work was work. It 
would be too easy, when you're 
your own boss, to goof off once 
in a while, then oftener and oftener, until you were shiftless like 
Eton] in bubble four. 

Of course, if he went home at 
noon she probably wouldn't make 
him come back, but she wouldn't 
like it, and would point out that 
he had lost most of yesterday. 

lie finished filling the bucket. 
He looked at it, wanting to get 
on it and ride it up. He shook his 
head, inside his helmet, and firmly 
pressed the Go button, and 
watched the bucket climb up the 
pipestem, its rider wheels keeping it away from the walls. 

He wished now he had gone up 
with it. 



Suddenly he was impatient. It 
seemed an eternity until the 
bucket came into view again. 

When it came to rest on the 
bottom he didn't even bother to 
unhook it, but stepped into it 
and pressed the Go button. His 
impatience increased. 

As the bucket neared the top, 
Marvin stood on its rim, holding 
the taut cable, and leaped off. 
The bucket kept going, clanging 
emptily through the tripping setup. 

He half ran to the truck, the 
impatience a driving force in him 
now. He didn't stop to analyze it 
or even be curious about it. He 
just wanted to turn on the screen 
and see Thelma. 

It was still tuned to one of the 
bedroom eyes, and after a moment the picture of the bedroom 
flashed into the screen. The bed 
was empty. 

He switched to the other bedroom eye to make sure she wasn't 
at her dresser. She wasn't. 

He switched to one of the 
kitchen eyes. She wasn't in the 
kitchen. Probably she was in the 
bathroom taking a shower or 
something. He touched the bathroom button, tiien shook his head. 

When he had installed the secret eyes he had hesitated a long 
time over putting any in the bathroom. Only the realization that 
lots of accidents happen in bathrooms had decided him. And, 
even so, he had never used it. 



38 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



He wasn't worried. Just impatient. Nervously impatient. He 
passed over the bathroom eyes 
and punched in one room after 
another, without finding Thelma. 

Finally his finger was back to 
the bathroom button again. He 
hesitated. One quick, half a second glance wouldn't do any harm. 

He pushed the button and 
pushed the kitchen button a half 
second afterwards. The bathroom 
flashed into the screen and was 
replaced by the kitchen. 

She wasn't in the bathroom. 

Wait a minute— she would be 
in the storeroom working on the 
load of stuff they had bought in 
town! 

"Why didn't I think of that before?" he said aloud. 

He slid over and put one foot 
to the ground, then changed his 
mind. He would have part of his 
lunch now, and a cup of hot tea. 

He pulled his leg back in and 
closed the cab door, and started 
the air purifier. When the green 
light flashed on he undamped his 
faceplate. 

He reached to shut off the view 
of the kitchen on the screen, then 
decided to leave it on. 

The lunch was especially good 
today. Thelma had bought a lot 
of new spices and little tidbits 
from a dozen different planets. 

He selected a small sandwich 
made from a canned bread that 
he vaguely remembered was 
made from a flour that was mostly 



the ground-up roots of a tree from 
some planet that was lightyears 
distant. 

He bit into the sandwich, 
chewed thoughtfully, then 
glanced idly at the viewscrecn. 

He saw the back door open and 
Thelma come in. The expression 
on her face arrested him. She was 
worriedHe saw the man, suddenly. The 
round face had a mask of dark 
stubble— darker than the normal 
blondness of native born people. 

A spaceman? But what would 
he l>c doing in Tedrow Valley? 
Maybe out sightseeing and something had gone wrong with his 
car. 

"I must phone my husband," 
Thelma said. 

Hie sound of her voice startled 
Marvin. It was utterly strange for 
someone to be there, at home with 
Thelma, when he wasn't. 

The man reached out and took 
Thelma's arm, saying, "Why 
bntlier the old man?" 

"He's expecting me to call him," 
Thelma said. "If I don't, he'll be 
worried and come right home." 

At this outright lie Marvin suddenly sat up, feeling icy fear racing through him. 

"Forget that guy!" the man said, 
jerking Thelma around and gripping both sides of her head. He 
ignored her beating fists, pulling 
her face toward his. 

Marvin was trembling so violently he fumbled several times 



Ground Leave Incident 



39 



ineffectively before getting the 
buck in motion. He slammed 
down on the damper rod control 
throttle and was pushed back 
against the seat. 

He risked a glance at the viewscreen. Thelma was struggling 
desperately. 

Marvin forced his eyes to the 
road. It would take twenty minutes to get down the mountain, 
get home. Twenty minutes! 

"That's better," the man's voice 
erupted in Marvin's ears. "Just 
relax so I can get this suit off. 
We're going to have a real good 
time, baby. A real good time." 

"Get out!" Thelma's voice shuddered. "Get out! My husband will 
kill you." 

Marvin risked a glance at the 
Screen. Thelma was on the tfoor, 
inching toward the phone. The 
man, peeling off his suit, was a 
symbol of nightmare etching into 
Marvin's mind. 

"Kill me?" the man was saying. 
"I don't think so, baby. And do 
you know why? Because you 
won't tell him. Not afterwards. 
You want this as much as I do, 
but you won't admit it to yourself. I could see it in your eyes 
when you looked at me yesterday 
at the docks, baby." 

The gloating words seared into 
Marvin's ears. 

At the docks? Absurd! 

"That's not true!" Thelma's 
voice sounded. 

Marvin risked another quick 



glance. Thelma had inched closer 
to the wall where the phone was. 
Suddenly she leaped to her feet 
and darted toward it. 

The man leaped after her, the 
protective suit still hanging to one 
leg. "Oh no you don't, baby," he 
said. He seized both her wrists 
and twisted them behind her, 
forcing her body to arch against 
his. 

Marvin jerked hack to his surroundings with the truck climbing 
off the road. It nearly overturned 
as he fought the wheel. Then he 
was back on the road. 

'Wo!" Thelma screamed. 

Marvin risked a look at the 
screen, and jerked his eyes away 
from what he saw, sick to the 
core of his being. 

He looked through the windshield. Everything was blurred. 
He tried to connect his mind to 
his vision, to see the road. The 
truck tilted over at a crazy angle 
again. He was off the road. It 
should have been the other side, 
with its two-hundred -foot drop 
that would mercifully kill him. 

He braked to a stop, unable 
even to see where he was stopping. He wanted to go on. He had 
to go on. It would take another 
full ten minutes at maximum 
srjeed to reach home. 

Ten minutes . . . The enormity 
of time . . . 

Like a disembodied spirit, he 
heard himself crying. Crying . . . 
lost . . . 



40 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



It might have been hours that 
passed, or days. Time had no 
meaning any more. Maybe Thelma was dead. It would be better 
for her to be dead, to escape the 
horror of being still alive. 

What insane sounds had come 
from the speaker? He wasn't sure. 
He thought Thelma had laughed 
once, but that couldn't be so. 
Laughed, and that maddeningly 
calm male voice had said, "That's 
it, baby, let yourself go, enjoy it." 
And the strange, wild, demented 
laughter spilling into Marvin's 
ears had changed to sobbing, that 
became laughter again, then sobbing that drifted into whimpers, 
and silence. 

Silence. The silence had lasted 
for ages. 

Marvin Opened his eyes and 
looked out the windshield. Tie 
could see clearly. The road, the 
haze of the valley below, the 
twin suns high in the purple sky. 

He turned suddenly and looked 
into the viewscreen. The man 
stood in the middle of the kitchen, 
stretching his long lean arms, his 
long legs widespread, his round 
face gaping in a huge yawn. 

Thelma lay on the floor, on her 
stomach, her head buried in her 
amis, unmoving, except for her 
shoulders which shook with her 
spasmodic, silent sobs. 

"You see, baby," the insanely 
calm male voice broke the silence. "It wasn't so bad after all, 
was it? Your old man ever give 



you such a good time? You know 
he didn't. And you liked it. You 
responded. You really wanted it 
all the time, didn't you? I guessed 
it when you blushed down at the 
docks. I could read your mind 
when you looked at mc. You 
blushed at what you were thinking, didn't you? There's a real 
hunk of man. Wish I could get 
in bed with him.' That's what you 
thought, wasn't it? Now admit it 
to yourself. It was. So I came out 
and gave you your wish." 

The little black eyes in the 
round face stared down at the 
back of Thelma's head shrewdly. 

"So now what are you going to 
do?" the man went on, while 
Marvin listened, unable not to 
listen. 

"Are you going to tell that husband of yours? Don't be foolish. 
What's done is done, and you 
liked it. You'll dream about it, 
baby, believe me. So why ruin 
things for yourself? What would 
your husband do if he found out? 
Kill me? I might have something 
to say about that if he tried. 

"And suppose he did kill me? 
Then everyone would know. Can't 
you hear the prosecutor saying, 
'Now tell the court once more 
how the deceased took you on 
the kitchen floor. Why didn't you 
struggle harder?' And all your 
friends—and your husband— will 
be sitting there, listening to you." 

The round face smiled at the 
back of Thelma's head. "On the 



Ground Leave Incident 



41 



■ther hand, if you keep your 
mouth shut, he need never know. 
No one will ever know. . And 
suppose you told him, and I was 
nl ready gone off the planet? 
Every time he looked at you he 
would remember. You would 
know what he was thinking . . 

Marvin tried to shut his ears. 
He wanted to shut off the sound 
and sight, and couldn't. He tried 
to shut off his thoughts, and 
couldn't. 

II he rushed down now, he 
couldn't stop what had already 
happened. But— something he 
hadn't thought of until now— 
Thelma would then learn of the 
electronic eyes in all the rooms, 
know he had been spying on her 
ever since they were married. 

He hadn't thought of it as spying. Certainly he had never even 
thought of anything but being 
close to her in secret, watching 
over her in case she slipped and 
hurt herself, or fainted, or any 
one of the many tilings that could 
happen . . . 

But would she know that? 

"Look," the man was saying. 
"I've got a rented car parked 
about a mile from here. I'm walking to it now and going back to 
town, Think it over. I'm a funny 
Idnd of a guy. Once, and I've had 
it. Something goes out of it for 
me, after I've had a girl the first 
time. So think of your life ahead, 
and hold onto it. Keep your 
mouth shut. After I go, get your


self prettied up for your hubby, 
and when you're in bed together, 
think of me, huh?" 

A carl Parked about a mile 
from the bubble! It would take 
the man half an hour, at least, to 
get to it. Then he would be going 
up around Paxton Hill. 

Had Thelma heard what the 
man said to her? What would 
she do? A lump rose in Marvin's 
throat. Poor Thelma . . . 

He was calm now. He saw the 
man's back turned to the screen 
as the man slipped into his u, ;,:s 
tight suit again. 

Marvin inched the truck down 
onto the road. When he looked 
at the screen again the man was 
gone. Thelma was slowly turning 
over. Marvin hastily shut off the 
viewscreen. He couldn't bring 
himself to see Tlielma's face. Not 
just yet. 

He closed up the dashboard 
and concentrated on driving. Mile 
after mile, as the mountain fled 
behind him and he raced toward 
Paxton Hill, not daring to turn 
his head to look toward his home. 

He had never driven across the 
valley before without turning to 
look at his home . . . 

Marvin knew exactly what he 
was going to do. There was a 
lookout point on Paxton Hill from 
which he could watch the valley. 
He would wait there until he saw 
the car. When he was sure it was 
coming he would start down the 



42 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



hill at full speed and run head-on 
into it. 

That would solve everything, 
for him. 

For him? The implication of 
selfishness and self pity in the 
thought struck him. But Thelma 
wouldn't have to face him with 
ber shame. She might wonder 
what he had been doing coming 
from the direction of town, but 
she would never suspect that he 
knew. 

The atom-driven turbine 
whined higher and higher as the 
speedometer needle passed over 
into the nineties, but he was unaware of his speed. 

What other course was there 
than to kill the monster and be 
killed? What was there to live for 
now? 

Suddenly it welled up in him. 
All that he and Thelma had together, all the future they had 
looked forward to with such confidence. Was it to be thrown 
away? 

Think of your life ahead, and 
hold onto it. 

What of Thelma. If she wanted 
to try to hold on to what she had, 
face life and wait for forgetfulness, didn't she have that right? 

Up ahead was the lookout 
point. Marvin took his foot off the 
foot control, slammed on the 
brakes, and made a tight U turn. 
Below, Tcdrow Valley spread out 
into the blue haze that lay over 
it. 



Marvin looked at it, then closed 
his eyes, fighting to still his 
thoughts. 

How selfish he wasl Thelma 
had been raped, her happy life 
and happy future shattered by 
an inhuman beast. And he, Marvin Lake, had been about to add 
to that final blow, an accident 
which took away the only reason 
she could have left for wanting 
to live. . . . 

There was another way. Turn 
around, drive slowly, and when 
that car passes, speed up and 
drive it over the side p£ the road 

up where there's a three-hundredfoot drop. 

And what if he did kill the 
man? It would be on all the telecasts and Thelma — would she 
guess, and know that he knew? 

Marvin groaned. If only he had 
not listened to the terrible reasoning of that monster from hell. 

And the horrible doubts he 
sowed, capitalizing on any guilt 
feelings his victims might have. 
Girls naturally admired men other 
than their husbands, just as men 
admired girls other than their 
wives. 

In town he found pleasure in 
seeing all the attractive girls, and 
Thelma probably found pleasure 
in seeing tall, manly men walking 
along
He was going to kill that spaceman. He wouldn't be able to live 
with himself if he didn't. 

He started to turn the car to 



Ground Leave Incident 



43 



head the other way so that he 
could run the man off the road. 

But if he killed the man, Thelma would know he knew . . . 

He stopped the car in a torment 
of indecision. 

It was up to Thelma. 

That spaceship wouldn't leave 
until tomorrow morning. Later 
he could go into town with a 
knife, find the man, and kill him. 
Maybe that would be a better 
way anyway. 

A knife. He nodded grimly. 
There were things he could do 
With a knife without killing the 
man. Better things than killing. 

He took his foot off the brakes 
and started slowly back the way 
he had come, into the valley. 
When he was almost down to the 
valley floor he saw the smaller 
car coming toward him. 

He caught a glimpse of the 
round face with its dark mask of 
short stubble. Then the car had 
shot past him. 

He continued on another hundred yards, and suddenly he was 
shaking uncontrollably. He had 
to stop the truck. He had to put 
on the handbrake because be was 
too weak to keep pressure on the 
foot pedal. 

Why was he shaking? Reaction, now that the crisis of his 
opportunity to kill the man in a 
crash was past? 

Possibly. But it was something 
else, too. He had seen that face 

J 



again. It was a symbol to him— 
the incarnation of everything eviL 

But now— He would have to 
come home at his regular time, be 
smiling and cheerful as though 
nothing had happened, and— 

Give Thelma a chance for life. 
That was it. Give Thelma a 
chance. Everything, no matter 
what, must lie secondary to that. 

Suddenly he saw his lunch, 
spilled out of the lunchbox on the 
floormat. And the thermos. He 
picked up the thermos and shook 
it, hearing the rattle of broken 
glass. Damn! He'd have to tell 
Thelma he dropped it and broke 
it. Good thing they had half a 
dozen replacements in the store 
room. 

He got out of the cab and went 
around to the right hand side, 
and picked up all the little tidbits 
of his lunch and tossed them over 
the cliff. He took a whisk broom 
and swept the finormat carefully. 

It was still three hours until 
his regular time to go home. He 
would go back to the mine and 
work. That was the thing to do. 

When he reached his mine it 
looked strange to him— like something familiar he had not seen far 
years. He began working on the 
pile of clay, breaking it down a 
handful at a time, picking out the 
small diamond granules. 

The seconds passed like hours, 
but slowly die familiar work comforted him. And eventually it was 
time to go home. 



44 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



Now that the time had come, he 
was afraid. As he started the truck 
he found lie was trembling again. 
He fought it, and it increased. 

He slowed down and began to. 
think of that future, the nice 
things about it, the things worth 
living for. After a while he wasn't 
trembling any more. 

She would be waiting for him 
now. How would she be waiting? 
With a firm grip on herself? Still 
overcome by shock and horror? 

Maybe it would be better if he 
looked in and found out, so he 
could know what he had to face. 
He hesitated, then stopped the 
truck and turned on the viewscreen. The kitchen scene came 
onto the screen. 

She was not there. 

The nightmare gnawed at the 
edge of his mind again. He 
jabbed the bedroom button in a 
panic of anxiety. She wasn't 
there. 

He shut off the screen and 
slammed the panel closed, and 
sat there, his fists clenched, fighting for control. Thelma was all 
right. She had to be all right. The 
whole future depended on it. 

Had that — that — come back? 
What a fool he had been for not 
keeping the viewscreen on. He 
had been interested only in his 
own selfish feelings. God! All 
afternoon, all he had been interested in was how he felt! Not 
a thought for Thelma. Not once 
looking in on her to see how she 



was making out! Not even a 
thought for the possible danger 
of that fiend coming back again. 
Calm now. Nothing is wrong— 
Thelma was either in the bathroom or out in the yard at the 
airlock. 

Of course! She was going to be 
out at the airlock. She was going 
to wave, force herself to smile! 
He mustn't be late, force her to 
stand there longer than necessary. 

He started the truck again, and 
held the vision of Thelma waiting for him, ready to smile and 
wave to him. It would be a good 
world. It teas a good world. Together, he and Thelma would 
hang onto it. 

He speeded up, cutting across 
the valley floor without paying the 
regard to roads that he usually 
did. Bubble seven— home— came 
into view. His heart started to 
pound painfully. His eyes ached 
from straining for the first sight 
of Thelma standing inside the 
transparent wall of the bubble 

She wasn't there, or if she was 
he couldn't see her. The truck 
lurched violently and he brought 
his eyes back to liis driving. 
Lucky he had only run over a 
large rock. He coidd have gone 
into one of the oil puddles and 
had a few hours' work cleaning 
off the sticky stuff. 

He pulled up in front of the airlock, leaped out of the truck cab. 
and ran to the airlock. He 
punched the button that would 



Ground Leave Incident 



45 



close the outer panel and start 
the air purifier to get rid of the 
methane. That was always the 
longest part, that sixty-second 
wait in the airlock. Usually Thelma was there, scant inches away, 
smiling at him happily. 

Today, he thought, she had reBiembered that sixty-second wait 
;mk! realized she couldn't keep 
smiling as if nothing were wrong. 
That was why she wasn't here to 
meet him. 

The sixty seconds were up. The 
inner panel swung open. Marvin 
Itarted to run toward the house. 

At the kitchen door he leaned 
Against the wall, collected himself, and called, "Thelma . . 

lie waited a couple of seconds, 
then pushed the door open and 
called again. 

When she didn't come he went 
on in. The kitchen was empty. 

The house was empty. 

How much later it was, he 
didn't know. He had run from 
room to room, shouting her name, 
searching, searching. In the store 
room lie had run up and down 
the aisles of canned goods. 

Twice hope flared in him— 
when he thouglit of the hydropOnic house, and when he thought 
of the emergency underground 
vault. But she had been in neither 
place. 

There was only one other place 
she could be. He tried not to 
think of it. 



Against his will he straightened 
stiffly and looked out through the 
transparent walls of the bubble 
to the truck . . . and beyond the 
truck. 

Out there. 

People did that. Just a few 
months ago the telecasts had told 
about some fellow who had 
simply walked out into it without 
a gas tight suit on. And a year 
ago a woman had run into it and 
dived into an oil pool. It had 
taken the police two days to get 
her body out. 

Marvin went into the airlock 
and on through. There was no 
sixty second wait going out; you 
just shut the inner panel and 
opened the outer one and let the 
good air out with you. Some 
alarmists predicted that eventually there would be enough oxygen released in this manner to 
bring the atmosphere of Jeffries' 
Planet to an explosive concentration; but that wasn't possible— the 
oxygen was burned up by ionization produced by the rays from 
the twin suns. 

Funny, to think of a thing like 
that when Thelma— 

Marvin began his search, Somewhere there would be a huddled 
bundle of clothing, an arm in 
view above a concealing rise. 

How far could she have gone 
before she dropped? A hundred 
yards? Not that far. Not even if 
she ran. 

He had never realized before 



46 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



that there were three large oil 
fronds within running distance of 
the airlock. Who would ever have 
a crazy thought, like that? 

He didn't find her. 

He searched the shores of the 
three ponds for some sign of a 
footprint in the rough, baked 
ground ... or a slight scraping 
where Thelma's shoe might have 
dragged or slipped. 

He found a few faint marks— 
but how could he tell which 
scratch, if any, had been made by 
Thelma? 

He stared at the gleaming black 
surfaces of the ponds, trying to 
sense whether Thelma's body was 
in tin's one or that one. It would 
take a week of dragging operations to get her out. 

Meanwhile— 

He went back to the bubble. 
He went into the kitchen, into 
its terrible emptiness. He opened 
the drawer containing the forks, 
knives, and spoons. 

There were lots of knives. Carving knives, paring knives, steak 
knives. He selected two. One was 
a carving knife, long and razor 
sharp, with a haft. The other was 
small, a paring knife. He sharpened it until it was razor sharp 
too. A doctor could perform an 
operation with it. 

Anyone could. 

At the doorway he paused and 
looked back. He would never sec 
the kitchen again, perhaps. It 
didn't matter. 



He went out to the truck and 
began the chive around Faxton 
Hill to the city. 

The twin suns had sunk below 
the horizon by the time he came 
within view of the city. The 
spaceship was still there, with 
sharp points of light on it here 
and there. Red, yellow, and green 
lights from outside, white discs of 
light from portholes. 

Marvin drove into his accustomed parking spot, went through 
the nearest airlock, and checked 
his suit. He stuck the tag in his 
pocket, aware that he would 
never redeem the suit. Thelma 
had chosen her way, now he had 
chosen his. If there were a hereafter they would soon be together. 

He noticed the rent-a-car booth. 
On impulse he stopped and went 
in. 

"Hello, Marvin," the girl behind the counter said. 

"Hello— Joyce." She had been 
in one of his classes in school and 
he had to think a minute before 
remembering her name. 

"What can I do for you?" she 
said, smiling. 

"I'll tell you," Marvin said, trying to be casual. "Did you rent 
a car to a fellow today, probably 
off that ship that's in? Tall, dark, 
sort of round face?" 

"Why, yes." She consulted a 
list. "Claude Mathews. He was 
out five hours." 

"Thanks." Marvin strode out. 



Ground Leave Incident 



47 



Claude Mathews. Knowing the 
man's name would simplify finding him, For one thingHe had been about to jump onto a moving walk. He changed 
his mind and went to a sidewalk 
phone booth. After a few tries he 
was conneeted to the spaceship. 

"Is Claude Mathews back on 
board yet?" he asked. 

"Just a minute," a male voice 
said, Then, "No. And, knowing 
J j Tin, J would say he's probably in 
a poker game somewhere and 
the L.P.'s will have to bring him 
aboard at the last minute." 

"Thanks," Marvin said. 

He left the phone booth, and 
headed toward the moving walk. 

"Hey, Marvin!" a vaguely familiar voice shouted. "Where you 
going? Long time no seel" 

Hi' ignored it and hopped on 
the walk, skipping over to the 
successively faster ones. He recalled the owner of the voice after 
a bit. A casual acquaintance in 
lu's single days. A three dimensional chess player with a weakness on Knight defenses and a 
nasty mind. 

Nasty? What had before 
seemed nasty to Marvin now 
Seemed only a mildly noticeable 
peculiarity of a decent man. Now 
Marvin knew about evil, and his 
values had changed 

Once, and I've had it. 

The supremely casual evilness 

of it The rather pleasant, deep 

voice that had said those words 



would echo horribly in his ears as 
long as he lived. 

Easy now. ft would be so easy 
to let the dam break. He had to 
keep control. . . . Just a little while 
longer. 

He rode the express walk toward the dock area. In that neighborhood were the card rooms, the 
pro houses, the alcohol joints and 
the dope cellars— wide open lures 
to keep the degenerate and the 
conscienceless clumped together 
where they could be controlled. 

But one had ignored the honeybaited trap and had gone out into 
the countryside where decent 
people lived. . . . 

Where was fie now? 

"Want a good time, honey?" 

Marvin looked without emotion 
at the ravaged face of the pro girl 
and moved on, feeling her clutching fingers slide off his sleeve. 
Had she once. . .? What had 
brought her to this— instead of the 
dark poo! of oil in the valley that 
would have given her eternal 
peace. . . . 

He turned into another card 
room. Not there. The street again. 

"You want happy dream?" 

Marvin looked down at the 
short man, his butterball figure, 
his shiny, jaundiced, fat face and 
multiple chins, his thick glasses. 

"You look sad," the grotesque 
lips said. "You come with me. I 
show you a happy land where all 
is lovely.** 



48 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



Yes, Marvin thought, that is a 
way . . . 

To sink into the arms of dopeinduced unreality— he coukl understand that need. . . . 

"No," he said gently. "Not yet." 

I If: pushed on. 

Man had spread out to the 
stars, driven on by a dream. Mankind was a mighty ocean washing 
against the cliffs of eternity, wearing them away. 

But here and there were the 
tideflats, with distorted shapes 
crawling under the rocks. 

And somewhere near was a 
thing named Claude Mathews— 

A lew feet ahead was a sign . . . 
another card room. It would be 
the eighth ... or the eighteenth. 
Marvin had lost track— he had almost begun to lose hope. This 
would he like the other places he 
had entered; there would be no 
round face on broad lean shoulders, no end to his search. 

But he pushed through the 
swinging doors. And almost immediately he saw the man. 

It had once been some kind 
of store. Shelves still lined the 
walls, coated with dust. Perhaps 
thirty by a hundred feet, its asphalt floor was streaked with filth, 
and a sour smell hung in the 
smoke-grey air. 

There were perhaps two dozen 
caul tables, regularly spaced, all 
of them filled, eight men to a 
table. Marvin recognized some of 



the games. Poker, pan, whiskey. . . . 

Here and there among the players was a young face that reminded him of himself when he 
was young and didn't know the 
meaning of horror. But three 
fourths of the faces were unmistakably those of spacemen, black 
men, yellow men, red men, white 
men— from a dozen parts of the 
galaxy. 

Marvin moved toward the tabic 
where Claude Mathews sat. He 
went unnoticed in the thin crowd. 

Would Claude Mathews recognize him? Did the man even know 
what he looked like? 

"I'll take two," the horribly 
familiar voice said. 

Marvin moved closer, until he 
was so close he could have 
reached out and touched the man 
on the shoulder. 

The dealer was a yellowskinned man on the other side of 
the table. Claude Mathews 
scooped up his cards, in high good 
humor. He had plenty of chips in 
front of him. 

He won the pot with two pair. 

"You know how it is," he 
gloated. "Lucky. That's me. Lucky 
at cards, lucky at love, lucky at 
everything." 

"Deal em," a red man said 
laconically. 

"But none of this grasshopper 
stuff for me," Claude Mathews 
went on, sticking up his cards as 
they were dealt. "Nine out of ten 



Ground Leave Incident 



-I 1 ) 



nice women want it, are waiting 
for it." 

When the red man opened, he 
tossed his cards in and said, "It's 
that way everywhere. How many 
husbands give their wife a real 
good time? None. They don't have 
what it takes. Mine out of ten 
married women are just waiting 
for a guy to walk in the door and 
give them a thrill they'll never 
forget." 

Marvin clamped a hand on 
Claude Mathews shoulder. 

The round face turned up, the 
dark eyes staring at Marvin. No 
flicker of recognition showed. 

"Move on, pal," Claude Mathews said. "No handouts from 
me. Try someone else." 

"I don't want a handout," Marvin said. 

"No?" Claude Mathews shoved 
nut his chair and half turned. All 
movement at the table stopped. 
"What do you want?" 

"Those nice women," Marvin 
said. "One of them was my wife." 

"Oh?" Claude Mathews said, 
glancing up and down Marvin's 
slight frame with amusement. 

"Cut it out," a voice whined. 
"Let's play cards. The ship lifts 
;it dawn, you know." But no one 
listened. 

"Yes," Marvin said. He was 
calm now. He was remembering 
when he was a little boy, with his 
magic kit and book of instructions 
that said the secret of magic was 
to keep them interested in what 



one hand was doing and they 
wouldn't notice what the other 
did. 

He pulled out the little paring 
knife, holding it in his left hand, 
half raised but not too threatening. All eyes, he knew, were on 
that little knife. Claude Mathews 
glanced at it. Marvin could see 
the gloating confidence in the 
little black eyes. One threatening 
move of the little knife and the 
long armed spaceman could grab 
the wrist that held it. 

"You raped my wife," Marvin 
said coldly. 

"Well now, wait a minute," 
Claude Mathews said. "Who says 
so? I don't know who you are, pal, 
but unless I'm invited—" 

Marvin lifted the little paring 
knife as a left-handed man might 
draw back to stab downward. 
Claude Mathews reached to intercept it. He was unaware of 
the long, broad-bladed carving 
knife that was thrust point first 
into his groin, thrust in a twisting 
slicing motion that stopped only 
when the point was buried deeply 
in the upholstery of the chair seat. 

The round face was only inches 
from Marvin's eyes, every pore 
and whisker magnified. Marvin 
saw the eyes glaze with shock and 
knew his thrust had gone where 
he intended. 

He let go the carving knife and 
stepped back, the little paring 
knife still in his left hand. 

He turned away and walked 



so 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION* 



toward the entrance. Ahead of 
him, men stepped quickly aside. 
Behind him, abruptly, Claude 
Mathews screamed— and screamed 
again. 

Marvin didn't look back It was 
over now. Nothing made any difference. If the knife he had just 
used struck him in the hack it 
would bring him happy oblivion. 
If Claude Mathews died, and they 
arrested him for the murder, it 
didn't matter. 

He was not stopped. He walked 
calmly out the door, unaware 
even that he had dropped the 
paring knife. 

"Want a good time, darling?" a 
rather pretty girl askod. She 
looked into his eyes, then shrank 
away. 

Marvin watched her move on. 
A man was coming up the street, 
8 hit unsteadily. She hesitated, 
then moved toward him. The man 
stopped. They exchanged a few 
words. Then the man slipped his 
arm around the girl's waist Together they walked back toward 
Marvin. 

When they passed, the girl was 
looking up at the man, smiling. 
She didn't glance toward Marvin. 

It had been one of the spacemen. He had been crooning something to the girl . . . "We lift at 
dawn." 

The song, old as space. 

We lift at dawn. Soon we'll be 
iionc. Good bye, my lover, good 
bye. 



"Gods of Space!" a voice said 
behind Marvin. "He's standing 
right outsider 

He started to turn. Men in L.P. 
uniforms and crash helmets 
moved swiftly to surround him. 

His only reaction was a wave 
of gratitude. 

When he hud emerged from 
that door he had had no idea what 
to do, where to go. There was 
nothing, anywhere, to draw him. 

Now there was purpose. Maybe 
not his purpose, but something 
to carry him along so he wouldn't 
have to think of anything. 

"What're we gonna do with 
him?" one of them said. "He's a 
hot potato. Why didn't he have 
sense enough to lam?" 

"Let's get him out of here before the polio' get here," another 
said urgently. "Oil, go hack in and 
pass the word around that nobody 
saw nothin*." 

"Let's get him on the ship," 
someone said. "The cops can't 
find him there. Last place they'd 
think of, on the ship." 

Marvin let himself be moved 
along. 

He caught a fleeting glimpse of 
the little fat man looking at him 
OwUshly through his thick lensed 
glasses. Tin? happy dreams man. 

He was pushed into a car that 
jerked into motion a moment 
later. In the distance he heard the 
moan of sirens. After a few blocks 
one passed by. rising to a peak of 



Ground Leave Incident 



deafening sound and dwindling 
away. 

He felt the car make several 
turns, then lurch up onto something ami stop. He felt the car 
dropping swiftly and knew he was 
on an elevator. He knew where he 
was— in the dock area, dropping 
down into the underground tubes 
leading out into the spaceport. 

He had never been on a spaceship but he knew that they settled 
with exact precision so that their 
elevator shafts could connect to 
the subway elevator shafts. 

In a few moments the car got 
into motion again. Then there was 
a fast lift upward. Up up up. 
higher than he had ever gone in 
an elevator. 

Suddenly the very atmosphere 
around him seemed different, 
alien. 

The car stopped rising. The car 
doors opened. He was pushed out 
gently but firmly. 

"Let's stick him in J room," one 
of the L.P.'s said. 

Marvin went along without 
protest. 

He lifted his feet over a hatchway and was in a room with four 
of the strange, bulky tonus that 
he had seen in pictures, and 
which were called crash boxes. 
There were also several conventional chairs, welded to the floor. 

"Sit down," he was told. 

He sat down. 

Two of the landside policemen 
stayed with Marvin. The others 



went away, Marvin closed his 
eyes and leaned back. His body 
tingled with fatigue. His mind 
floated in pools of darkness where 
the past and the future did not intrude. 

After a while he was listening 
to the conversation of the two 
L.P.S. Not what they talked 
about, but the words, their voices. 
Their accent was subtly different, 
the tempo of speech more rapid 
than he was used to. 

Twice during the long wait the 
phone on the wall shrilled and 
one of the L.P.'s answered it. Marvin opened his eyes and watched, 
and knew the conversation was 
about him. 

At last the wait was over. A 
man in the uniform of a spaceolficer came in. Marvin knew 
nothing about the meanings of 
the insignia on the uniform, 
whether the man was the ship's 
captain or some minor officer. He 
dismissed the L.P.'s and closed the 
door. 

He was lean faced with a strong 
chin. His hair was iron gray. Marvin felt a liking for him. 

"I'm Dr. Cavendish," the man 
said abruptly. 

"I'm Marvin Lake." 

"One name is as good as another," Dr. Cavendish said with 
a twisted smile. 

"Oh, but it isl" Marvin said. 

"If you say so," Dr. Cavendish 
said. "Have you ever been in 
space?" 



52 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



"No. I've never even been on a 
ship until now." 

Dr. Cavendish smiled. "It probably seems as strange to you then 
as Jeffries' Planet seems to me. 
What do yon do for a living?'' 

"I have a diamond mine." 

"Oh? How many work with you 
in the mine?" 

"I work it by myself. You see, 
the clay deposits arc like long 
fingers sticking deep in the 
ground. We call them pipestems. 
They go down at very steep angles 
and are never more than six or 
eight feet in diameter, and usually 
about four feet. One man is all 
that can work comfortably. Besides, it's against the law to make 
a crew operation out of a mine. 
Inspectors make regular visits to 
make sure we clean the pipestem 
as we go down and don't let the 
cheap stuff go to waste." 

"Cheap stuff?" 

"The grains that assay under a 
tenth of a karat." 

Dr. Cavendish nodded. "I see," 
he said. "You work alone then, 
day after day." 

"That's right." 

"What do you think about 
while you're working alone, day 
after day?" 

"Oh, I don't know," Marvin 
said. "I have a lot of interests. 
But mainly, when you're working, 
you have to concentrate on what 
you're doing." 

"But you do think about things, 
at times?" Dr. Cavendish said. 



"Oh, sure." 

"Like your wife being homo 
alone, and a spaceship in, with 
the crew on ground leave?" 

"So that's your line," Marvin 
said. "Look." He took a deep 
breath. "Let's get something 
straight. I did something. I don't 
regret it. I'm ready to take my 
punishment. Is that good enough 
for you?" 

"But you haven't done anything," Dr. Cavendish said quietly. 
"That's the point. Yott Jiavcn't 
done anything." 

Man-in blinked at the ship's 
officer. "What do you mean?" he 
asked with a sinking feeling. "Are 
you trying to tell me I missed?" 
He leaped to his feet. "Where is 
he?" he said. "I'll get him—" 

"Listen to me," Dr. Cavendish 
said firmly. "Two members of our 
crew had a knife fight in a landside card room. You, as one of 
the hundred or so spectators of 
that fight, saw it. You projected 
yourself into the fight, in your 
imagination, and imagined you 
were one of the two men." 

Marvin stared at the man unbelievingly. 

"It's not a serious mental < ondition," Dr. Cavendish went on. 
"It's well known that for every 
crime there are usually two or 
three people who come in and 
confess to it. It has to do with 
the urge to be somebody. Such 
confessions have to be checked 



Ground Leave Incident 



53 



against the lads. . , . Wo have 
witnesses, several dozen of them 
in fact, willing to swear to the fact 
that the fight occurred between 
two members of our crew." 

Dr. Cavendish leaned forward. 
"Don't you sec what your story, 
if told to the police, could do to 
us? You would charge that one of 
our crew went out into the countryside and attacked a citizen of 
Jeffries' Planet. Our ship would 
be grounded for weeks. If the 
courts of this planet believed your 
testimony—and I doubt that they 
would without your wife's testimony and a doctor's examination, 
and probably not even then— the 
most Claude Mathews could get 
would be two years in your local 
fail. That would be mild punishment compared to the damage 
that has already been done to 
him. On the other hand, it would 
cost us a lot of money and wreck 
our schedu le. Other planets on 
our route—" 

"Did I cut him, then?" Marvin 
interrupted. 

"The crew member who knifed 
him did a very thorough job. He 
will live, hut lie would be much 
better off dead. 1 am not tlx 1 one 
lo say if lie deserved what he 
got— there have been reports that 
he talked a pretty dirty game, 
only no one believed it was more 
than talk. However, that's beside 
the point. We intend to lift on 
schedule at dawn and deal with 
the matter in our own way in 



space. I would suggest you forget 
the whole tiling. What could you 
do? Do you want your wife on 
the witness stand?" 

"My wife is dead," Marvin said 
quietly. 

"I'm sorry," Dr. Cavendish said. 
Fie looked away, uncomfortably. 
"But that still doesn't change the 
picture." He stood up. "I understand now. I wish there were 
something I could do for you. All 
I can do is say, go home. Let time 
bring forgetfulness, as it will." 

The doctor went to the door 
and opened it. 

"Take this man grounds do," he 
said. "Escort him to wherever his 
car is. See that he starts for home. 
And hurry back— We're at zero 
minus two hours right now." 

Marvin fished in his pocket for 
the claJmcheck— the check he had 
been sure he would never be 
using. The L.P.'s helped him get 
into his suit, shook hands with 
him, and watched while he went 
to the airlock. 

He could, he knew, wait outside until they had gone, then 
come back in. But what was there 
for him inside the city? What was 
there anywhere, for that matter? 

But yes, there was something. 
Out across Paxton Hill, down in 
Tedrow Valley, fifty yards from 
bubble seven. A dark pool was 
waiting for him, and he was ready 
for it now. 

A dark pool, little different than 



54 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



the surrounding darkness except 
that it reflected (he stars. And 
when it had welcomed him it 
would ripple sluggishly, then become smooth again. 

When he was well up Paxton 
Hill he stopped the truck and 
looked back. The city at night 
captured a strange sort of beauty, 
its transparent flat ceiling and 
dark outer wall making it appear 
to be a cauldron of molten fire 
in the night, as the lights of the 
city escaped upward into the 
darkness. 

And the ship. There were lights 
on it. Red, blue, and green riding 
lights. Luminous discs of white 
that were portholes. Behind which 
ones was the room he had been 
in? 

He felt a tinge of regret that 
his life was over. Some day he 
would have liked to have taken 
a trip somewhere out among the 
stars. With Thelma. 

He started the truck again, and 
went on around Paxton Hill without looking back again, and down 
the long grade into Tedrow 
Valley. 

Overhead in the indigo night 
sky stars shone feebly. In the 
close confines of the truck cab 
the high pitched whine of the 
turbines was lulling, peaceful. 

Strange, how peaceful it was 
when life was over. 

Bubble seven loomed in the 
light from the headlights all too 
soon. 



He glanced at his watch. Zero 
minus forty-five minutes for the 
ship. Should he wail? Should he 
watch it soar into the morning 
sky, as _ he and Thelma had 
watched similar ships before? 

No. 

That was for the living. 

He opened the cab door and 
stepped out onto the ground. Unconsciously, he had parked where 
he always parked. The airlock 
was only a few feet away. 

The house was dark. Marvin 
turned away from it with a sob of 
torment. He should not have 
looked at it. lie would not look 
at it again. 

He walked out into the darkness toward the pool, the largest 
and deepest of the three. It would 
be the one Thelma bad chosen. 

He reached up and fumbled 
at the release clamp of bis faceplate. 

He was calm now. He would 
open up his faceplate. He would 
take several deep breaths of the 
natural atmosphere of Jeffries' 
Planet. It was supposed to have 
an opiate ('(rcct thai would deaden, 
the pain to come later. 

He stilled the panic within him 
and stiffened his fingers for the 
final act. 

And a sound broke into his consciousness. 

The shrill, strident ringing of 
the phone in his truck. 

His first reaction was anger. 



Ground Leave Incident 



55 



Who would be calling at a time 
like this? To release his faceplate, 
to breathe in the lethal atmosphere of the planet, to dive into 
the depths of the dark poo], with 
the sound of a phone ringing. . . ! 

He made a strange sound, a 
mixture of a sob and a snort. Then 
lie ran to the truck, stumbling 
and sprawling halfway there, and 
picking himself up again and running on. 

He jerked the hand mike off 
its hook and said, "Hello!" 

"Is that you, Marvin? My lands, 
where have you been? I've been 
trying to reach you for hours!" 

It was the voice of his motherin-law. 

"What do you want?*' he said 
dully. 

"What do I want?* she said. 
"That's a fine question for you to 
ask. Don't you even care about 
your wife? I suppose when you 
got home and found out she was 
over here you vyent into town and 
got in a card game or something. 
A lot you cure that she's sick, 
and going to have a baby." 

"What?" Marvin croaked. 

"Sure," Thelma's mother said 
smugly. "She got sick this afternoon and called me, and we came 
over there and got her and 
brought her home with us, and 
then called the doctor." 

Marvin sagged against the seat. 

"What have you been doing?' 
the voice went on. "Didn't you get 
her note? I saw her tape it to the 



inner door of the airlock myself. 
Maybe it Ml off." 

"The baby—" Marvin croaked. 

Two months along, and doing 
fine. Thchna slipped and fell thi.s 
noon, and felt dizzy afterwards. 
It made bar afraid . . ." 

The words droned on and on, 
but Marvin was no longer listening. 

Thelma had decided to live. 
She was going to have a baby. 

And for the baby, for him, for 
herself, Thelma had decided to 
live, to fight for what she held 
dear, to protect him from the 
knowledge of what had happened. 

". . . and she can't sleep. If you 
don't get over here right away, 
you no good fool . . ." 

Dear, wonderful mother-in-law. 

"Okay," Marvin said, laughing 
and crying. "Okay, I'll come right 
away. You're right. I'm a fool. I 
was in town— gambling. I 'II be 
right there. And mother-inlaw . . ." 

"What is it, you nddlc-patcd 
son-in-law?" 

"Did I ever tell you I love you?" 

"Go on, now," the shrill voice 
snorted. 

The carrier tone ended. She 
had hung up. 

Marvin started to get into the 
truck, glanced toward the airlock, 
hesitated, then went over to it. 
There was no note stuck to the 
inner door, but after a moment 
he saw it inside the bubble on the 



56 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



ground, vague in the semi-darkness. 

He stepped into the airlock 
and closed the door. He waited 
impatiently for the air to clear, 
then opened the inner door and 
picked up the envelope. It was 
grimy with oily dirt where he 
had stepped on it again and again 
in his blind torment an eternity 
ago. He opened it with great tenderness. 

"Darling," it read. "Mama and 

papa have come to get me. I took 

sick and didn't want to worry you. 

Fix your dinner and I will call 

you or have mama call you later. 

Love, Thelma." 

Cautiously worded. He could 

see her as she wrote it. Brave, pro; tecting him, not sure whether the 

baby would live or die after what 

had happened . . . 
! He could do nothing but be 

equally brave. She would never 
\ know that he knew, never know 

what he had done. 
He went back outside. 



Suddenly Paxton Hill took on 
faint detail, and with it the valley 
around Marvin. One of the twin 
suns was shooting into sight. Alpha, from its color. 

And then came the thunder. 
It grew deeper, more steady. 

Marvin looked up over Paxton 
Hill into the purpling morning 
sky. In a moment the ship rose 
into sight. 

A needle shape gleaming in the 
rays of the suns, riding upward 
with gathering momentum on a 
tail of fire. 

It grew smaller and smaller, 
and then he lost it. 

Out into the void. Out among 
the stars. Keeping to its schedule. 
Connecting the worlds of man, 
itself a small world, peopled with 
men who had found their souls— 
or lost them. 

Marvin turned. A few feet away 
was his truck, the door standing 
open. 

Without hesitation, he went to 
it and got in. 



HELP . . . 

Because of the recent upheaval in newsstand distribution, many dealers 
are not being adequately supplied with copies of VENTURE SCIENCE 
FICTION. 

If your dealer does not have it, you will be doing a real service for us— 
for the dealers—and perhaps for yourself, if you will send us his name and 
address. We will make sure that your dealer will be kept supplied in the 
future. Write to: 

Newsdealer Service 
VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 
527 Madison Avenue, New York 22, N. Y. 



ON HAND: A Book 



by THEODORE STURGEON 




As I UUPOHTED IN THE LAST ISSUE, 

the ramifications of the anthology A DEFIANCE OF TIME, its pUT
posc and its reasons for being, 
crowded the tabular Offhand 
from the issue. I restore the balance herewith, adding joyfully 
that something on the anthology 
is already "on hand." It happens 
that the gap between the appearance of one issue of Venture and 
the closing date for the next one 
is a small one indeed; yet already 
nominations are coming in, and I 
Couldn't be more pleased. Come 

Offhand


on in: send me the titles of s f 
stories which, in your most carefully considered opinion, are deserving of a permanent place iu 
English literature, judged by the 
highest standards which can be 
applied to any fiction. I want particularly those stories which are 
uniquely the product of what is 
called the science fiction field, 
preferably by authors who have 
produced in and for that field. We 
are going to prove that the greatest science fiction is as great as 
the greatest anywhere. 



BOOK TYPE and TIME BUY IT


Rogue in Space 
Fredric Brown 
Bantam A1701/1 
163 pp 35c 


Novel, 
future 


—if your dish is ding-dong action on the superman 
theme. But don't expect plotting as in a Brown whodunit, uniqueness as in what mad universe, or hilarity as in mak riANS go home. 


Those Idiots From 

Earth 
Richard Wilson 
Ballainine 237 
160 pp 35c 


Collection, 
10 stories 


—for perplexity. Good ideas shouldn't be as poorly 
written as Hostess and The Inhabited, Poor ideas arc 
seldom as well done as Honor and Love. But It's 
Cold Outside is worth 10 times the price, so buy iu 


The City and 

the Stan 
Arthur C. Clarke 
Signet S 1464 
191 pp 35* 


Novel, 
far future 


—and be glad, for it has much of die sweep and size 
of early s f epics. There's a hollowness, though, that 
flings Clarke this challenge: just once, write a novel 
with three characters and do them in depth. 



57 



58 VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



BOOK 


TYPE and TIME 


BUY IT

Seven Footprints 

to Satan 
A. Mcn-itt 
Avon T-208 
187 pp 35* 


Novel, 

contemporary 
(dated) 


—for a tremendous good time. Corny, colorful, unabashedly unbelievable, this reissue has the rich taste 
of Rider Haggard. Don't miss this hypnotic hokum; 
you'll love it! 


The Best from 
Fantasy and Science 
fiction, 7th Series 

Ed. Anthony Boucher 

Doubled ay 

264 pp $3.75 


Amhology, 
15 stories, 3 poems, 1 immortal 
gagline. 


—with your carfare; slay home with it. The dingerman might well be the best short I've ever read. The 
rest cover a wide spectrum from quips to classics, 
deft to stark. 


Satellite! 

E. Bcrgaust, W. Belief 
Bantam A 1765 
176 pp 35* 


N on -fiction. 
Intro by Oberlh. 


—for it's a contemporary necessity to separate fact 
from foolishness. A sound though occasionally stodgy 
revue of the whole satellite area, Needs index. Better 
grab it 


Fancies and Good
nights i 
John Collier 
Bantam R 1703 
375 pp 50* 


Collection 

50 (I said fifty) 

stories 


—twice, one to read, one to hug. A huge and unalloyed 
delight. Refreshing, amusing, chilling, challenging, 
puzzling qualities in various combinations. A reissue, 
and be grateful. 


The Planet Explorer 
Murray Lcinster 
Avon T-202 
171 pp 35* 


Collection 
4 novellas 


—if you like unusual sci-spcculativc problems and 
don't mind the certainty of their solution : suspense is 
never 'if'; only 'how.* Gnome Press edition was 

COLONIAL SURVEY. 


The Variable Man 
and Other Stories 
Philip K.. Diet 
Acc D-261 
255 pp 35* 


Collection 
5 long stories 


—for Second Variety, a marvellous concept handled 
with vividness and economy. The others, excellent to 
good. The title story, killed dead by clumsiness. 


Spacewayx Satellite 

Charles Eric Maine 

Avalon 

H.% pp $2.75 


Novel, 

Contemporary 


—for an engrossing study of a launching and it* 
launchers. Excellent plotting. Style flat, unimaginative, 
right in character of narrator. 


Atlas Shrugged 
Ayn Rand 
Random House 
1168 pp $6.95 


Novel, 
near future 


-for a stupefying study of some people who have 
speech organs and sex organs-between which they 
interminably oscillate-but no pores; the whole keyed 
on the fallacy that only Njctzche could really run 
the N.A.M. 


Doomsday Morning 
C. L. Moore 
Doubled ay 
316 pp $2.95 


Novel 
Near future 


-because it's excellent on all counts. Special excellences: sensitive, exhaustive knowledge of stage techniques: wonderful feel for nature environments. 


Year 2108 
James Blish 
Avon T-193 
159 pp 35* 


Novel 
Near future 


— end you'll own some "pure" sf. Fine extrapolation of both scientific and sociological themes, 
nicely orchestrated. Appendix charts future history, 
and relation of this book to Earihman, Come Home. 


Occam's Razor 
David Duncan 
Ballantine 230 
165 pp 35* 


Novel 
Near future 


— Without wail. Well told, tense and compassionate 
novel turning around the fascinating phenomena of 
minimal surfaces. Particularly enjoyed Staghorn, 


Solomon's Stone 
L. S. ileCamp 
Aval on 
224 pp $2.75 


Novel 

Fantasy 

Contemporary 


— if swordplay and enchantments are your dish. Typical deCamp humor in a narrative which abides by 
its rules, if one of the rules is that anything can 
happen. 



On Hand: A Book 59 



BOOK TYPE and TIME BUY IT— 



Troubled Star 
Geo. O. Smith 
Aval on 
224 pp $2.75 


Novel 

Contemporary 


— if you can i Ac a strange mixture of juvenile with 
gin, satire and space chase. Good sequence: tyro 
piloting unfamiliar alien starship directed by talkdown on TV. 


Pawn of Time 
Robin Carson 
Holt 

442 pp $4.95 


Novel 

Renaissance 


— and be glad. A big, brawling, lusty, serious job, 
excellently, sometimes beautifully written. 2fllh 
century man thrown back to 16th, Italy. Wonderful 
perspective on us, memorable characterizations. 


Rvvkvis Through 

Spa cp 
L. del Rey 
Winston, 8x10 in. 
118 pp $3.95 


Non-fiction 


—for yourself, pretending it's a youngster's gift. 
But don't give It Buy him another. As so frequently 
with Winston — and del Rey — the kids are getting 
a solid education while us know-it-alls aren't looking. 
Fine illos by Heugh. 


Tomorrow Plus X 
Wilson Tucker 
Avon 
1S8 pp 354 


Novel 

Near future 


-and you've bought an exciting few hours. This is 
the retitled paperbacked Rinehart time, bomb, a 
frightening conjecture on the encroachment of 
jingoism in America and a sober estimate of the 
price of avoiding it. As narrative it is cohesive and 
brisk. A good fob. 


Twice in Time 
Manly Wade Wellman 
Avalon 
222 pp 52.75 


Novel, contemporary and then 
Renaissance 
Italy 


-a muddle-headed swashbuckler suggesting yet 
again that you-know-who was a transplanted 
modern. 



BOOKENDS 
AND BULLETS 



. , . a Warm nod to Avalon. 
These uniformly bound, lowpriced hard-covers are aimed at 
library shelves and as such are undoubtedly the first s f encountered 
by many readers. Time was when 
we shuddered to think of some of 
their earlier titles representing the 
field to anyone. But with recent releases such as wasp and spaceways 

SATELLITE and TROUBLED STAR, 

we feel much better. ... I notice 
Signet, in endpaper ads, listing Orwell's 1984 as science fiction. Well 

it's high dammit time Don't let 

satellites' red glare blind you to 
scientific developments that will 
really change the face of the earth. 



Consider the words thermionic 
converter and say you read them 
bcafe first . . . Hey have you beard 
about THE LIBRARY OF SCIENCE? This book club is for you. 
More on that anon, fully . . . 
They ail said the atom bomb 
would vastly stimulate s f and it 
didn't. Now they say Sputnik will 
—and it will. Reason: The general 
public wasn't aware there were 
atom bombs in s f. But it's convinced there's nothing else in s f 
but space flight. . . . The wistful 
voice of ignorance triumphant: a 
Boston newscaster, the day after 
the first Sputnik launching, announcing that our Vanguard will 
go around much faster. — THS— 



FLEEGL OF FLEEGL 



by GORDON R, D/CKSON 

Fleegl was a rabbity-looking sort, with four arms, 

a force field, and a conviction that people were demented. 

He also had an extraordinary space tube, a missionary's zeal, 

and a regrettable resistance to fission bombs and reason. . . . 



James Godow woke up just in 
time to see it happen. His alarm 
clock had just gone off in the bedroom of the small house he had 
inherited from his aunt Martha. 
The four blue-and-green flowered 
wallpapered walls were all about 
him — and then suddenly they 
weren't. That is to say, two of 
them still were, but the other two 
had been cut off by what appeared to be a wall of thick, misty 
glass extending through both floor 
and ceiling. 

Jim did not react immediately. 
Instead, he lay cautiously still, 
gazing at the misty wall and turning over in his mind all die tilings 
that could cause him to experience such an hallucination. 
Nerves? Incipient insanity? Degeneration of the optic nerve? After several minutes had passed 
and the wall was still there, he 
stretched out a slow hand and 
touched it where it passed close 
to his bed. It was quite solid. 
Solid as steel, 



After thinking this over, he got 
out of bed and looked out the one 
window that had been left to 
him. What he saw was a continuation of the white wall, reaching 
up into a dome to enclose the 
unfeneed back yards of three 
other houses at his end of the 
block and portions of the houses 
themselves. 

As he watched, a bedroom window of the amputated house-portion directly opposite was pushed 
up, and the oval-shaped face of 
a girl with somewhat rumpled 
blond hair emerged to stare right, 
left and center, finally focusing 
on something which in the general excitement had escaped Jim's 
attention. It was a large, metalliclooking cube, some eight feet on a 
side, sitting in the center of (he 
four yards. It gave no sign of 
life. From this, she looked around 
the enclosed area again, and spotted Jim, hanging out his window. 
Jim felt that it was time to enter 
into communication. 



60 



Fleegl of Fleegl 



61 



What is it?" he yelled across 
at her. 

"I don't knowl" she called back. 
"Don't you?" 
"Nol" 

"It must be something!" 

There was a slight pause. 

"Tell you what!" shouted Jim. 
"I'll get dressed and. meet you in 
the hack yard in a few minutes. 
Til have to come out the window. 
I'm walled off in my bedroom 
here!" 

"Me, too!" she answered. "It's 
right across my bedroom door. 
I'll get dressed, too, and— oh!" 
Apparently just realizing the implications of her last statement, 
her head popped back out of 
sight through her window. Jim 
pulled his own head in and went 
in search of clothes. 

Half the dresser and all of his 
closet was available to him. He 
was equipped with everything but 
shirts, which he kept in the closet 
of the spare bedroom. He compromised on slacks and a clean 
t-shirt, and crawled out the window. 

The girl was already out in the 
back yard by the metallic cube. 
She was dressed in slacks and a 
light summer blouse. With her 
was a neighbor boy of about 
twelve in a boy scout uniform; 
and a heavy man in his sixties, 
wearing pajamas and a purplewool dressing gown, whom Jim 
recognized as Mr. Harvey Bolster 
of the segment of the large house 



the back of which was diagonally 
opposite his own. 

. . get a pry-bar," Bolster was 
saying excitedly, waving his arms 
in outrage. "Break it open. Smash 
the machine inside!" 

"Maybe there isn't any machine," saM the boy scout, happily. "Maybe the box just resonates a signal beamed in from 
somewhere else, and makes the 
force-field that way." 

"Resonates!" exploded Bolster, 
glaring at the boy. "Force-field 1" 

"Sure. Just like—" 

"Be quiet, boy!" 

"Youll see," said the boy scout. 
He went over to examine the surface of the cube closely. 

"Uh— hello," said Jim. The girl 
and Bolster looked over at him. 
"I'm Jim Godow. I just moved 
into Mrs. Lee's house last month. 
She was my aunt. . . . You're Mr. 
Bolster, aren't you?" 

"How d'y'do. Harvey Bolster, 
yes." The two men shook hands. 
"You know Jennie Coram, here? 
Miss Coram, Mr.— uh." 

"Jiin Godow." 

"Hi," she SHid. "The neighborhood's been talking about you. 
You write Christmas cards, don't 
you?" 

"All sorts of greeting card 
verse," said Jim. 

"That must be fascinating." 

"The point is," broke in Harvey, 
"what're we going to do? Here 
we are, cut off, in my case without even a pair of slippers—" 



62 



VSNTUBI BGDENGK FicnON 



"It's opening," said the boy 
scout. 

They all went over to the cube, 
which was beginning to crack 
down on one side. 

"Hi," said Jim to the boy scout. 
"I'm Jim Godow. Who're you?" 

"Rodney Wasla," said the boy 
scout. "We better stand back. The 
extra-terrestrial atmosphere from 
the interior of the ship may be 
poisonous to humans." 

"Oh, nonsense!" snapped Harvey. "What I think is-** 

The cube opened up suddenly, 
revealing what appeared to be a 
small, square room crammed with 
instruments. A large, rabbit-like 
creature with long drooping ears 
and four anus came out, waving 
its hands at them. 

"All right, all right now," it said 
pettishly in a rather Vermont-like 
accent, "get back, don't be in the 
way." 

They retreated slightly. 

"Welcome to Earth," said Rodney Waslu. 

"What's that?" said the creature, 
focusing on Rodney. "Oh, Welcome. Thank you." It patted Rodney on the head. "That's a good 
boy." It produced sometluug like 
a large turnip from what appeared 
to be a natural pouch in the front 
of its body, and rammed the vegetable into the turf of a back yard 
—Jim's, as luck would have it. 

"I declare tin's planet planted in 
the name of Fleegl," the creature 
said. "I, Nugwik, being a duly 



, accredited planter of Fleegl on 
Fleegl. Good sproutingsl" It went 
back into the ship. 

"Well, of all the blasted nerve!" 
exploded Harvey. "Hey, you— 
Nugwik, or whatever your name 
is— come out here." 

"Now, now," said Nugwik, 
emerging from the culie's interior 
with his four arms full of miscellaneous gadgets of a metallic nature. "No time to gab. Particularly 
with criminal psychopaths. Stand 
back there while I get my spacetube started." 

"Gab!" roared Harvey. "Psychopaths! What're you talking 
about?" 

"Come, come," said Nugwik, 
beginning to put his gadgets together. "Nothing to be ashamed 
of. You're all paranoiacs here on 
Earth. But we'll cure you, just as 
soon as I can get the necessary 
equipment here from Fleegl on 
Fleegl. Insanity's completely unknown at Fleegl on Fleegl." 

"What—" Harvey was beginning to pop and froth again. Jim 
took him by the arm and led him 
away, beckoning to Jennie Coram 
to follow. When they were out of 
earshot of Rodney and Nugwik, 
Jim spoke again. 

"Let's not go off half-cocked," 
he said. "This thing looks like it's 
too big to be fiddled with. Let's 
sec if we can't get together and 
decide what's best to do." 

"Oh, yes," said Jennie. 

"Well," said Harvey, calming 



fleegl of Flcegl 



63 



down with an effort, "you may be 
right. It's just the infernal nerve 
of that— What do you suggest?" 

"Is there someplace we can 
talk?" asked Jim. 

"Not in my bedroom," said 
Harvey. 'There's less than a bed 
and an armchair left." 

"I'm in about the same condition," said Jim. "Er— Jennie?" 

"Oh, no!" she said quickly. "I 
haven't much more than the rest 
of you and it's all in a mess. But 
Rodney's got all his bedroom, and 
a bathroom, too, he says. Why 
don't we. . . ?" 

They adjourned to the segment 
of the Wasla house and compared 
notes. 

There was little they could tell 
each other— they'd all been asleep 
when the wall came. 

"We need help," said Jim. 

"Yes, but how do we get it?" 
demanded Harvey. "No blasted 
telephone. You can't see through 
that wall, let alone hear through 
it. I tell you something's got to 
be done! What's wrong with the 
police— and the fire department? 
They should have been here an 
hour ago, cutting their way in." 

'They can't," said Rodney, appearing at the window. He proceeded to climb into the room. 
"No power on Earth can break 
that barrier." 

"Who says so?" demanded Harvey. "That rabbit?" 

"The Fleeglian," explained Rodney. 



"I don't care whether he ileegls 
or floozies!" snapped Harvey. "He 
can't do this to us. Who does he 
think he is, anyway?" 

"He's a survey Flcegl," said 
Rodney. "He happened to be 
passing by this solar system, and, 
luckily for us—" 

"You've been talking to him," 
said Jim. 

"I just asked him where he 
came from." 

"Where?"' asked Jim. 

"Oh, he can't make us understand, we're too dumb," said Rodney. "Besides, we're all psychofats." 

"Psychopaths, Roddy," corrected Jenny. 

"Yes, and this place he comes 
from, it's an island called Fleegl. 
It's the only land on the planet 
Fleegl. He just happened to be 
passing by after many years on 
space duty and he saw at a glance 
that we were dangerous." 

"Why?" asked Jim. 

"On account of we're going to 
conquer Fleegl if he doesn't cure 
us. We hate Fleegl and all it 
stands for." 

"Never heard such nonsense in 
my life!" barked Harvey. "Is that 
all it is?" He got to his feet. "Let's 
go straighten him out." 

"Well, maybe . . said Jim, 
doubtfully. They all followed 
Harvey back out the window. He 
strode up to Nugwik. The Fleeglian had got his bits and pieces 
of equipment put together. From 



64 VENTURE sen 

somewhere inside them a shimmering cylinder rose up as they 
watched and passed through the 
top of the dome. Every so often 
Nugwik would do something to a 
control panel and the cylinder 
would appear to flow upward at 
an incredible rate. Then it would 
stop, and Nugwik would make 
another adjustment on his panel. 

"Hey!" said Harvey, tapping 
Nugwik between the shoulder 
blades. "Hey, youl None of us 
here're mad at FleegL Nobody 
ever heard of the place." 

"Yes, yes," murmured Nugwik 
absently, his gaze on the panel. 
"Run along, now." 

"Run along! Why, blast you— 
you run along!" Harvey purpled. 
"Pack up and get out. You've 
made a mistake." 

Nugwik stiffened and turned. 

"A mistake?" he said icily. 

"You heard me!" cried Harvey. 

"Barash!" exploded Nugwik, 
stabbing a finger suddenly at Harvey. He turned back to his panel, 
in an outraged tone muttering to 
himself something that, whatever 
it was, certainly was not English. 

Harvey continued to stand 
there. After a second, Jim nudged 
him. 

"Let's go back and talk this 
over some more," he whispered. 
"Back at Rodney's." 

Harvey turned about like a 
clockwork soldier and marched 
off toward the boy's house. He 
continued marching until he came 



Ma FICTION 

to the wall of the house. There he 
stopped. The other humans hurried after him. 

"Mr. Bolster!" said Jenny. "Are 
you all right?" 

Harvey jerked his head around 
and looked at her glassily. 

"All right?" he said. "Of course 
not. I'm wrong, all wrong." 

Jim and Jenny looked at each 
other. After a second, Jim turned 
to Harvey again. 

"Let's all get back inside," he 
said. Harvey obediently scrambled 
over the sill into Rodney's room, 
and the rest followed. Jim heard 
a continuous beeping sound coming from somewhere. 

"Sit down on the bed, Harvey," 
he told the older man, and turned 
about. "What's that noise?" 

"Oh, boy!" yelped Rodney, 
diving for a card table cluttered 
with junk. He scratched most of 
this aside and revealed a telegraph key, a sounder, and a couple of dry-cell batteries, all 
hooked together. 

Eagerly, Rodney began to 
manipulate the key. "It's my line 
to Jerry Burr, down the block," he 
said. "We're going to be ham operators—" he broke off suddenly, 
listening to a series of answering 
beeps. "Hey, that's somebody else 
talking! That can't be right." 

"Wrong. Dead wrong," said 
Harvey to himself, on the bed. 
"How could I be so wrong?" 

"He's a general, a real general!" 
cried Rodney, jittering in excite


b'leegl of Fleegt 



86 



ment. Busily, he began to send 
himself. The small telegraph buzzed back and forth and the minutes stretched on. 

"What's going on?"' Jim asked 
finally. 

"He's asking all about Nugwik," 
said Rodney, blissfully. "I'm telling him. He's listening, too. He's 
<m Air Force general from the air 
base at Leesville." 

"Perhaps I was hom to err," 
Harvey told himself. "When I 
think how wrong I've been, day 
after day, year after year. . . ." 

"Let me talk to him," said Jim. 

"Always wrong," muttered Har
"Just a minute— he wants to talk 
to you, or somebody grownup—" 
Rodney turned for the first time 
from the key to look at Jim. "Do 
you know code?" 

"Code? Oh— no, you'll have to 
send for me," said Jim. "Is the 
general listening? Ask him what 
we ought to do?" 

Rodney tapped his key, paused 
and listened. 

"He says," said Rodney. "Observe the alien carefully. Take 
notes on everything he does." 

"But what about us?" said Jim. 
"We want to get out. Tell him to 
break through this wall here and 
let us out." 

"He says they're working on it 
now. Meanwhile, he wants full 
data on the alien, and in particular on the space tube the alien is 
projecting. It's already a number 



of miles high. This alien may be 
a threat to the very existence of 
the United States. It is impimperative to discover his intentions and that of the government he represents. Repeat, it is 
imperative to discover his intentions." 

"How does he expect us to do 
that?" demanded Jim. "Am I supposed to just go ask him?" The 
set beeped. 

"Affirmative," said Rodney. 

"What?" said Jim. "Affirmative? 
Affirmative what?" 

The set ceased sounding. Rodney looked sadly up at Jim. 

"Don't you know that?" he said. 
"That's the way they say yes in 
the Air Force." 

"Oh," Jim looked at Harveyhe was shaking his head despairingly at his own reflection in a 
dresser mirror-and over at Jenny. "Well," he said. "I suppose . . ." 

Leaving the rest of them there, 
he climbed out over the window 
sill and went back out to Nugwik, 
who was still busily jacking up 
his space tube. 

The alien did not seem to be 
aware of Jim's approach, so Jim 
coughed a couple of times. '"Say," 
he said, when this produced no 
response, "can I ask you a question?" 

"Yes, yes," said Nugwik, "just a 
minute." He twiddled a couple of 
dials and straightened up. "Tiring," he said. "Very tiring." He 



66 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



turned around toward Jim and 
produced what looked like a small 
bunch of flowers from his body 
pouch. He sniffed them. "Ah, 
that's better." He put the flowers 
away, "And now for your question." 

"Why don't you just leave us 
alone?" said Jim. 

"And give you the chance to 
conquer and enslave Fleegl on 
Fleegl? Hah!" 

"But nobody here is mad at 
Fleegl on Fleegl. We never even 
knew there was such a place." 

"You would, shortly. What do 
you mean, not mad? You're all 
mad, here. If I ever saw a ipecies 
so unethical, carnivorous, given to 
delusions of persecution, bloodthirsty, hysteric—" 

"But-" 

"No interruptions, please," said 
Nugwik, sternly. "You are monsters — fortunately, rather stupid 
monsters . . . but monsters. Now, 
have you any other questions to 
ask, before I knock off for a sniff 
of nourishment?" 

"Yes," said Jim. "How come you 
speak English so well?" 

"Come nowl" said Nugwik, 
stiffly. "As if there were any trick 
to learning your simple dialect." 

"Well, look," said Jim. "If you'd 
just tell me something about this 
Fleegl of yours—" 

"Words," said Nugwik, "cannot 
possibly convey to you the essence, the grandeur of the islandwide Fleegl City on Fleegl Island 



on Fleegl. Why, it" I were to attempt to describe to you just 
Fleegl Hall on Fleegl Boulevard 
—I doubt very much you'd be 
able to take it. It would be too 
much. You would collapse." 

"Try me," offered Jim. 

"No," said Nugwik, shaking his 
head. "It would be too cruel." He 
turned away and reentered his 
cube. 

Jim went back to Rodney's 
room. Harvey was still on the bed 
and weeping softly as he explained to Jenny how he had been 
wrong-natured from the start. 
Rodney looked up from his telegraph set, as Jim climbed in over 
the window sill. 

"General Farber has a message 
for you," he said. "You're to tell 
Nugwik if he does not emerge 
from this protection of his and 
enter personally into negotiation 
with United States authorities, serious steps will be taken. You arc 
to tell him—" Rodney consulted a 
piece of paper— "that if he wishes 
to consider this as an ultimatum, 
he may do so. The deadline is two 
hours from now at 1300 hours. . . . 
And," wound up Rodney, "I'm 
hungry and my mother says you 
have to make Nugwik see that 1 
have something to eat" 

'Thanks," said Jim, dropping 
wcarilv down on a corner of the 
bed. 

"Oh, that's all right,* said Rodney, generously. 

"However," said Jim, seeing 



Fhegl of Fkegl 



67 



Jenny's eyes, too, upon Iiim, "Nugwik's gone inside his box to have 
his own lunch; and I can't get at 
him. As soon as he conies out III 
talk to him again. How's Harvey?" 

"He's not very happy," said Jenny. She patted the older man consolingly on the shoulder. "There, 
there, Mr. Bolster. You never were 
that bad." 

"Oh, yes I was," said Harvey, 
"I was worse, much worse. You 
don't know me like I do." He 
snuffled quietly into the pillow of 
Rodney's bed. 

"Can't you get Nugwik to 
change him back?" asked Jenny, 
turning to Jim. "He's such a problem this way." 

"Well," said Jim, doubtfully. "I 
hate to ask him for too many 
things at once. Let's just try out 
the food question first." 

"How long do you suppose before he comes out again?" 

"No way of telling," said Jim. 
He glanced again out the window. 
The cube was still closed up, 
looking as if it were east out of 
one piece of solid metal, and Rodney had left them again for another examination of it. From the 
bed a gentle snore apprised them 
that Harvey, worn out by his selfrecrimi nations, had dropped off to 
sleep. "We'll just have to wait," 
said Jim. He looked at Jenny and 
cleared his throat. "Funny situation, isn't it? I mean, meeting this 
way." 

"I've seen you lots of times," 



said Jenny. "Around your aunt's 
house. But you didn't seem to 
have too much to do with the 
neighbors." 

"Well, you see," said Jim. 
"When you work at home the way 
I do, it's awfully easy to get distracted from work you ought to 
get done. . . * 

They chatted in low voices 
while Harvey slumbered. Jenny, 
it turned out, was in her senior 
year at EXimbarton U. Her major 
was Education. She wanted to 
teach history. Jim had always 
Uked history . . . some day he 
intended to write an historical 
novel. Their first names both began with J. . . . 

"Nugwik s back out at work 
now," said Rodney, after an indeterminate time, appearing at 
the window. "And I'm hungry as 
heck." 

"Oh," said Jim, coming back to 
the realities of their present situation. "All right, I'll go ask him." 

"Be careful he doesn't get mad," 
said Jenny. 

"Yes," said Jim. He went out 
the window and approached Nugwik. The Fleeglian was happily at 
work, jacking up his space tube. 

"— er," said Jim. 

"Now whatr^ snapped Nugwik, 
his good nature vanishing in a 
flash. He turned about, his ears 
literally dragging on his shoulders. 

"Well, you've got us cut off here 
without any food—" began Jim. 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



B8 

Nugwik winced, but turned 
back to his panel and made some 
adjustments on it. 

"All right," he said. "Co get 
your—" he winced again, "sustenance." 

"Thanks," said Jim. Nugwik 
turned back to the panel. Jim 
hesitated. 

"Uh-" he said, after a second. 
"Just where do I go to get it?" 

Nugwik threw up all four 
hands and turned on him. 

"Where do you usually go?" he 
snapped. "To a refrigerator." 

"Refrigerator?* 

"His refrigerator!" Nugwik jabbed a finger at Rodney, and 
tinned back to work, muttering. 
Rodney turned and raced off toward his bedroom window. 

Jim continued to stand around, 
peering at the panel at which the 
Flceglian was working. There did 
not seem much to what Nugwik 
was doing. A twist of a rheostat, 
a glance at a dial, and the white 
column seemed to flow upward 
for a short period of time. 

"Well, what are you staring at 
now?" demanded Nugwik, without turning. 

"The— uh, space tube," said Jim. 

"Eighteen thousand miles out 
already," said Nugwik with satisfaction. "Propagation increases in 
ratio to the square of the established length. Won't take long 
now." 

"Fleegl isn't Mars, is it?" asked 
Jim. 



"Mars!" Nugwik snorted. "Are 
there any oceans on Mars?" 
"Venus?* 

"Certainly not. None of your 
scrubby little planets. For your information—much good itU do you 
—Fleegl is light-years from here. 
Hundreds of light years." He 
waved a hand absently at Jim. 
"Now, go seek your sustenance 
and leave me to my work here." 

Jim went back into Rodney's 
bedroom. There was nobody 
there. Going down the hall toward the bedroom, he discovered 
the wall had been extended in 
the form of a tunnel which led 
him to the kitchen of the Wasla 
house. Rodney, Jenny, and even 
Harvey were seated at the kitchen 
table, eating chicken sandwiches. 

"Coffee?" asked Jenny, getting 
up as Jim came in. 

"Thanks," said Jim. He looked 
around him. "Are we still walled 
in?" 

"You can't open the kitchen 
door," said Rodney, with his 
mouth full. "It's all white outside 
it, and the windows, too." 

Jim sat down at the table somewhat dispiritedly. Jenny brought 
him some coffee and a chicken 
sandwich. 

"What did he say?" asked Jenny. 

"He just said to go to the refrigerator here." 

"I mean," said Jenny, "to the 
general's ultimatum." 

"Oh, Lord," Jim said, getting to 
his feet. "I forgot to tell him." 



Fleegl of Fleegl 



98 



He went back out in the direction 
of the back yard; and returned in 
a few minutes, looking rather pale. 

"What did he say?" Jenny asked 
again. Jim sat down heavily at 
the kitchen table. 

"He said," reported Jim, "to let 
them drop their silly little fission 
bombs." 

He looked at them. Jenny and 
Rodney stared back at him. Harvey remarked that that was all 
right, he, Harvey, deserved it. 

"That does mean— atom bombs 
or H-bombs, doesn't it?" faltered 
Jenny. 

"I don't know what else it could 
mean." Jim perspired slightly. He 
cleared his throat and took a gulp 
of coffee. "Maybe I could find 
something to hit him over the 
bead with. I thought of that. But 
how would I find out how to turn 
off the wall?" 

"Couldn't you just experiment 
with the controls—" 

"If I could just get him out of 
the way for a while, I could try 
it." Jim bit thoughtfully into his 
sandwich. "Wait a minute— Harvey r 

"I'm sorry," whimpered Harvey. "I didn't mean to do it— whatever it was." 

"No, no," said Jim. "I was talking to Jenny. Jenny, you go tell 
Nugwik that Harvey's in some 
kind of coma. Say it's his fault. 
He won't believe you, but he 
ought to come just to make sure 
you're wrong. I'll hide in the bath


room, and after he goes by, I'll 
run out and see what I can manage to figure out with his controls." 

"But Harvey isn't in a coma," 
protested Jennie. 

"Ho will be," Jim said. He stood 
up, winced, murmured "Excuse 
me," and hit Harvey squarely on 
the jaw. Harvey collapsed. 

"Man!" said Rodney. "With one 
punchi" 

"It's not my muscles," explained 
Jim, modestly, "it's Harvey. He's 
agreeable to anything now, even 
to being knocked out. I figured 
on that." He turned to Jenny. 
"Hurry." 

Jenny went out hurriedly. Jim 
followed her ami hid in the bathroom. After a minute or two he 
heard the sound of double loutsteps pass his closed door, and 
the voice of Nugwik snorting— 
"Ridiculous!" 

He opened the door and pen cil 
out into the kitchen. He saw Harvey still obligingly being unconscious and everybody else bending 
over him. 

Jim hurried out through the 
bedroom into the backyard. The 
cube stood open before him. He 
entered it. 

There were only two panels of 
controls visible. On top of one o£ 
them was a small something like a 
tv screen, in which a miniature 
cube stood open in the middle of 
some back yards. 

"That's for driving it, I sup


70 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



pose," muttered Jim. He turned 
to the other panel. This was surmounted by a like screen, which 
was blank. BeJow.it were a couple 
of knobs like rheostats and a small 
keyboard, of which some of the 
keys were depressed. Jim hastily 
punched other keys at random 
and twiddled the knobs. A face 
like Nugwik's appeared in the 
screen. 

"Koji?" it said, staring at Jim. 
"Wun vark?" 

Jim hastily stabbed other buttons. The face disappeared, but 
blinked back on again a second 
later. 

"WojiP barked the face. 

"Sorry, I didn't mean to get 
you. Wrong numberl" stammered 
Jim, frantically poking buttons. 
The face in the screen flickered, 
but stayed put. 

"Lari, orri, Shkarri, sawri— 
sorry. Enjefli no. Paji? Poji. Sawri, 
I dindt min tawgt oo. Ah, chifleni!" Who you? What you are 
doing, calling from Fleegl number? Explain this, please." 

"Just a mistake," said Jim, hying wildly with the controls to 
erase it. 

"Kindly cease attempting to 
alter your wavelength," said the 
face sharply. "You are connected 
with Survey Headquarters, Aberrations Tracer Unit One. How 
does it come you are operating a 
Fleeglian communication device?" 

"Sorry, got to go now," said Jim. 
He slammed down both hands on 



all the keys at once, succeeding 
in blanking the screen, and 
sprinted for Rodney's house. He 
was just in time to duck into the 
bathroom before Nugwik passed, 
muttering angrily to himself. 

After Nugwik had gone, Jim 
came out and went back to the 
kitchen. The other tliree were 
still there, Harvey sitting up and 
looking something like his natural 
self. 

" 'Lo, M he grunted as Jim came 
in. "I'm fixed up now. How 'd you 
do?" 

"No good," said Jim. "All I 
could make work was his radio, 
or his telephone, or whatever it 
was." He told them what had happened. "How'd Nugwik fix you 
up?" he wound up, looking at 
Harvey. 

"Must be hynotism" said Harvey. "It's those eyes of his. He 
looked at me and said something." 

"Did he find out why you were 
unconscious? Uh— sorry about that 
punch, by the way." 

"No," said Harvey. "That's all 
right. Fortunes of war, Look, 
what 11 we do now? If the Air 
Force's actually going to bomb 
us—" 

"I think we better talk to that 
general again," said Jim. 

They went back to the bedroom 
and Rodney unlimbered the telegraph. As soon as he had the general on the wire, Jim dictated an 
account of the present situation 
and recent happenings. 



Flccgl of Fleegl 



71 



* . . what do you advise us to 
do?" he wound up. There was a 
short period of silence from the 
far end of the wire. 

"Sit tight for the moment," 
came back the answer. "You may 
hear from us in about fifteen minutes." 

They sat tight. About a dozen 
minutes later there was a small 
jar, like a minor earthquake, that 
rattled the hunting prints on Rodney's walls. 

"What happened?" asked Jenny, 
turning startled eyes on Jim. 

"I don't know," said Jim. "Call 
them back, Rodney, and ask 
what's going on." 

Rodney did. "They say, wait a 
minute," he reported. 

They waited. About ten minutes later, the telegraph began a 
plaintive beeping. Rodney hurried 
to it. 

"It's the general again," he said. 
"He says— we are finally in a position where our only hope is to 
appeal to you. Our most powerful weapon has been tried against 
the defense of the alien, with no 
effect. The alien's space tube now 
reaches hundreds of thousands of 
miles into space and continues to 
grow unchecked. Clearly the 
safety not only of the United 
States but the whole world is 
threatened. In this sad and fateful hour our only hope rests upon 
you four. We must appeal to you 
to make whatever effort lies 
within your power to put this 



creature or his apparatus out of 
commission. Whatever the cost 
or whatever the results may be, 
you must make this effort for the 
sake of every living creature upon 
the face of the globe. We can 
offer you no hope and no help, but 
our hearts aro with you. Goodby." 

The telegraph fell silent. They 
continued to sit in that same silence, for a long minute. 

"Well," muttered Harvey, at 
last. "That's all very touching. But 
what can we do?" 

"Take a chance at putting Nugwik out of action," said Jim. 
"That's all we cun do." 

"Easy enough to say it," said 
Harvey. 

"Well, there's just a chance," 
said Jim. "If the Fleeglians are as 
advanced as it seems, Nugwik 
may not be used to physical violence. We could sneak up on 
him—" 

"All he has to do is look us in 
the eye. And tlien what?" Harvey 
said. 

"I thought of that," answered 
Jim. "We put something over his 
head, see, and—" 

Shortly thereafter, armed with 
a couple of baseball bats, Rodney's lasso and a large brown 
paper shopping bag— all held out 
of sight behind their backs— the 
four of them emerged from the 
bedroom window and advanced 
on Nugwik, busy at his outside 
panel. 

"Go away! Go away!" snapped 



YUVTUHE SCIENCE FICTION 



Nugwik as they came up behind 
him. He continued to work without turning his head. "I can't get 
anything done when you're constantly interrupting me—" 

"Now!" yelled Jim. They all 
jumped him. Jenny jammed the 
shopping bag down over his head. 
Rodney hit the bag-enclosed head 
with a baseball bat. Jim and Harvey threw the lasso around him 
and began to wrap him up tight. 
Jenny, with the other baseball 
bat, dodged around making small 
attemptive swings that had to be 
checked at the final second for 
fear of disabling one of the men. 

Jim, Harvey and Nugwik rolled 
around on the grass in a tangle of 
arms and legs that eventually resolved itself into three parts. Jim 
and Harvey got puffily to their 
feet. Nugwik, trussed and papersacked, lay still on the ground, 
emitting muffled noises that were 
not, whatever else they were, 
words in English. 

"Whoopee!" yelped Rodney, 
dancing on the grass. 

"Are you all right?" said Jenny. 

"Fine," said Jim. "Harvey?" 

"Little short— breath— that's all," 
wheezed Harvey. "Now what?" 

"Well," said Jim, drawing a 
deep breath, "now we try to figure the wall.** 

"Oh, do you think we can?" 
said Jenny, gazing up into his 
eyes. 

"Er— no," said Jim, running an 
index finger around the inside col


lar of his t-shirt, which seemed 
to have shrunk somewhat. Jenny 
was a particularly pretty girl, he 
was realizing. "But we can try." 

"What if we don't?" said Harvey. 

"Then," said Jim, "we can always starve quietly, all of us, 
including Nugwik. That way nobody outside, at least, is any 
worse off." 

"Ought to give him a hit on the 
head right now," growled Harvey. 
"Settle his hash once and for—" 

"Certainly not! That would be 
barbarous!" snapped a new voice 
over their heads. Looking up, 
they discovered a new visitor 
floating down through the beam 
of the space tube. This was a tall 
thin man dressed in a cutaway 
coat and striped trousers. His face 
was thin and sensitive, his ears 
were large and he wore an enormous top hat. He was carrying 
a pencil and a notepad, and was 
making notes of some sort as he 
gently floated down to stand on 
the grass, lacing them. 

"Shocking situation!" said the 
newcomer. "Shocking. You 
shouldn't try to concentrate so 
hard." 

He gestured at Nugwik. "A/ash!" 
The rope and paper sack disappeared. Nugwik climbed to his 
feet somewhat glassy-eyed, and 
marched to the space tube. He 
rose up it out of sight. 

"Professor Johnson-Fleegl, at 
your service," said the top-hatted 



74 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



man, bowing to them all. He 
turned to Jim and took him confidentially by the elbow. "Come 
with me, my boy. w . 

He led Jim off into the shadow 
cast by the eaves of Jenny's house. 

"Listen—" began Jim. Professor 
johnson-Fleegl held up a hand. 

"Not a word,'* he said. "I insist. 
Let me be the first to congratulate 
you. I will he your best man— in 
fact, that's why I'm here " 

"Best man?" Jim stared at him. 
"Best man for what?" 

"Best man in your upcoming 
marriage to Jenny, of course," said 
Professor Johnson-Fleegl. "You 
young rascal, I know you've been 
secretly in love with her for some 
time. All those sonnets you wrote 
about her." 

"But I didn't write any sonnets 
about her!" 

"Come, come," said Professor 
Johnson - Fleegl. "Jenny knows 
nothing about it, of course, but 
you can't hide such things from 
a psychologist like myself. You 
were smitten with her the first 
time you saw her. but you didn't 
dare hope until last Monday 
when you happened to see her 
turning into the Alhambra theater, 
downtown. You sat in a seat two 
rows behind her all through the 
Alice in Wonderland feature. / 
saw you. I was seated two rows 
behind you." 

"I don't know what you're talking about!" cried Jim. 

"Tut-tut," said Professor John


son-Fleegl. "Let me remind you 
again that you're talking to a psychologist. It was in that show 
that you finally decided to let her 
know of your love, come what 
might. But you had no chance 
until all this happened. And 
now—" he clapped Jim on the 
back— "the prize is yours. And 
what a prize she is! Surely, the 
most wonderful, beautiful girl in 
the universe." 

"Well, I wouldn't say that," said 
Jim. "After all, there's Mar—" 

"Of course she is. A gem without a flaw— except perhaps the 
fact that during experiments she 
will try to concentrate too hard." 

"Experiments? You know, Professor, this is all becoming more 
and more like a dream. What experiments?" 

"Nothing that need concern 
you, my hoy. Although she has 
a great talent, a very great talent." 

"Uh— I see," said Jim. A very 
strange idea was burgeoning in 
his mind. He peered curiously at 
Professor Johnson-Fleegl. "Look," 
he said. "You're right. I admit it, 
being secretly in love with her. 
Now, I wonder if you'd do something for me." 

"Anytlung," beamed the Professor. "Anything." 

"I haven't bought her a ring 
yet, of course. I wonder if you'd 
go over and— kind of subtly, you 
know— try to find out just what 
she'd like in the way of an engagement ring. Would you?" 



Fleegl of Fleegl 



75 



"Of course!" said JohnsonPteegl, patting him on the back 
again. "Just leave it all to me." 
He went off. 

Jim threw a quick glance at the 
others. They were all— Harvey 
Rodney, and Jenny ~ clustered 
around the open cube, peering 
inside it. Everyone's back was 
turned. 

He turned about quickly, went 
down along the side of Jenny's 
house to her open window and 
hoisted himself inside, wriggling 
through and falling to the inner 
floor with something of a thump. 

He sat up and looked about 
him. He was in the midst of the 
perfumey clutter of a young girl's 
room. The footboard of the bed 
was just beside his head. He stood 
up and looked over it. 

Jenny, hair spread out on the 
pillow, was peacefully slumbering 
there, a happy smile on her lips. 

Jim glanced out the window. 
Jenny was also out there, engaged 
in earnest private conversation 
with the Professor. 

Jim swallowed. He went up to 
the head of the lied and stood 
over the sleeping Jenny. 

"Uh— " he said. "Jenny— er— 
wake up." 

She did not stir. Uncertainly, 
he reached out and nudged her 
shoulder, gently. She slept on. He 
thought for a moment, and nodded wisely. He cleared his tliroat 
rather desperately, leaned over, 
and kissed Jenny on the lips. 



She sighed ecstatically, stretched out slowly and happily under 
the blankets, and lazily opened 
her eyes. Slowly they focused on 
Jim, standing over her; and she 
smiled. 

Then suddenly her eyes flew 
wide open. She shot upright in 
the bed, clutching the covers protectively to her. And screamed. 

And that was the last Jim remembered for a while. 

He opened his eyes rather 
woozily. Professor Johnson-Fleegl, 
minus the top hat, was bending 
over him where he lay in some 
sort of bed. 

"How're you feeling?" asked 
the Professor. 

"Fine," said Jim. "Or am I?" 
He moved cautiously on the bed. 
Everything seemed to be working 
all right. 

"That's right," said the Professor. "There shouldn't be any il! 
effects. By the way, I'm Professor 
Alan Johnson— " 

"Johnson-Fleegl, isn't it?" said 
Jim, then checked himself. "What 
am 1 talking about? Of course 
Fleegl was all in her dream." 

"So you understand about that," 
said Johnson. 

"Some of it, I guess," said Jim. 
"Was it really real— or did we 
all just imagine it?" 

"It was real all right— the dome, 
the space tube and all," Johnson 
smiled down at him. I'm a psychology research fellow at the 



7G 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



University Foundation across the 
river. Jenny was one of my subjects in psi research. We knew she 
was a strong talent— but never 
how strong until today, When she 
was awake, she had a slight 
block . . 

"I know," said Jim, "she used 
to concentrate too hard." 

Johnson looked slightly surprised. 

"You and I are going to have 
to get together for some more 
talks," he said. "I'd like to hear 
more of what my dream counterpart told you about Jenny. Naturally, most of the dream was 
made up out of whole cloth." 

"Where did she get the name 
Klecgl?" 

"Fleegl Dry Cleaners," said 
Johnson. "It's the outfit her family sends laundry to. I don't 
know where she got the majority 
of her details about the place, 
but the effect of Alice in Wonderland was very apparent all the 
way through." 

*Tou were a sort of mad hatter," 
said Jim. 

"So I gathered. And a lot of 
the rest of it will undoubtedly 



turn out to be highly symbolic on 
a subconscious level." He paused 
and shook his head a little ruefully. "What a girll" 

"You can say that several dozen 
times," said Jim. "Hy the way, 
where's Jenny now?" 

"Jenny?" Johnson shook his 
head again. "I don't think you'll 
be seeing her again. I may not 
even see her again, myself. The 
army's got her under lock and 
key, now. You can imagine what 
an impenetrable dome like she 
threw up would be worth to them 
—as well as the other possible 
uses of her talent, after they get 
that symbolism under control." 
He looked down at Jim. "Why? 
You weren't actually in love with 
her, were you?" 

"Heaven forbid," said Jim. 

"Then it's just as well you won't 
be seeing her any more." 

"I'd say so," agreed Jim. He 
thought of the space tube probing thousands of miles into space, 
and he shivered again. "Somehow," lie said reflectively, "I've 
got the feeling I never would 
have been able to live up to her 
dreams." 



A WORLD NAMED MARY 



by ROBERT MARNER 

Bill and Merry found the planet, and it was beautiful. 

Which pleased Mary, but didn't surprise her— 
she was accuslomed to getting what she wanted. Then 
Bill named the planet afier her— and everything changed . . . 



The planet was small, bit the 
sky was blue, like Earth's. There 
were seas, forests, and very lugh 
mountains, snowcapped and beclouded. The; plains were deep 
with gently stirring grass, and ran 
down to bayous at the coasts of 
a shallow sea fed by a twisting 
river that split the plains. 

Bill and Mary's ship came 
whistling in out of the sky. It 
sailed on outstretched wings over 
the plains and across the ambercolored clarity of the river. It 
drifted lower past a stand of 
white-trunked trees, and touched 
down on a long level stretch of 
grass, coming in on lowered landing treads and rolling over the 
ground until Bill gave the forcjets 
one last kick and it stopped. 

Mary ran to the airlock and 
opened it. The green smell of the 
planet flooded away the oil and 
metal tang of the ship from their 
nostrils. Bill shut off all the 
switches, locked the controls, and 
came quickly over to Mary. 



She was framed in the center of 
the open hatch, one hand on each 
side of the frame. She was a lithe 
girl in whipcord shorts and a jersey top, and her arched nostrils 
quivered as she looked out at the 
planet. 

Bill squeezed in between Mary's 
right side and the hatch frame. 
He put his arm around her waist 
and nipped her earlobe between 
his teeth. He ran his hand up and 
down her outstretched right arm, 
and looked out over her shoulder. 

"Mere we are, Honey," he said. 
"I told you I'd find it." 

"Yes, here we are," she echoed. 

Bill ran his fingertips Over the 
side of her neck. "It's beautiful." 

"Yes. It's just the way Roy described it to me. . . . But he never 
landed," she added, "he just circled it long enough to get a navigational fix. Nobody's ever landed 
here. I'm going to be the first. We 
are, Bill." 

"Yes, Honey,' - he breathed in 
her ear. "And it is beautiful. Just 



7S 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



like you. Are you glad yn\i married me? I told you I had enough 
money saved up to buy a ship. 
Didn't I? And didn't I find this 
place?" 

Mary smiled fondly. "Yes, dear, 
of course I'm glad." She patted his 
hand. She took a quick breath. 
"Let's go down, the ladder. Let's 
go out." 

Bill let down the ladder, and 
Mary climbed down quickly. She 
jumped from the last run and 
stood ankle-deep in the grass, her 
hands on her hips, her head raised, 
looking out over the tops of the 
trees that looked like birches and 
staring at the white-dotted sky. 
There was a gentle south wind 
coming from the sea, and it ruffled 
her hair. 

Bill came down the ladder. He 
tried to put his arms around Mary, 
but she did not move her hands 
from her hips. She turned her head 
from side to side, looking at the 
plains, the river, and the distant 
mountains. 

Bill looked around restlessly. 
"There's nothing moving." 

There had been no ships in the 
ocean, and DO cities on the land. 
There were no game trails. There 
were no birds singing in the trees. 

"Of course not, Dear," Mary 
said patiently. "Roy told me it was 
uninhabited. By anything, as far 
as he could see." Her eyes shone. 
"A paradise," he said, "An untouched paradise, in a solar system no one knows about— a para


dise no one else may ever find, 
unless they get lost in hyperspace 
like Roy did, and happen to come 
out in just the right place." 

Bill said: "It could happen, you 
know, Honey. Or Roy may tell 
somebody else about it." 

"Some other girl?" she said 
quickly. "Is that what you mean?" 

"Well . . . he's a mail pilot— 
you know ... I mean, they get 
around a lot. . . ." 

"I ivasn't just any girl to Rotj. 
Have you got tfait straight? I 
wasn't just any girl." Mary had 
hold of Bill's arm. "He would have 
come back for me and brought me 
here. If I'd wanted to wait for 
him.*' 

Bill stroked her hand. "Yes, 
Dear. Of course," he apologized 
quickly. "I know that." He leaned 
forward to kiss her cheek. "I just 
happened to meet you before he 
had a chance to come back. And I 
was lucky enough to talk you into 
marrying me, instead of waiting 
for him." He rubbed his hand 
lightly across her shoulders. "I'm 
very happy with you. Arc you 
very happy with me?" 

Mary turned and moistened hex 
lips. She enfolded Bill quickly in 
her arms and kissed him. "Didn't 
you bring me here?" she murmured. 

Then she stepped back and 
said: "It's getting dark. I want a 
fire. I want to eat outside, here, 
on the grass." 

They went back into the ship to 



A World Named Mary 



79 



bring the food, and Bill made a 
fire with a broken packing case 
and some excelsior. They ate and 
sat watching the night fall. Bill 
listened for crickets, or the whirring of bats, as though it were 
twilight on Earth. 

It was a beautiful sunset, over 
the blazing snow of the mountains, but diere were no crickets. 

They sat for a long time. Finally there was nothing left of the 
twilight, and it was night. A huge 
star cluster began to rise in the 
sky behind the silhouetted trees. 
Bill reached into a pack and 
brought out a bottle of champagne. The cork popped. He 
turned to his bride. 

"Mary," he said, "this is the best 
part of my promise. I've been saving this up." He smiled shyly. "1 
hope you like it." He spilled some 
of the champagne on the ground. 
It sank into the grass roots and 
disappeared. "World, I christen 
thee Mary," he said. 

Mary got to her feet, her eyes 
shining. Bill filled a glass for each 
of them. "Mary, this is your 
world," he told her. "ItH always 
bear your name." He smiled in the 
same way, again. "I don't know if 
it's really mine to give. But I 
thought you might like that." 

"Oh, I do, Honey, I do," she 
breathed. 

They went to sleep in the ship. 
Bill awoke once and looked at 
Man-. She slept quietly, smiling. 



She spoke a name, in a low, loving voice. It was her own. 

They awoke again, together. 
The stars were like clouds of aluminum paint, here in the center 
of the galaxy. Though the planet 
had no moon, still the night was 
brighter than it had ever been on 
Earth. Bill got up and looked out 
through a viewport at the plain, 
which looked blue in the starlight, and the river, which was 
silvery with froth. The trees were 
bent toward the ship by the south 
wind, heaving the shoulders of 
their shadows. The grass was rippling like the river, flowing around 
the ship. 

"Bill! The river's too close." 

Mary stood beside him, clutching his shoulder. 

He looked at the silver froth 
again. It was flowing toward 
them, extending long semicircles 
of water over the low bank, running into the pressed tracks of the 
landing gear, running over the 
grass, touching the foot of the 
ladder. It bulged into a long hump 
that ran toward them very rapidly, sending arm-like runners of 
silver ahead of it, flooding the 
grass and shooting out to close 
around the ship. Bill stared across 
the river at the other bank. It 
rose a foot above the water there, 
a Hue of blue-black unbroken by 
silver. 

The wind, Bill-listen to the 
wind!" 



80 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



A cloud dashed across the sky. 
It crossed from his left hand to 
his right, rushing for the mountains. But the trees bent toward 
them. The landing gear and the 
ladder hummed. The ship rocked 
on its suspensions. A spray of 
water, like a veil, came in the airlock. The water was almost a foot 
deep around the ship, puddling 
for twenty yards all around them, 
bulging at the center, rounding 
out, but not spilling. The trees began to clash their branches, and 
bits of leaf hit the side of the 
ship. 

The plain began to hum with 
the wind in the long grass. It 
combed straight north, trembling 
at the tips. A hundred yards beyond the ship, the combing was 
parted and the grass rippled gently toward the mountains, toward 
the west. 

Mary drew in the ladder, and 
clamped the airlock shut. She was 
raying. 

Bill started the ship's engines. 
They coughed fire that sent swirls 
of water dancing on the surface of 
the water. The ship quivered and 
began to roll, splashing through 
the water, squashing the grass 
into the mud, crunching the little 
branches that the wind was breaking from the trees. Outside, the 
water piled up in waves, moving 
much more swiftly, submerging 
the landing gear treads. The ship 
became hard to control as Bill 
pushed the throttles forward, run


ning clear. A plume of silver 
turned to steam behind them in 
the starlight. 

Bill pulled the ship up. He saw 
the trees blow over, the wood of 
their snapped trunks shining til 
the starlight. He looked down at 
the water flowing back into the 
river, and aimed the ship back up 
into tlie sky. Mary was sobbing 
behind him. He had never heard 
her cry that way before— but then, 
he had never broken her heart. 

They hovered above the planet, 
the ship hanging on her burning 
jets, using up fuel. But Mary 
would not let them go on. 

"We have to go back. Bill," she 
said, holding his hand and looking at him from her deep-sunk 
eyes. 

"Mary, it doesn't want us," Bill 
said softly. "It wants to be left 
alone. Nothing's alive down there 
on its surface. It wants to keep its 
life to itself. There are only the 
seas and mountains, and the wind. 
Why do you want to go back?" 

"Because it's mine!" she cried. 
"We named it, remember? We 
named it for me, and it was beautiful. Even the river was beautiful 
as it came up to us." 

"Mary, we can't. We have to go 
on to someplace else." 

"Are you going to name another planet Mary? Or Second 
Mary, or Mary II, or what? Well?" 

"We didn't have any tight to 
name this one." 



A World Named Mary 



81 



"No right? Wliat do you mean, 
no right? We found it, didn't we?" 

"Ill find another planet," Bill 
promised. 

"That's M ary, down there," 
Mary said. "It's mine, and we're 
going back, and I'll make it give 
itself up to me" 

"All right," Bill sighed. 

He aimed the ship at the plain 
and the river, feeding power into 
the brake jets for the landing, 
throwing the mud of last night in 
all directions. It was dawn again 
on the small world, and the grass 
lay pulpy among the shattered 
trees. 

The wind began to blow again, 
but Mary opened the airlock and 
dropped the ladder into the soil of 
her planet. Bill didn't shut the engines off, but kept both banks of 
Jets idling, one cancelling the 
other. He sat at the controls, looking over his shoulder at Mary. 

She ran down the ladder and 
Out on the plain, the south wind 
flinging through her hair. Bill 
could hear her call. 

"Hello, Maryl" she cried out to 
the planet. 

The south wind rose, throwing 
leaves. 

"Hellor 

A small branch hit the plating 
of the ship. 
"Hello-" 

The wind, screaming, picked up 
B branch and carried it against 
her scalp. She fell, then got up 



slowly and ran back to the airlock, the wind pushing her, pelting her with leaves. She tripped 
at the foot of the ladder and 
pulled herself up with her hands, 
the blood running down her 
cheek. 

At the airlock, she turned and 
spat: "All right!" Then she pushed 
the switch on the ladder reel and 
slammed the hatch shut. Bill cut 
the power to the brake jets, and 
the ship began to roll forward. 

"All right, Bill." Her voice was 
calm and even. "Let's go." 

"We need fuel," Bill said. "We 
don't have enough to approach 
another star. We wasted too 
much. We'll have to fly up to the 
mountains and cut some rock for 
the converter." 

"All right, then, let's go," she 
said spitefully. "I wish you'd 
watched the gauges." 

"I did. You wanted to go back." 

"You might have said something." 

"It wouldn't have stopped you." 

Mary stared at him. He looked 
at her stubbornly, his shoulders 
hunched. 

Bill took the ship up over the 
mountains, searching for a level 
place, balancing the ship upright. 
Finally he found a deep ledge beside a waterfall that dropped to a 
valley. Bill lowered the ship, and 
casually as a gentle touch the 
south wind pushed them and 
sheared off a fin against an out


82 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



crop of rock just before the jet 
bases touched ground. The ship 
tilted slightly and fell against the 
rock. 

There was no way down off the 
ledge, even if they had dared go 
out on the plain. 

"Can tjott fix the ship?" 

"Maybe. But the wind'll still be 
here." 

"Can you take off without putting it upright?" 

"No." 

They leaned against the angle 
of the deck and looked at each 
other. The spray of the waterfall 
ran down the viewport. It bathed 
the hull and hissed against the 
jets. Bill dropped a hand to the 
instrument board and turned off 
all the switches. 

"It hates me," Mary said. "This 
place hates me. She hates me." 

"Who?" 

"Mary- Mary hates me. Mary 
hates Mary." Mary laughed bitterly. "She kept trying, and now 
she's got me where she wants me." 

"The planet." 

"Yes, tlic planet!" Mary said in 
a shrill voice. "She can't stand to 
share anything with anybody. You 
said it: she wants to keep her life 
to herself. She won't share it with 
birds, or with animals, or with 
people. It's hers, and she won't 
let go of it." 

Bill was looking at her closely. 
' Do you think my giving her your 
name had anything to do with it?" 

"What's that supposed to 



mean?" Mary flared. "Don't get 
smart with mel" She swung 
around and faced the viewports, 
looking out. "She was always this 
way. No animals. No birds. No insects. Just grass and water and 
trees. Just what site needed. Nothing for anybody else. Maybe all 
planets have life inside them, 
somewhere, stored up, waiting to 
be given to the things that will 
need it, and live on it, and be 
happy. Other planets give it up. 
Not this one. Tin's one hugs it to 
herself, and feeds on it, and turns 
sick." She turned back. "And don't 
you make any more cracks about 
mer 

"It was an accident," Bill said. 
"Just an accident, giving her your 
name. It didn't mean anything. It 
wasn't supposed to mean anything 
. . . except that 1 loved you." 

"You did it all for me, didn't 
you?" Mary said. "You didn't want 
to leave Earth. You wanted a 
house. But you did it all for me, 
just to please me. You were the 
chump, and now I'm getting it in 
the neck and you're just along for 
the ride. Happy?" 

"It's all right, Mary," Bill said 
awkwardly. 

"It's ali right. It's all right!" 
Mary mimicked viciously. "You're 
damned right, it's all right! All 
right for you. You're not the one 
she hates. You're not the one she's 
after. You're just fat, dumb and 
happy. What're you losing that's 
worth anything? What kind of 



A World Named Mary 



■S3 



hunger have you got, that looked 
like it was going to be fed, and 
then wasn't? You— you'd still be 
sitting somewhere, piling up 
money and waiting for your pension. You'd still be dating that 
mousey little Alice from the same 
dusty office you were all set to rot 
in. I did you the biggest favor of 
your life, knocking you loose from 
that, and now I'm stuck!" 

"Thank you," Bill said. "Thank 
you for everything." 

"Oh, you make me sick!" 

Bill looked at her, and slumped 
his shoulders. He said in a soft 
voice: 

"Mary ..." 

"Oh, shut up!" 

"Mary— I'm sorry. Not . . . not 
about the landing. That wasn't my 
fault. And we're here, now, and 
there's no v/ay back. Wo have to 
live together on this ledge for the 
rest of our lives. Mary— I'm sorry I 
was angry at you." 

"Forget it. I never even 
noticed." 

"I— I know. That's the way you 
are. I always knew it. But I think 
I hoped I was wrong. And that 
wasn't right. Nobody should try 
not to see other people's faults. 
They should understand them. 
They should learn to live with this 
other person, and see why they're 
like that, and . . . and love them." 

"Oh, for Pete's sake!" Mary 
Cfied OUt, Tm going outside." 

Bill followed her out of the 



ship. Mary was pacing back and 
forth on the ledge. It was a hundred yards across, and a hundred 
feet deep. 

"A cage," Mary muttered. "She 
put me in a cage. In a cage. With 
a boob." 

"Mary—** 

"Shut up! People Bke you are 
supposed to do things for people 
like me. You're no good for anything else. What good are you going to do me here? You deserve to 
be caught in a place like tins. But 
not me! Not met' She strode to 
the lip of the ledge, and stood 
framed against the valley, looking out over the plains to the distant river. "You'll seel" she cried 
suddenly. "I won't stay here! I'll 
get out! Roy '11 come and find me! 
You won't keep me here! KoyU 
take me away!" 

Bill turned around suddenly, 
his face wet. He stared without 
seeing at the granite face of the 
mountain, his mouth quivering. 
"You don't have any mercy at all, 
do you? You're never going to 
change." 

There was a sharp gust of wind, 
and a scrambling sound that 
ended suddenly. 

Bill did not hear it. He was asking: "Mary, what makes you be 
like that? Why are you the way 
you are? Why, Mary?" 

But his dead wife did not answer him from the rocks below 
the ledge. 

Neither did the planet. 



buy Jupiter! 

. by ISAAC ASIMOV 

The aliens were strong enough simply to take Jupiter, 
but for some reason they wanted it all legal. 
And the price they offered was fine. Thing was— 
why did they want the gassy old thing . ..? 



He was a simvlacron, of course, 
but so cleverly contrived that the 
men dealing with him had long 
since given up thinking of the beings he represented— the energyentities that waited in white-hot 
blaze in their field-enclosure 
"ship,"* miles from Earth. 

The simulacron, with a majestic golden beard and deepbrown, wide-set eyes said gently, 
"We understand your hesitations 
and suspicions, and we can only 
continue to assure you we mean 
you no harm. We have, I think, 
presented you with proof that we 
inhabit the coronal haloes of Ospectra stars; that your own Sun 
is too weak for us, and your 
planets, being of solid matter, are 
completely and eternally alien to 

US." 

The Terrestrial spokesman 
(who was Secretary of Science 
and, by common consent, had 



been placed in charge of negotiations with the aliens) said, 
"But you have admitted we are 
now on one of your chief trade 
routes." 

"Now that our new world of 
Kimmonoshek has developed 
fields of protonic fluid, yes." 

The Secretary said, "Well, here 
on Earth, positions on trade 
routes can gain military importance out of proportion to their 
intrinsic value. 1 can only repeat 
then, that to gain our confidence 
you must tell us exactly why you 
need Jupiter." 

And as always, when that question or a form of it was asked, 
the simulacron looked pained. 
"Secrecy is important. If the Lamberj people-" 

"Exactly " said the Secretary. 
"To us it sounds like war. You 
and what you call the Lambcrj 
people—" 



84 



Buy Jupiter! 



80 



The simulacron said hurriedly, 
"But we are offering you a most 
generous return. You have only 
colonized the inner planets of 
your System and we are not interested in those. We ask for the 
world you call Jupiter which, I 
understand, your people can 
never expect to live on, or even 
land on. Its size—" he smiled indulgently— "is too much for you." 

The Secretary, who disliked the 
air of condescension, said stiffly, 
"The Jovian satellites are practical sites for colonization, however, and we intend to colonize 
them shortly." 

"But the satellites will not be 
disturbed in any way. They are 
yours in every sense of the word— 
we ask only Jupiter itself, a completely useless world to you. And 
the return we offer is generous. 
Surely, you realize that we could 
take your Jupiter if we wished, 
without your pennission. It is 
only that we prefer payment and 
a legal treaty. It will prevent disputes in the future. As you see, 
I'm being completely frank." 

The Secretary said stubbornly, 
"Why do you need Jupiter?" 

"The Lamberj— " 

"Are you at war with the Lamberj?" 

"It's not quite—" 

"Because you see that if it is 
war and you establish some sort 
of fortified base on Jupiter, the 
Lamberj may, quite properly, resent that and retaliate against us 



for granting you permission. We 
cannot allow ourselves to be involved in such a situation." 

"Nor would I ask you to be involved. My word that no harm 
will come to you. Surely," (he 
kept coming back to it) "the return is generous. Enough power 
boxes each year to supply your 
world with a full year of powerrequirement." 

The Secretary said, "On the understanding that future increases 
in power consumption will be 
met." 

"Up to a figure five times the 
present total. Yes." 

"As I have said, I am a high 
official of the government a ml 
have been given considerable 
powers to deal with you— but not 
infinite powers. I, myself, am inclined to trust you, but I could 
not accept your terms without 
understanding exactly why you 
want Jupiter. If the explanation 
is plausible and convincing, I 
could perhaps persuade our government and, through them, our 
people, to make the agreement 
If I tried to make an agreement 
without such an explanation, I 
would simply be forced out of 
office and Earth would refuse to 
honor the agreement. You coidd 
then, as you say, take Jupiter by 
force. But you would be in illegal 
possession, and you have said 
you don't wish that." 

The simulacron clicked its 
tongue impatiently. "I cannot con


86 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



tinuc forever in this petty bickering. The Lamberj— * He stopped, 
then said, "Have I your word of 
honor that this is all not a device 
inspired by the Lanvberj people 
to delay us until—" 

"My word of honor/* said the 
Secretary. 

The Secretary of Science 
emerged, mopping his forehead 
and looking ten -years younger. 
He said, softly, "I told him his 
people could have it as soon as I 
obtained the President's formal 
approval. And I don't think the 
President will object, or Congress, 
either. Good Lord, gentlemen, 
think of it; free power at our 
fingertips in return for a planet 
we could never use in any case." 

The Secretary of Defense 
growled, "I don't like it. No matter what their story is, only a 
Mizzarctt-Lamberj war can really 
explain their need for Jupiter. 
Under those circumstances, and 
comparing their military potential 
with ours, a strict neutrality is 
essential." 

"But there is no war, sir," said 
the Secretary of Science. "The 
simulacron presented an alternate 
explanation of their need for Jupiter so rational and plausible that 
I accepted it at once. I think the 
President will agree with me, and 
you gentlemen, too, when you understand. In fact, I have here their 
plans for the new Jupiter, as it 
will soon appear,* 



The others rose from their seats, 
clamoring. "A new Jupiter?" 
gasped the Secretary of Defense. 

"Not so different from the old, 
gentlemen," said the Secretary of 
Science. "Here are the sketches 
which they have provided in form 
suitable for observation by matter 
beings such as ourselves." 

He laid them down. The familiar banded planet was there 
before them on one of the 
sketches: yellow, pale green and 
light brown with curled white 
streaks here and there and all 
against the speckled velvet background of space. But across the 
bands were curious streaks of 
blackness, as velvet as the background and arranged in an unusual pattern. 

"That," said the Secretary of 
Science, "is what they plan for the 
day side of the planet. The night 
side is shown in this sketch." 
(There, Jupiter was a thin crescent enclosing darkness, and 
within that darkness were the 
same thin streaks arranged in similar pattern, but in a phosphorescent glowing orange this time.) 

"The marks," said the Secretary 
of Science, "arc a purely optical 
phenomenon, I am told, which 
will not rotate with the planet, 
but will remain static in its atmospheric fringe." 

"But what is it?" asked the Secretary of Commerce. 

"You see," said the Secretary of 
Science. "Our Solar System is now 



0uy Jupiter! 



87 



on one of their major trade routes. 
As many as seven of their ships 
pass within a few hundred million 
miles of the System in a single 
clay, and each ship has the major 
planets under telescopic observation as they pass. Tourist curiosity, you know. Solid planets of 
any size are a marvel to them." 

"What has that to do with it?" 

"This is one form of their writing. Translated, those marks read: 
USE M1ZZARETT ERCONE 
VERTICES FOR HEALTH AND 
GLOWING HEAT." 

"You mean— you mean Jupiter 
is to be an advertising billboard?" 
exploded the Secretary of 
Defense, 

"Right. The Lamberj people, 
it seems, produce a competing er> 
gone tablet, which accounts for 
the Mizzarett anxiety to establish 
full legal ownership of Jupiter. 
In case of Lamberj lawsuits. . . . 



And, gentlemen, I am happy to 
say that the Mizzaretts appear to 
be novices at the advertising 
game." 

"Why do you say that?" asked 
the Secretary of the Interior. 

"Why, they neglected to set up 
a series of options on the other 
planets. The Jupiter billboard will 
be advertising our system, as 
well as their own product. And 
when the competing Lamberj 
people come storming in to cheek 
on the Mizzarett title to Jupiter, 
we will have Saturn to sell to 
them. With its rings. As we will 
easily be able to explain to them, 
the rings will make Saturn much 
the belter spectacle." 

"And therefore," said the Secretary of the Treasury, suddenly 
beaming, "worth a much better 
price." 

And they all looked very cheerful. 



FOR FANS . . . AND NON-FANS 

If you arc the type of science fiction reader who prefers to enjoy his 
science fiction in quiet, who does not wish the field to intrude on his 
social life, you would be wise to avoid the North Plaza Motel, 791 r 
Reading Road, Cincinnati, Ohio, on the days of June 28th and 29th, 
1958. By so doing, you'll miss the 9th Annual Midwcscon. 1£ you 
are not anti-social about such things, you will quite possibly miss a 
good time. 

The World Science Fiction Convention — even more vigorous — will be 
held at the Alexandria Hotel, Fifth at Spring, Los Angeles, Cab, from 
Aug. 29th through Sept. t. At that meeting, if certain under-the-counter 
plans go through, you may have a chance to bid for one hour of the 
time of your favorite science fiction writer . . . among other divertissements. . . . You have been warned. 



The Comedian's Children 



a novelet 
by THEODORE STURGEON 

Everybody— almost everybody— >/o ved vnsmiitng Heri Gonza, 
the world's funniest man. Look how he took over 
when that frightening children's disease was brought 
back from fapetus. He gave who/// of himself, 
gave his money, his love, his talent. . . . 
The one thing he didn't give was a core. That seemed 
io be locked fn the mind of Gonza's most dedicated enemy— 
and on the frozen surface of Salvrn's eighth satellite. . . . 



Prologue 

The quiet third of the Twenty-First Century came to an end at 
ten o'clock on the morning of May 17, 2034, with the return to earth 
of a modified Fafnir space cruiser under the command of Capt. Avery 
Swope. Perhaps in an earlier or a later day, the visitation which began 
on the above date might have had less effect. But the earth was lulled 
and content with itself, and for good reason— interna tional rivalries 
having reverted to the football fields and tennis courts, an intelligent 
balance of hade and redistribution of agriculture and industry having 
been achieved. 

Captain Swope's mission was to accomplish the twelfth off-earth 
touchdown, and the body on which he touched was Iapetus ( sometimes Japettis), the remarkable eighth satellite of Saturn. All Saturn's 
satellites are remarkable, each for a di/ferent reason. Iapetus' claim 
to fame is his fluctuating brilliance; he always swings brightly around 
the eastetrj limb of the ringed planet, and dwindles dimly behind the 



B9 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



western edge. Obviously the little moon is half bright and half dark, 
and keeps one face turned always to its parent; but why should a 
union be half bright and half dark? 

It was an intriguing mystery, and it had become the fashion to 
affect all sorts of decorations which mimicked the fluctuations of the 
inconstant moonlet: cufflinks and tunic clasps which dimmed and 
brightened, bread-wrappers and book-jackets in dichotomous motley. 
Copies were reproduced of the midcentury master Pedcrson's magnificent oil painting of a space ship aground on one of Saturn's moons, 
with four suited figures alighting, and it became a sort of colophon 
for news stories about Swope's achievement and window displays of 
bi-colored gimcrackery— with everyone marvelling at the Twentieth 
Century artist's unerring prediction of a Fafnir's contours, and no one 
noticing that the painting could not possibly have been of Iapetus, 
which has no blue sky nor weathered rocks, but must certainly have 
been the meticulous Pederson's visualization of Titan. Still, everyone 
thought it was Iapetus, and since it gave no evidence as to why Iapetus 
changed its brightness, the public embraced the painting as the portrait of a mystery. They told each other that Swope would find out. 

Captain Swope found out, but Captain Swope did not tell. Something happened to his Fafnir on Iapetus. His signals were faintly 
heard through the roar of an electrical disturbance on the parent 
world, and they were unreadable, and they were the last. Then, voiceless, he returned, took up his braking orbit, and at last came screaming 
down out of the black into and through the springtime blue. His acquisition of the tail-down attitude so very liigh— over fifty milesproved that something was badly wrong. The extreme deliberation 
with which he came in over White Sands, and the constant yawing, 
like that of a baseball bat balanced on a fingertip, gave final proof 
that he was attempting a landing under manual control, something 
never before attempted with anything the size of a Fafnir. It was 
superbly done, and may never be equalled, that roaring drift down 
and down through the miles, over forty-six of them, and never a yaw 
that the sensitive hands could not compensate, until that last one. 

What happened? Did some devil-imp of wind, scampering runt of 
a hurricane, shoulder against the Fafnir? Or was the tension and 
strain at last too much for weary muscles which could not, even for a 
split second, relax and pass the controls to another pair of hands? 
Whatever it was, it happened at three and six-tenths miles, and she 
lay over bellowing as her pilot made a last desperate attempt to gain 
some altitude and perhaps another try. 



The Comedians Children 



She gained nothing, she lost a bit, hurtling like a dirigible gone mad, 
faster and faster, hoping to kick the curve of the earth down and away 
from her, until, over Arkansas, the forward section of the rocket liner 
—the one which is mostly inside the ship— disintegrated and she blew 
off lier tail. She turned twice end over end and thundered into a buckwheat field. 

Two days afterwards a photographer got a miraculous picture. It 
was darkly whispered later that he had unforgivably carried the child 
—the three-year-old Tresak girl from the farm two miles away— into 
the crash area and had inexcusably posed her there; but this could 
never be proved, and anyway, how could he have known? Nevertheless, the multiple miracles of a momentary absence of anything at all 
in the wide clear background, of the shadows which mantled her and 
of the glitter of the many-sharded metal scrap which reared up behind 
her to give her a crown— but most of all the miracle of the child herself, black-eyed, golden- haired, trusting, fearless, one tender hand 
resting on some jagged steel which would surely shred her flesh if 
In were less beautiful— these made one of the decade's most memorable pictures. In a day she was known to the nation, and warmly 
loved as a sort of infant phoenix rising from the disaster of the roaring bird; the death of the magnificent Swopc could not cut the nation 
quite as painfully because of her, as that cruel ruin could not ait her 
bund. 

The news, then, that on the third day after her contact with the 
wreck of the ship from Iapetus, the Tresak child had fallen ill of a 
disfiguring malady never before seen on earth, struck the nation and 
the world a dreadful and terrifying blow. At first there was only a 
numbness, but at the appearance of the second, and immediately the 
third cases of the disease, humanity sprang into action. The first thing 
It did was to pass seven Acts, an Executive Order and three Conventions against any further off-earth touchdowns; so, until the end of the 
iupctitis epidemic, there was an end to all but orbital space flight. 



"you're goinc to be aix bight," 
she whispered, and bent to kiss 
the solemn, comic little face. 
(They said it wasn't contagious; 
at least, adults didn't get it.) She 
■ straightened up and smiled at 
him, and Billy smiled his half


smile— it was the left half— in response. He said something to her, 
but by now his words were so 
blurred that she failed to catch 
them. She couldn't bear to have 
him repeat whatever it was; he 
seemed always so puzzled when 



92 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



people did not understand him, as 
if he could hear himself quite 
plainly. So to spare herself the 
pathetic pucker wbich would 
worry the dark half of his face, 
she only smiled the more and 
said again, "You're going to be all 
right," and then she fled. 

Outside in the corridor she 
leaned for a moment against the 
wall and got rid of the smile, the 
rigid difficult hypocrisy of that 
smile. There was someone standing there on the other side of the 
scalding blur which replaced the 
smile; she said, because she had 
to say it to someone just then: 
"How could I promise him that?" 

"One does," said the man, answering. She shook away the blur 
and saw that it was Dr. Otis. "I 
promised him the same thing myself. One just ... does," he 
shrugged. "Heri Gonza promises 
them, too." 

"I saw that," she nodded, "lie 
seems to wonder 'How could IT 
too." 

"He does what he can," said 
the doctor, indicating, with a motion of his head, the special hospital wing in which they stood, 
the row of doors behind and beyond, doors to laboratories, doors 
to research and computer rooms, 
store rooms, staff rooms, all donated by the comedian. "In a 
way he has more right to make 
a promise like that than Billy's 
doctor." 

"Or Billy's sister," she agreed 



tremulously. She turned to walk 
down the corridor, and the doctor 
walked with hw. "Any new 
cases?" 
"Two." 

She shuddered. "Any—" 

"No," he said quickly, "no 
deaths." And as if to change the 
subject, he said, "I understand 
you're to be congratulated." 

"What? Oh," she said, wrenching her mind away from the 
image of Billy's face, half marble, 
half mobile mahogany. "Oh, the 
award. Yes, they called me this 
afternoon. Thank you. Somehow 
it . . . doesn't mean very much 
right now." 

They stood before his office at 
the head of the corridor. "I think 
I understand how you feel," he 
said. "You'd trade it in a minute 
for—" he nodded down the corridor toward the boy's room. 

"I'd even trade it for a reasonable hope," she agreed. "Good 
night, Doctor. You'll call me?" 

"Ill call you if anything happens. Including anything good. 
Don't forget that, will you? I'd 
hate to have you afraid of the 
sound of my voice." 

"Thank you, Doctor." 

"Stay away from the trideo this 
once. You need some sleep." 

"Oh Lord. Tonight's the big effort," she remembered. 

"Stay away from it," he said 
with warm severity. "You don't 
need to be reminded of iapetitis, 
or be persuaded to help." 



The Comedian's Children 



93 



"You sound like Dr. Horowitz." 

His smile clicked off. She had 
meant it as a mild pleasantry; if 
she had been less tired, less distraught, she would have had 
better sense. Better taste. Horowitz' name echoed in these of all 
halls like a blasphemy. Once 
honored as among the greatest 
of medical researchers, he had inexplicably turned his back on 
Heri Gonza and his Foundation, 
had flatly refused research grants, 
and had publicly insulted the 
comedian and his great philanthropy. As a result he had lost his 
reappointment to the directorship 
of the Research Institute and a 
good deal of his professional 
■tending. And like the sullen buffoon he was, he plunged into rejtttrch— "real research," he inexcusably called it— on iapetitis, attempting single-handedly not only 
to duplicate the work of the 
Foundation, but to surpass it: 
"the only way I know," he had 
told a reporter, "to pull the pasture out from under that clod and 
his trained sheep." Heri Gonza's 
reply was typical: by deft 
sketches on his programs, he 
turned Horowitz into an improper 
noun, defining a horowitz as a 
sort of sad sack or poor soul, pathetic, mildly despicable, incompetent and always funny — the 
kind of subhuman who not only 
asks for, but justly deserves a pie 
in the face. He backed this up 
wilh a widely publicized stand


ing offer to Dr. Horowitz of a nostrings-attached research grant of 
half a million; which Dr. Horowitz, after his first unprintable 
refusal (his instructions to the 
comedian as to what he could do 
with the money were preceded by 
the suggestion that he first change 
it into pennies), ignored. 

Therefore the remark, even by 
a Nobel prizewinner, even by a 
reasonably handsome woman understandably weary and upset, 
even by one whose young brother 
lay helpless in the disfiguring grip 
of an incurable disease— such a 
remark could hardly be forgiven, 
especially when made to the head 
of the Iapetitis Wing of the Medical Center and local chairman of 
the Foundation. "I'm sorry. Dr. 
Otis," she said. "I . . . probably 
need sleep more than I realized." 

"You probably do, Dr. Barran," 
he said evenly, and went into his 
office and closed the door. 

"Damn," said Iris Barran, and 
went home. 

No one knew precisely how 
Heri Gonza had run across the 
idea of an endurance contest cum 
public solicitation of funds, or 
when lie decided to include it in 
his bag of tricks. He did not invent the idea; it was a phenomenon of early broadcasting, which 
erupted briefly on the marriage of 
video with audio in a primitive 
device known as television. The 
performances, consisting of up to 



94 



VENTURIS SCIENCE FICTION 



forty continuous hours of entertainment inters persed with picas 
for aid in one charity or another, 
were headed by a single celebrity 
who acted as master of ceremonies and beggar-in-chicf. The 
terminological ly bastardized name 
for this production was telethon, 
from the Greek root tele, to carry, 
and the syllable thon, meaningless in itself but actually the last 
syllabic of the word marathon. 
The telethon, sensational at first, 
had rapidly deteriorated, due to 
its use by numbers of greedy publicists who, for the price of a 
phone call, could get large helpings of publicity by pledging donations which, in many cases, 
they failed to make, and the large 
percentage of the citizenry whose 
impulse to give did not survive 
their telephoned promises. And 
besides, the novelty passed, the 
public no longer watched. So for 
nearly eighty years there were no 
telethons, and if there had been, 
a disease to hang one on would 
have been hard to find. Heart 
disease, cancer, multiple sclerosis, 
muscular dystrophy — these, and 
certain other infirmities on which 
public appeals had been based, 
had long since disappeared or 
were negligibly present. 

Now, however, there was* 
iiipctltis. 

A disorder of the midbrain and 
central nervous system, it attacked children between the ages 
of three and seven, affecting only 



one hemisphere, with no statistical preference for either side. 
Its mental effects were slight 
( which in its way was one of the 
most tragic aspects of the disease) 
being limited to aphasia and 
sometimes a partial alexia. It had 
more drastic effects on the motor 
system, however, and on the entire cellular regeneration mechanisms of the affected side, which 
would gradually solidify and become inert, immobile. The most 
spectacular symptom was on the 
superficial pigmentation. The immobilized side turned white as 
bleached bone, the other increasingly dark, beginning with a reddening and slowly going through 
the red-browns to a chocolate in 
the later stages. The division was 
exactly on the median line, and 
the bicoloration proceeded the 
same way in all cases, regardless 
of the original pigmentation. 

There was no known cure. 

There was no known treatment. 

There was only the Foundation 
— Heri Gonza's Foundation — ami 
all it could do was install expensive equipment and expensive 
people to operate it . . . and hope. 
There was nothing anyone else 
could do which would not merely 
duplicate Foundation efforts, and 
besides, with one exception the 
Foundation already had the top 
people in microbiology, neurology, virology, internal medicine, 
and virtually every other discipline which might have some 



The Comedian's Children 



bearing on the disease. There 
were, so far, only 376 known 
cases, every one of which was in 
a Foundation hospital. 

Heri Gonza had been associated with the disease since the 
very beginning, when he visited 
a children's hospital and saw the 
appalling appearance of the first 
case, little Linda Tresak of Arkansas. When four more cases appeared in the Arkansas State Hospital after she was a patient there 
for some months, Heri Gonza 
moved with characteristic noise 
and velocity. Within forty-eight 
hours of his first knowledge of 
the new cases, all five were ensconced in a specially vacated 
wing of the Medical Center, and 
mobilization plans were distributed to centers all over the world, 
so that new clinics could be set 
up and duplicate facilities installed the instant the disease 
showed up. There were at present 
forty-two such clinics. Each child 
had been picked up within hours 
of the first appearance of symptoms, whisked to the hospital, 
pampered, petted, and . . . observed. No treatment. No cure. 
The white got whiter, die dark 
got darker, the white side slowly 
immobilized, the dark side grew 
darker but was otherwise unaffected; the speech difficulty grew 
steadily (but extremely slowly) 
worse; the prognosis was always 
negative. Negative by extrapolation: any organism in the throes 



of such deterioration might survive for a long time, but must 
ultimately succumb. 

In a peaceful world, with 
economy stabilized, population 
growing but not running wild 
any longer, iapetitis was big news. 
The biggest. 

The telethon was, unlike its 
forbears, not aimed at the public 
pocket. It was to serve rather as 
a whip to an already aware world, 
information to the informed, 
aimed at earlier and earlier discovery and diagnosis. It was one 
of the few directions left to medical research. The disease was obviously contagious, but its transmission method was unknown. 
Some child, somewhere, might be 
found early enough to display 
some signs of the point of entry 
of the disease, something like a 
fleabite in spotted fever, the mosquito puncture in malaria— some 
sign which might heal or disappear soon after its occurrence. A 
faint hope, but it was a hope, 
and there was little enough of 
that around. 

So, before a wide grey backdrop bearing a forty-foot insignc 
in the center, the head and 
shoulders of a crying child vividly 
done in half silver, half mahogany, Heri Gonza opened his telethon. 

Iris Barran got home well after 
it had started; she had rather 
overstayed her hospital visit. She 



98 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



came in wearily and slumped on 
the divan, thinking detachedly of 
Billy, thinking of Dr. Otis. The 
thought of the doctor reminded 
her of her affront to him, and she 
felt a flash of annoyance, first at 
herself for having done it, and 
immediately another directed at 
him for being so touchy— and so 
unforgiving. At the same tune she 
recalled his advice to get some 
sleep, not to watch the telethon; 
and in a sudden, almost childish 
burst of rebellion she slapped the 
arm of the divan and brought the 
trideo to life. 

The opposite wall of the room, 
twelve feet high, thirty feet long, 
seemed to turn to smoke, wluch 
cleared to reveal an apparent extension of the floor of the room, 
back and further back, to Heri 
Gonza's great grey backdrop. All 
around were the sounds, the 
smells, the pressure of the presence of thousands of massed, rapt 
people. "... so I looked down 
and there the horse had caught its 
silly hoof in my silly stirrup. 
'Horse,' I says, 'if you're gettin* 
OH, I'm gettin' off!" 

The laugh was a great soft 
booming explosion, as usual out 
of all proportion to the quality of 
the witticism. Heri Gonza had 
that rarest of comic skills, the 
ability to pyramid his effects, so 
that the mildest of them seemed 
much funnier than it really was. 
It was mounted on a rapidlystacked structure of previous 



quips and jokes, each with its 
little store of merriment and all 
merriment suppressed by the 
audience for fear of missing not 
only the next joke, but the entire 
continuity. When the pyramid 
was capped, the release was explosive. And yet in that split instant between capper and explosion, he always managed to slip 
in a clear three or four syllables, 
"On my way here—" or "When 
the president—" or "Like the 
horowitz who—" which, repeated 
and completed after the big 
laugli, turned out to be the base 
brick for the next pyramid. 

Watclung his face during the 
big laughs— yocks, the knowledgeable columnists and critics called 
them— had become a national 
pastime. Though the contagion of 
laughter was in his voice and 
choice of phrase, he played everything deadpan. A small, wiry man 
with swift nervous movements, he 
had a face-by- the-million: anybody's face. Its notable characteristics were three: thin lips, 
masked eyes, impenetrable as 
onyx, and astonishing jug-handle 
ears. His voice was totally flexible, capable of almost any timbre, and with the falsetto he frequently aflected, his range was 
slightly over four octaves. He was 
an accomplished ventriloquist, 
though he never used the talent 
with the conventional dummy, 
but rather to interrupt himself 
with strange voices. But it was 



The Comedian's Children 



97 



his ordinary, unremarkable, almost immobile face which was 
his audience's preoccupation. His 
face never laughed, though in 
dialogue his voice might. His 
voice could smile, too, even weep, 
and his face did not. But at the 
yock, if it was a big yock, a long 
once, his frozen waiting face 
would twitch; the thin lips would 
fill out a trifle: he's going to smile, 
he's going to smiU'l Sometimes, 
when the yock was especially fulsome, his mouth actually would 
widen a trifle; but then it was 
always time to go on, and, deadpan, he would. What could it 
matter to anyone whether or not 
one man in the world smiled? On 
the face of it, nothing: yet millions of people, most of whom 
were unaware of it, bent close to 
thei r trideo walls and peered 
raptly, waiting, waiting to sec him 
smile. 

As a result, everyone who heard 
him, heard every word. 

Iris found herself grateful, 
somehow— able to get right out of 
herself, sweep in with that vast 
unseen crowd and leave herself, 
her worrying self, her angry, 
weary, logical, Nobel- prizewinning self asprawl on the divan 
while she hung on and smiled, 
hung on and tittered, hung on and 
exploded with the world. 

He built, and he built, and the 
trideo cameras crept in on him 
until, before she knew it, he was 
standing as close to the invisible 



wall as belief would permit; and 
still he came closer, so that he 
seemed in the room with her; and 
this was a pyramid higher than 
most, more swiftly and more 
deftly built, so that the ultimate 
explosion could contain itself not 
much longer, not a beat, not a 
second. , . . 

And he stopped in mid-sentence, mid-word, even, and, over 
at the left, fell to one knee and 
held out his arms to the right. 
"Come on, honey," he said in a 
gentle, tear-checked purr. 

From the right came a little 
girl, skipping. She was a beautiful little girl, a picture-book little 
girl, with old-fashioned bouncing 
curls, shiny black patent-leather 
shoes with straps, little white 
socks, a pale-blue dress with a 
very wide, very short skirt. 

But she wasn't skipping, she 
was limping. She almost fell, and 
Beri w as (here to catch her. 

Holding her in his arms, while 
she looked trustingly up into his 
face, he walked to center stage, 
turned, faced the audience. His 
eyes were on her face; when he 
raised them abruptly to the audience, they were, by some trick of 
the light (or of Heri Gonza) unnaturally bright. 

And he stood, that's all he did, 
for a time, stood there with the 
child in lus arms, while the pentup laughter turned to frustrated 
annoyance, directed first at the 
comedian, and slowly, slowly. 



88 



VENTUHE SCIENCE FICTION 



with a rustle of sighs, at the audience itself by the audience. Ah, to 
see such a thing and be full of 
laughter: how. awful 1 am. 

I'm sorry. I'm sorry. 

One little arm was white, one 
pink. Between the too-tiny socks 
and the too-short skirt, the long 
thin legs were one white, one 
pink. 

This is little Koska," he said 
after an age. The child smiled 
suddenly at the sound of her 
name. He shifted her in his elbow 
so he could stroke her hair. He 
said softly, "She's a little Esthonian girl, from the far north. She 
doesn't speak very much English, 
so she won't mind if we talk about 
her." A huskiness crept into his 
voice. "She came to us only yesterday. Her mother is a good 
woman. She sent her to us the 
minute she noticed." 

Silence again, then he turned 
the child so their faces were side 
by side, looking straight into the 
audience. It was hard to see at 
first, and then it became all too 
plain— the excessive pallor of the 
right side of her face, the tooeven flush on the left, and the 
sharp division between them 
down the center. 

"We'll make you better," he 
whispered. He said it again in a 
foreign language, and the child 
brightened, smiled trustingly into 
his face, kepi her smile as she 
laced the audience again: and 
wasn't the smile a tiny bit wider 



on the pint side than on the 
white? You couldn't tell . . . 

"Help me," said Heri Gonza. 
"Help her, and the others, help 
us. Find these children, wherever 
in the world they might be, and 
call us. Pick up any telephone 
in the world and say simply, I . . . 
F. That's IF, the Iapctitis Foundation. We treat them like little 
kings and queens. We never 
cause them any distress. By trideo 
they are in constant touch with 
their loved ones." Suddenly, his 
voice rang. The call you make 
may find the child who teaches 
us what we need to know. Your 
call— yours\— may find the cure 
for us." 

He knelt and set the child 
gently on her feet. He knelt holding her hands, looking into her 
face. He said, "And whoever you 
are, wherever you might be, you 
doctors, researchers, students, 
teachers ... if anyone, anywhere, 
has an inkling, an idea, a way to 
help, any way at all— then call me. 
Call me now, call here—" He 
pointed upward and the block 
letters and figures of the local 
telephone, floated over his head 
—"and tell me. I'll answer you 
now, lU personally speak to anyone who can help. Help, oh, help." 

The last word rang and rang 
in the air. The deep stage behind 
him slowly darkened, leaving the 
two figures, the kneeling man and 
the little golden girl, flooded with 
light. He released her hands and 



The Comedians Children 



99 



she turned away from him, smiling timidly, and crossed the wide 
stage. It seemed to take forever, 
and as she walked, very slightly 
she dragged her left foot. 

When she was gone, there was 
nothing left to look at but Heri 
Oonza. He had not moved, but 
the lights had changed, making 
of him a luminous silhouette 
against the endless black behind 
him . . . one kneeling man, a light 
in the universal dark . . . hope , . . 
slowly fading, but there, still 
there . . . no? Oh, there . . . 

A sound of singing, the palest 
of pale blue stains in deep center. 
The singing up, a powerful voice 
from the past, an ancient, all but 
forgotten tape of one of the most 
moving renditions the world has 
ever known, especially for such 
a moment as this: Mahalia Jackson singing The Lords Prayer, 
with the benefit of such audio as 
had not been dreamed of in her 
day . . . with a cool fresh scent, 
willi inaudible quasi-hypnotic 
emanations, with a whispering 
chorus a chorus of angels might 
learn from. 

Heri Gonza had not said "Let 
us pray." He would never do such 
a thing, not on a global network. 
There was just the kneeling dimness, and the blue glow far away 
fn the black. And if at the very 
end the glow looked to some like 
the sign of the cross, it might 
have been only a shrouded figure 
raising its arms; and if this was 



benediction, surely it was in the 
eye of the beholder. Whatever it 
was, no one who saw it completely escaped its spell, or ever 
forgot it. Iris Barran, for one, exhausted to begin with, heart and 
mind full to bursting with the 
tragedy of iapetitis; Iris Barran 
was wrung out by the spectacle. 
All she could think of was the 
last spoken word: Help\ 

She sprang to her phone and 
waved it active. With trembling 
fingers she dialed the number 
which floated in her mind as it 
had on the trideo wall, and to the 
composed young lady who appeared in her solido cave, saying, 
Trideo, C. A. O. Good evening," 
she gasped, "Heri Gonza— 
quickly." 

"One moment please," said the 
vision, and disappeared,, to be replaced instantly by another, even 
more composed, even lovelier, 
who said, "I.F. Telethon." 

"Heri Gonza." 

"Yes, of course. Your name?"' 

"I-Iris Barran. Dr. iris Barran." 

The girl looked up sharply. 
"Not the—" 

"Yes, I won the Nobel prize. 
Please— let me speak to Heri 
Gonza." 

"One moment please." 

The next one was a young man 
with curly hair, a bell-like baritone, and an intensely interested 
face. He was Bureke of the network. He passed her to a jovial 
little fat man with shrewd eyes 



100 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



who was with Continuity Acceptance. Iris could have screamed 
out loud. But a worldwide appeal 
for calls would jam lines and channels for hours, and obviously a 
■thorough screening process was 
essential. She was dimly aware 
that her name and face, only today 
in all the news, had already carried her to the top. Consciously, 
she thought of none of this; she 
held on and drove, wanting only 
to help . . . help ... A snatch of 
the conversation she had had with 
Dr. Otis drifted across her mind: 
/ guess you'd trade it for . . . and 
then a heart-rending picture of 
Billy's face, trying to smile with 
half a mouth. Yd trade it all for 
a reasonable hope . . . and suddenly she was staring into the 
face of Heri Gonza. Reflexively 
she glanced over her shoulder at 
the trideo wall; Heri Gonza was 
there too, with a solidophone pillar in center stage, its back to the 
audience so that only the comedian could see its cave. Light from 
it flickered on his face. 

"I'd know that face anywhere!" 
he said raspingly. 

"Oh," she said faintly, "Mr 

uh . . ." and then remembered 
that one of his public affectations 
was never to permit anyone to 
call him Mister. She said, "Heri 
Gonza, I . . . I'm Iris B-barran, 
and I—" She realized that her 
voice could not be heard over the 
trideo. She was grateful for that. 

He said, just as stridently, "I 



know who you are. I know the 
story of your life too." Switching to a comic quack, he said, 
"So-o-o?" 

"You know I just won the 
Nobel award. M— uh, Heri Gonza, 
I want to help, more than anything in the world, I want to help. 
My brother has it. W-would you 
like me to give the award money 
to you ... I mean, to the Foundation?" 

She did not know what she expected in exchange for this stunning offer. She had not thought 
that far ahead. What she did not 
expect was . . . 

"You what?" he yelled, so loud 
she drew her head down, gracelessly, turtle-like. "Listen, you, I 
got along without you before and 
I can get along without you now. 
You're getting from me, see, and 
I'm giving. What you got I don't 
want. I'm not up here to do you 
no good. I tell you what you got, 
you got a wrong number, and 
you are, s-s-s-s-so," he hissed in 
a hilarious flatulent stutter, "s-sso long." And before she could 
utter another sound he waved 
her off and her phone cave went 
black. 

Numb with shock, she slowly 
turned to the trideo wall, where 
Heri Gonza was striding downstage to the audience. His expressionless face, his gait, his posture, the inclination of his head, 
and his tone of voice all added 
to an amused indignation, with 



The Comedians Children 



101 



perhaps a shade more anger than 
mirth. He tossed a thumb at the 
phone and said, "Wits we got 
calling, can you imagine? At a 
lime like this. We got dimwits, 
half wits, and—" exactly the right 
pause; there was one bleat of 
laughter somewhere in the audience and then a thousand voices 
to chorus with him— "horowitz!" 

Iris sank back in the phone 
chair and covered her face, pressing so hard against her tired eyes 
that she saw red speckles. For a 
time she was shocked completely 
beyond thought, but at last she 
was able to move. She rose heavily and went to the divan, arrested her hand as she was about 
to click off the trideo. Heri Gonza 
Was back at the stage phone, 
talking eagerly to someone, his 
voice honey and gentleness. "Oh 
bless you, brother, and thank you. 
You may have an idea there, so 
( 0*1) you what you do. You call 
the 1.1*. at Johannesburg and arrange a meeting with die doctors 
there. They'll listen.. .No, 
brother, collect of course. Wbat'samatta, brother, you broke? I got 
news for you, for you-ee are-ee aee good-ee man-ee yes-ee indeedy 
-dee: you ain'ta broka no mo. A 
in. m like you? 1 got a boy on the 
way this very minute with a bag 
o' gold for the likes of you brother 
. . . Oh now, don't say thanks, you 
i M.. L a me mad. 'Bye." 

He waved off, and turned to 
(he audience to intone, "A man 



with an idea— little one, big one, 
who knows? But it's to help . . . 
so bless him." 

Thunderous applause. Iris let 
her hand finish the gesture and 
switched off. 

She went and washed her face, 
and that gawe her strength enough 
to shower and change. After that 
she could think almost normally. 

How could he? 

She turned over impossible alternatives, explanations. His 
phone was a dummy: he couldn't 
see her, didn't know who was on 
the phone. Or: it was his way of 
being funny, and slip was too 
tired to understand. Or . . . or . . . 
it was no use: it hack really happened, he had known what he 
was doing, he had a reason. 

But what reason? Why? Why? 

In her mind she again heard 
that roar from the audience: Horowitz. With difficulty, because it 
still stung, she pieced together 
the conversation and then, moving her forefinger toward her 
phone and the trideo, back and 
forth, puzzled out what had gone 
out over the air and what had not. 
Only then did she fully understand that Heri Gonza had done 
what he had done to make it 
seem that his first call was from 
Dr. Horowitz. But if he needed 
that particular gag at that time, 
why didn't he fake it to a dead 
phone? Why actually converse 
with her, cut her down like that? 

And he hadn't let her help. 



102 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



That was worse than any of the 
rudeness, the insult. He wouldn't 
let her help. 

What to do? Making the gesture she had made had not been 
hard; having it refused was more 
than she could bear. She must 
help; she would help. Now of all 
times, with all tlris useless money 
coming to her; she didn't need 
it, and it might, it just might 
somehow help, and bring Billy 
back home. 

Well then, expose Heri Gonza. 
Give him back some of his own 
humiliation. Call in the newsmen, 
make a statement. Tell them what 
she had offered, tell them just 
who was on the line. He'd have to 
take the money, and apologize to 
boot. 

She stood up; she sat down 
again. No. He had known what 
he was doing. He had known who 
she was; he must have a telltale 
on his phone to get information 
on his callers from that screening 
committee. She knew a lot about 
Heri Gonza. He seemed so wild, 
so impulsive; he was not. He ran 
his many enterprises with a steel 
fist; he took care of his own 
money, his own bookings. Ho did 
not make mistakes nor take 
chances. He bad refused her and 
the Foundation would refuse her: 
the Foundation teas Heri Gonza. 
He had his reasons, and if she 
had any defense at all against 
what he had done, he would not 
have done it. 



She wasn't allowed to help. 
Unless— 

She suddenly ran to the phone. 
She dialled 5, and the cave lit up 
With the floating word DIRECTORY. She dialled H, O, R, and 
touched the Slow button until she 
had the Horowitzes. There were 
pathetically few of them. Almost 
everyone named Horowitz had 
filed unlisted numbers: many had 
gone so far as to change their 
names. 

George Reholwth Horowitz, 
she remembered. 

He wasn't listed. 

She dialled Information and 
asked. The girl gave her a pitying 
smile and told her the line was 
unlisted. And of course, it would 
be. If Dr. Horowitz wasn't the 
most hated man on earth, he was 
the next thing to it. A listed 
phone would be useless to him, 
never silent. 

"Has he screening service?" Iris 
asked suddenly. 

"He has," said the girl, company-polite as always, but now 
utterly cold. Anyone who knew 
that creature to speak to . . . "Your 
name, please?" 

Iris told her, and added, "Please 
tell him it's very important." 

The cave went dark but for the 
slowly rotating symbol of the 
phone company, indicating that 
the operator was doing her job. 
Then a man's head appeared and 
looked her over for a moment, 
and then said, "Dr. Barran?" 



The Comedian's Children 



103 



"Dr. Horowitz." 

She had not beeu aware of 
having formed any idea of the 
famous ( Infamous? ) Horowitz; 
yet she mti.st have. His face 
seemed too gentle to have issued 
those harsh rejoinders which the 
news attributed to him; yet perhaps it was gentle enough to be 
taken for the fumbler, the fool so 
many people thought he was. His 
eyes, in some inexplicable way, 
assured her that his could not be 
clumsy hands. He wore old-fashioned exterior spectacles; he was 
losing his hair; he was younger 
than she had thought, and he was 
ugly. Crags are ugly, tree-trunks, 
the hawk's pounce, the bear's 
loot, if beauty to you is all 
straight lines and silk. Iris Barren 
was not repulsed by this kind of 
ugliness. 

She said, bluntly, "Are you doing any good with the disease?" 
She did not specify: today, there 
was only one disease. 

He said, in an odd way as if 
he had known her for a long time 
and could judge how much she 
would understand, '"I have it all 
from the top down to the middle, 
and from the bottom up to about 
a third. In between— nothing, and 
no way to get anything." 

"Can you go any further?" 

"I don't know," he said candidly. "1 can go on trying to find 
ways to go further, and if 1 find 
"** a way, I can try to move along 
on it." 



"Would some money help?" 
"It depends on whose it is." 
"Mine." 

He did not speak, but tilted his 
head a little to one side and 
looked at her. 

She said, "I won ... I have 
some money coming in. A good 
deal of it" 

"I heard," he said, and smiled. 
He seemed to have very strong 
teeth, not white, not even, just 
spotless and perfect. "It's a good 
deal out of my field, your theoretical physics, and I don't understand it. I'm glad you got it. 
I really am. You earned it." 

She shook her head, denying 
it, and said, "I was surprised." 

"You shouldn'l have been. Al ter 
ninety years of rather frightening 
confusion, you ve restored the 
concept of parity to science—" he 
chuckled— "though hardly in the 
way anyone anticipated." 

She had not known that this 
was her accomplishment; she had 
never thought of it in those terms. 
Her demonstration of gravitic 
flux was a subtle matter to be 
communicated with wordless 
symbols, quite past speech. Even 
to herself she had never made a 
conversational analog of it; this 
man had, though, not only easily, 
but quite accurately. 

She thought, if this isn't his 
field, and he grasps it like thatjust how good must he be in his 
own? She said, "Can you use the 
money? Will it help?" 



101 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



"God," he said devoutly, "can 
I use It ... As to whether it will 
help, Doctor, I can't answer that. 
It would help me go on. It may 
not make me arrive. Why did you 
think of me?" 

Would it hurt him to know? 
she asked herself, and answered, 
it would hurt him if I were not 
honest. She said, "I offered it 
—to the Foundation. They 
wouldn't touch it. I don't know 
why." 

"I do," he said, and instantly 
held up his hand. "Not now," he 
said, checking her question. He 
reached somewhere off-transmission and came up with a card, 
on which was lettered, AUDIO 
TAPPED. 

"Who-" 

"The world," he overrode her, 
"is full of clever amateurs. Tell 
me, w hy are you willing to make 
such B sacrifice?" 

"Oh— the money. It isn't a sacrifice. I have enough: I don't need 
it. And— my baby brother. He has 
it." 

"I didn't know " he said, with 
compassion. He made a motion 
with his hands. She did not understand. "What?" 

He shook his head, touched 
his lips, and repeated the motion, 
beckoning, at himself and the 
room behind him. Oh. Come 
where I am. 

She nodded, but said only, "It's 
been a great pleasure talking with 
you. Perhaps I'll see you soon." 



He turned over his card; obviously he had used it many times 
before. It was a map of a section 
of the city. She recognizee! it readily, followed his pointing finger, 
and nodded eagerly. He said, "1 
hope it is soon." 

She nodded again and rose, to 
indicate that she was on her way. 
He smiled and waved off. 

It was like a deserted city, or a 
decimated one; almost everyone 
was off the streets, watching the 
telethon. The few people who 
were about all hurried, as if they 
were out against their wills and 
anxious to get back and miss as 
little as possible. It was known 
that he intended to go on for at 
least thirty-six hours, and still 
they didn't want to miss a minute 
of him. Wonderful, wonderful, 
she thought, amazed (not for the 
first time) at people— just people. 
Someone had once told her that 
she was in mathematics because 
she was so apart from, amazed 
at, people. It was possible. She 
was, she knew, very unskilled 
with people, and she preferred 
the company of mathematics, 
which tried so hard to be reasonable, and to say what was really 
meant . . . 

She easily found the sportinggoods store he had pointed out 
on his map, and stepped into the 
darkened entrance. She looked 
carefully around and saw no one, 
then tried the door. It was locked, 



The Comedians Children 



LOS 



and she experienced a flash of disappointment of an intensity that 
surprised her. But even as she 
felt it, she heard a faint click, 
tried the door again, and felt it 
open. She slid inside and closed 
it, and was gratified to hear it 
lock again behind her. 

Straight ahead a dim, concealed light flickered, enough to 
show her that there was a clear 
aisle straight back through the 
store. When she was almost to 
the rear wall, the light flickered 
again, to show her a door at her 
right, deep in an ell. It clicked 
as she approached, and opened 
without trouble. She mounted two 
flights of stairs, and on the top 
landing stood Horowitz, his 
hands out. She took them gladly, 
and for a wordless moment they 
stood like that, laughing silently, 
until he released one of her hands 
and drew her into his place. He 
closed the door carefully and then 
turned and leaned against it. 

"Well!" he said. "I'm sorry 
about the cloak and dagger busii ness." 

"It was very exciting." She 
[i smiled. "Quite like a mystery 
h story." 

"Come in, sit down," he said, 
I leading the way. "You'll have to 
[ excuse the place. I have to do my 
I own housekeeping, and I just 
Z, don't." He took a test-tube rack 
b and a cracked bunsen tube from 
' an easy chair and nodded her 
into it. He had to make two cir


cuits of the room before he found 
somewhere to put them down. 
"Price of fame," he said sardonically, and sat down on a rope*tied stack of papers bearing the 
flapping label Proceedings of the 
Pan-American Microbiological 
Society. "Where that clown makes 
a joke of Horowitz, other fashionable people make a game of Horowitz. A challenge. Track down 
Horowitz. Well, if they did, 
through tapping my phone or 
following me home, that would 
satisfy them. Then I would be 
another kind of challenge. Bother 
Horowitz. Break in and stir up 
his lab with a stick. You know." 

She shuddered. "People are . . . 
are so . . ► 

"Don't say that, whatever it 
was." said Horowitz. "We're living in a quiet time, Doctor, and 
we haven't evolved too far away 
from our hunting and tracking 
appetites. It probably hasn't occurred to you that your kind of 
math and my kind of biology are 
himting and tracking too. Cut 
away our science bump and we'd 
probably hunt with the pack too. 
A big talent is only a means of 
hunting alone. A little skill is a 
means of hunting alone some of 
the time.** 

"But . . . why must they hunt 
you?" 

"Why must you hunt gravitic 
phenomena?" 

*To understand it." 

"Which means to end it as a 



100 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



mystery. Cut it down to your size. 
Conquer it. You happen to be 
equipped with a rather rarefied 
type of reason," so you call your 
conquest understanding. The next 
guy happens to be equipped with 
fourteen inches of iron pipe and 
achieves his conquest with it instead." 

"You Ye amazing," she said 
openly. "You love your enemies, 
like-" 

"Love thine enemies as thyself. Don't take any piece of that 
without taking it all. How much 
I love people is a function of how 
much I love Horowitz, and you 
haven't asked me about tliat 
Matter of fact, / haven't asked me 
about that and I don't intend to. 
My God it's good to talk to somebody again. Do you want a 
drink?" 

"No," she said. "How much do 
you love Heri Gonza?" 

He rose and hit his palm with 
his fist and sat down again, all 
his gentleness folded away and 
put out of sight "There's tinexception. You can understand 
anything humanity does if you 
try, but you can't understand the 
inhumanity of a Heri Gonza. The 
difference is that he knows what 
is evil and what isn't, and doesn't 
care. I don't mean any numb byrote moral knowledge learned at 
the mother's knee, the kind that 
afflicts your pipe-wielder a little 
between blows and a lot when he 
gets liis breath afterward. I mean 



a clear, analytical, extrapolative, 
brilliantly intelligent knowledge 
of each act and each consequence. 
Don't underestimate that devil." 

"He . . . seems to ... I mean, 
he does love children," she said 
fatuously. 

"Oh, come on now. He doesn't 
spend a dime on his precious Foundation that he wouldn't have to 
give to the government in taxes. 
Don't you realize that? He doesn't 
do a thing he doesn't have to do, 
and he doesn't have to love those 
kids. He's using those kids. He's 
using the filthiest affliction mankind has known for a long time 
just to keep himself front and 
center." 

"But if the Foundation does 
find a cure, then he—" 

"Now you've put your finger on 
the tiling that nobody in the 
world but me seems to understand—why I won't work with the 
Foundation. Two good reasons. 
First, I'm way ahead of them. I 
don't need the Foundation and 
all those fancy facilities. I've got 
closer to the nature of iapetitis 
than any of 'em. Second, for all 
my love for and understanding of 
people, I don't want to find out 
what I'm afraid I would find out 
if I worked there and if a cure 
was found." 

"You mean he'd— he'd withhold 

it?" 

"Maybe not permanently. Maybe he'd sit on it until he'd milked 
it dry. Years. Some would die by 



The Comedian's Children 



107 



then. Some are pretty close as it 
is." 

She thought of Billy and bit her 
hand. 

"I didn't say he would do that," 
Horowitz said, more gently. "I 
said 1 don't want to be in a position to find out. I don't want to 
know that any member of my 
species could do a thing like that. 
Now you see why I work by myself, whatever it costs. If I can 
CUE6 iapetitis, I'll say so. I'll do it, 
I'll prove it. That's why I don't 
mind his kind of cheap persecution. If I succeed, all that harrassment makes it impossible for him 
to lake credit or profit in any 
way." 

"Who are you going to cure?" 
"What?" 

"He's got them all. He's on trideo right now, a telethon, the biggest show of the last ten years, 
hammering at people to send him 
every case the instant it's established." Her eyes were round. 

The logician," he whispered, 
as round-eyed as she. "Oh my 
Cod, I never thought of that." He 
took a turn around the room and 
sat down again. His face was 
white. "But we don't know that. 
Surely he'd give me a patient. Just 
one." 

"It might cost you the cure. 
You'd have to, you'd just have to 
give it to him, or you'd be the 
one withholding it!" 

"I won't think about it now," 
he said hoarsely. "I can't think 



about it now. I'll get the cure. 
That first." 

"Maybe my brother Billy—" 
"Don't even think about it!" he 
cried. "He's already got it in for 
you. Don't get in his way any 
more, He won't let your Billy out 
of there and you know it. Try 
anything and he'll squash you 
like a beetle." 
"What's he got against meK 
"You don't know? You're a 
Nobel winner— one of the newsiest things there is. A girl, and not 
bad-looking at all. You're in the 
public eye, or you will be by noon 
tomorrow when the reporters get 
to you. Do you think for a minute 
he'd let you or anybody climb on 
his publicity? Listen, iapetitis is 
his sole property, lus monopoly, 
and he's not going to share it. 
What'd you expect him to do, 
announce the gift on his lousy 
telethon?" 

"I— I c-called him on his telethon." 
"You didn't!" 

"He pretended the call was 
from you. But . . . but at the same 
time he told me ... oh yes, he 
said, "What you got I don't want. 
I'm not up here to do you no 
good.' " 

Horowitz spread his hands. 
"Q.E.D." 

"Oh," she said, "how awful." 

At that point somebody kicked 
the door open. 

Horowitz sprang to lus feet, 



10$ 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



livid. A big man in an open, flapping topcoat shouldered his way 
in. He had a long horse-face and 
a blue jaw. His .eyes were extremely sad. He said, "Now just 
relax. Relax and you'll be all 
right." His hands, as if they had 
a will of their own, busied themselves about pulling off a tight 
left-hand glove with wires attached to it and running into his 
side pocket. 

"Flannel!" Horowitz barked. 
"How did you get in?" He stepped forward, knees slightly bent, 
head lowering. "YouH get out of 
here or so help me—" 

"Nol" Iris cried, clutching at 
Horowitz's forearm. The big man 
outreached and outweighed the 
biologist, and certainly would 
fight rougher and dirtier. 

"Don't worry, lady," said the 
man called Flannel sleepily. He 
raised a lazy right hand and made 
a slight motion with it, and a 
cone-nosed needier glittered in 
his palm. "He'll be good— won't 
you, boy? Or I'll put you to bed 
for two weeks an' a month over." 

He sidled past and, never taking his gaze from Horowitz for 
more than a flickering instant, 
opened the three doors which led 
from the laboratory— a bathroom, 
a bedroom, a storage closet. 

"Who is he? You know him?" 
Iris whispered. 

"I know him," growled Horowitz. "He's Heri Conza's bodyguard." 



"Nobody but the two of them," 
said Flannel. 

"Good," said a new voice, and 
a second man walked in, throwing off a slouch hat and opening 
the twin to the long, loose topcoat Flannel wore. "Hi, chillun," 
said Heri Gonza. 

There was a long silence, and 
then Horowitz plumped down on 
his pile of Proceedings, put his 
chin in his hands, and said in profound disgust, "Ah, for God's 
sake." 

"Dr. Horowitz," said Heri 
Conza pleasandy, nodding, and 
*Dr. Barran." 

Iris said, shakily, "I th-thought 
you were doing a sh-show." 

"Oh, I am, I am. All things are 
possible if you only know how. 
At the moment Chitsie Boxnboffl 
is doing a monolog, and she's 
good for two encores. After that 
there's a solido of me sitting way 
up on the flats in the left rear, oh 
so whimsically announcing the 
Player's Pub Players. They have 
a long one-acter and a pantomime. I've even got a ballet company, in case this takes that long." 

"Phoney to the eyeballs, even 
when you work," said Horowitz. 
"In case wliat takes that long?" 

"We're going to talk." 

"You talk," said Horowitz. 
"Quickly and quietly and get the 
hell out of here, 'scuse me, Dr. 
Barran." 

"Oh, that's all right," she murmured. 



The Comedian's Children 



J 09 



Hi ;isr, said the comedian 
softly, "1 didn't come here to 
quarrel with you. I want to end 
all that Here and now, and for 
good* 

"We've got something he 
wants," said Horowitz in a loud 
aside to Iris. 

Hcri Gonza closed his eyes and 
said, ' You're making this harder 
than it has to be. What can I do 
to make this a peaceful talk?" 

"For one thing," said Horowitz, 
"your simian friend is breathing 
and it bothers me. Make him 
stop." 

"Flannel," said Heri Gonza, 
"get out" 

Glowering, the big man moved 
to the door, opened it, and stood 
on the sill. "All the way," said the 
comedian. Flannel's broad back 
was one silent mass of eloquent 
protest, but he went out and shut 
the door. 

Deftly, with that surprising 
suddenness of nervous motion 
which was his stock in trade, Heri 
Gonza dropped to one knee to 
bring their faces on a level, and 
captured Iris's startled hands. 
"First of all. Dr. Barran, I came to 
apologize to you for the way I 
spoke on the telephone. I had to 
do it— then- was no alternative, as 
you'll soon understand. I tried to 
call you back, but you'd already 
gone." 

"You followed me here! Oh, Dr. 
Horowitz, I'm sorry!" 
"I didn't need to follow you. 



I've had tin's place spotted since 
two days before you moved into 
it, Horowitz. But I'm sorry I had 
to strongarm my way in." 

"I yield to curiosity," said Horowitz. "Why didn't my locks alarm 
when you opened them? I saw 
Flannel's palm-print eliminator, 
but dammit, they should have 
alarmed." 

"The locks were here when you 
rented the place, right? Well, who 

do you think hud thezn Installed? 
I'll show you where the cutoff 
switch is before I leave. Anyhow 
—grant me this point Was there 
any other way I could have gotten in to talk witli you?" 

"I concede," said Horowitz 
sourly. 

"Now, Dr. Barran. You have my 
apology, and you'll have the explanation to go with it. Believe 
rue, I'm sony. The other thing I 
want to do is to accept, with 
thanks from the bottom of my 
heart, your very kind offer of the 
prize money. I want it, I need it, 
and it will help more than you 
can possibly realize." 

"No," said Iris flatly. Tve 
promised it to Dr. Horowitz." 

Heri Gonza sighed, got to his 
feet, and leaned back against the 
tab bench. He looked down at 
them sadly. 

"Go on," said Horowitz. "Tell 
us how you need money." 

"The only two things I have 
never expected from you are ignorance and stupidity," said Heri 



I 10 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



Gonza sharply, "and you're putting up a fine display of both. Do 
you really think, along with all 
my millions of ardent fans, that 
when I land a two-million-dollar 
contract I somehow put two million dollars In the bank? Don't be 
childish. My operation is literally 
too big to hide anything in. I have 
city, county, state and federal 
lax vultures picking through my 
whole operational framework. I'm 
a corporation and subject to outside accounting. I don't even have 
a salary; I draw what I need, and 
I damn well account for it, too. 
Now, if fin going to finish what 
I started with the disease, I'm 
going to need a lot more money 
than I can whittle out a chip at 
a time." 

The n take it out of the Foundation money— that's what it's for." 

"I want to do the one thing I'm 
not allowed to do with it. Which 
happens to be the one thing that'll 
break this horrible tiling— it has 
to!" 

The only thing there is like 
that is a trip to Iapetus." 

To this, Heri Gonza said nothing—absolutely nothing at all. He 
simply waited. 

Iris Harran said, "He means it. 
I think he really means it." 

"You're a big wheel," said Horowitz at last, "and there are a lot 
of corners you can cut, but not 
that one. There's one thing the 
government— all governments and 
all their armed forces— will rise up 



in wrath to prevent, and that's 
another landing and return from 
any place off earth — especially 
Iapetus. You've got close to four 
hundred dying kids on your hands 
right now, and the whole world 
is scared," 

"Set that aside for a moment." 
The comedian was earnest, warmvoiced. "Just suppose it could he 
done. Horowitz, as I understand it 
you have everything you need on 
the iapetitis virus but one little 
link. Is that right?" 

That's right. I can synthesize 
a surrogate vims from nucleic 
acids and exactly duplicate the 
disease. But it dies out of its own 
accord. There's a difference between my synthetic virus and the 
natural one, and I don't know 
what it is. Give me ten hours on 
Iapetus and half a break, and 111 
have the Original virus under an 
electron mike. Then I can synthesize a duplicate, a real self-sustaining virus that can cause the 
disease. Once I have that, the 
antigen becomes a factory process, with the techniques we have 
today. We'll have shots for those 
kids by the barrel lot inside of a 
week.** 

Heri Gonza spread his hands. 
There's the problem, then. The 
law won't allow the flight until we 
have the cure. We won't have the 
cure unless we make the flight." 

Iris said, "A Nobel prize is an 
awful lot of money, but it won't 
buy the shell of a space ship." 



The Comedians Children 



111 



"I've got the ship." 

For the first time Horowitz 
straightened up and spoke with 
something besides anger and 
hopelessness. "What kind of a 
ship? Where is it?" 

"A Fafnir. You've seen It, or 
pieturcs of it. I use it for globetrotting mostly, and VIP sightseeing. It's a deepspacc craft, 
crew of twelve, and twelve passenger cabins. But it handles like 
a dream, and I've got the best 
pilot in the world. Kearsarge." 

"Kearsarge, God yes. But look, 
what you call deepspacc is Mars 
and Venus. Not Saturn." 

"You don't know what's been 
done to that ship. She'll sleep 
four now. I have a lab and a shop 
in her, and all the rest is nothing 
but power-plant, shielding and 
fuel. Hell, she'll make Pluto!" 

"Vim mean you've been working on this already?" 

"Man, I've been chipping away 
at my resources for a year and a 
half now. You don't know what 
kind of footsie I've been playing 
with my business managers and 
the banks and all. I can't squeak 
out another dime without lighting up the whole project. Dr. 
Barren, now do you sec why I 
had to treat you like that? You 
were the godsend, with your wonderful offer and your vested interest in Billy. Can you astrogate?" 

"I— oh dear. I know the principles well enough. Yes, I could, 
with a little instruction.'' 



"You'll get it. Now look, I don't 
want to see that money. You two 
will go clown and inspect the ship 
tomorrow morning, and then put 
in everything yonll need beyond 
what's already there. You've got 
food, fuel, water and air enough 
for two trips, let alone one." 

"find," said Horowitz. 

"I'll arrange for your astrogation, Dr. Barran. You'll have to 
dream up a story, secret project 
or long solitary vacation or some 
such. Horowitz, you can drop out 
of sight without trouble." 

"Oh sure, thanks to you." 

"Dammit, this time you're welcome,'* said the comedian, and 
very nearly smiled. "Now, you'll 
want one more crew member: I'll 
take care of that before flight 
time." 

"What about the ship? What 
will you say?" 

"Flight test after overhaul. 
Breakdown in space, repair, return—some such. Leave that to 
Kearsarge." 

"I freely admit," said Horowitz, 
"that I don't get it. This is one 
frolic that isn't coming out of 
taxes, and it's costing you a 
packet. What's in it, mountebank?" 

"You could ask that," said the 
comedian, sadly. "The kids, that's 
aU." 

"YouH get the credit?" 

"I won't, I can't, I don't want 
it. I can't tie in to this jaunt— it 
would ruin me. Off-earth land


112 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



ings, risking the lives of all earth's 
kids— yon know how they'd talk. 
No sir: this is your cooky, Horowitz. You disappear, you show up 
one day with the answer. I eat 
crow like a hell of a good sport. 
You get back your directorship 
if you want it. Happy ending. All 
the kids get well." He jumped 
into the air and clicked his heels 
four times on the way down. "The 
kids get well," he breathed with 
sudden sobriety. 

Horowitz said gently, "Heri 
Gonza, what's with you and 
kids?" 

"I like cm." He buttoned his 
coat "Goodnight, Dr. Barren. 
Please accept my apologies again, 
and don't think too badly of me." 

"1 don't," she said smiling, and 
gave him her hand. 

"But why do you like kids thatmuch?" asked Horowitz. 

Heri Gonza shrugged easily and 
laughed his deadpan laugh. 
"Never had none," he chuckled. 
He went to the door and stopped 
facing it, suddenly immobile. His 
shoulders trembled. He whirled 
suddenly, and the famous carven 
face was wet, twisted, the mouth 
tortured and crooked. "Never 
can," he whispered, and literally 
ran out of the room. 

The weeks went by. the months. 
Iapetitis cases underwent some 
strange undulations, and a hope 
arose that the off-world virus was 
losing its strength. Some of the 



older cases actually improved, 
and a blessing that was, too; for 
although overall growth was arrested, . there was a tendency for 
the mobile side to grow faster 
than the other, and during the 
improvement phase, the sides 
seemed to equalize. Then, tragically the improvement would slow; 
and stop. 

Incidence of the disease seemed 
to be slackening as well. At the 
last, there had been only three 
new cases in a year, though they 
caused a bad Surry, occurring as 
they did simultaneously in a Belgian village which had had no 
hint of the disease before. 

Heri Gonza still did Iris weekly 
stint (less vacation) and still 
amazed his gigantic audiences 
with his versatility, acting, singing, dancing, clowning. Sometimes 
he would make quiet appearances, opening and closing the 
show and turning it over to a 
theater or ballet group. During 
the Old Timer's Celebration he 
learned to fly a perfect duplicate 
of a century-old light aircraft with 
an internal combustion engine, 
and daringly took his first solo 
during the show, with a trideo 
camera occupying the instructors 
seat. 

At other times he might take 
up the entire time-segment alone, 
usually with orchestra and props, 
once— possibly his most successful 
show— dressed in sloppy practice 
clothes on a bare stage, without 



The Comedian's Children 



113 



so much as a chair, and with no 
assistance but lights and cameras 
and an occasional invisible touch 
from the hypnos and the scent 
generators. Single-handedly he 
was a parade, a primary schoolroom, a zoo in an earthquake, and 
an old lady telling three children, 
ages five, ten, and fifteen, about 
sex all at the same time. 

And in between (and sometimes during ) his shows, he faithfully maintained I. F. He visited 
his children regularly, every 
Single one of the more than four 
hundred. He thrilled with their 
improvements, cheered them in 
their inevitable relapses. The only 
time he did not make one of his 
scheduled shows at all was the 
time the three cases appeared in 
Belgium, and then the slot was 
fillet! with news-items about the 
terrifying resurgence, and a world 
lour of I. F. clinics. He was a 
great man, a great comic, no question about it, right up to his very 
last show. 

He didn't know it was his last 
show, which in its way was a pity, 
because with that knowledge he 
would have been more than good; 
he'd have been great. He was that 
kind of performer. 

However, he was good, and 
was in and out of a vastly amusing variety show, using his old 
trick of standing offstage and 
singing with perfect mimicry 
while top vocalists stood center 
Stage and mouthed the words. He 



turned out to be one of the Japanese girls who built body-pyramids on their bicycles, and, 
powered by a spring device under 
tho water, joined a succession of 
porpoises leaping to take fish out 
of a keeper's hand. 

He played, as he preferred to 
do, in a large studio without an 
audience, but playing to the audience-response sound supplied to 
him. He made his cues well, filled 
in smoothly with ad-libs when a 
girl singer ran a chorus short on 
her arrangement, and did his easy 
stand-up comedy monolog to 
close. A pity he didn't smile on 
that show. When the on-the-airs 
went out and the worklights came 
on, he threw a sweatshirt around 
his shoulder and ambled into the 
wings, where, as usual, the network man, Burcke, waited for him. 

"How'd it look, Burckee oY turkey?" 

"Like never before," said 
Burcke. 

"Aw, you're cute yourself," said 
the comedian. "I^ets have a look." 
One of his greatest delights— and 
one reason for his fantastic polish 
—was the relaxed run-through 
afterward, where he lounged in 
the projection-room and looked 
at the show he had just finished 
from l>cginning to end. He and 
Burcke and a few interested castmembers, backstage people, and 
privileged strangers got arranged 
in the projection room. Beer was 
passed around and the small-talk 



1 14 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



used up. As usual they all deferred to Heri Gonza, and when 
he waved a negligent hand everybody shut up and the projectionist threw the switch. 

Title and credits with moving 
doud-blanket background. 
Credits- fade, camera zooms toward clouds, which thin to show 
mountain range. Down through 
cloiuls, hover over huge misty 
lake. Water begins to heave, to be 
turbulent, suddenly shores rush 
together and water squirts high 
through the clouds in a thick column. Empty luke rises up out of 
clouds, is discovered to be Heri 
Gonza's open mouth. Pull back 
to show full face. Puzzled expression. Hand up, into mouth, extracts live goldfish. 

Gonza: Welcome to the Heri 
Gonza show, this week 'As you 
lake it.' (beat) Which is all you 
can expect when you open with 
a punorama. What ho is (beat) 
What ho is yonder? A mountain. 
What ho is on the mountain? A 
mountain goat. What ho is the 
goat mountain? Why, another 
rnoun— Fellers, keep the lens on 
me, things are gettin* a little blue 
off camera. Now hear ye, Tom, 
now hear ye Dick, now hear ye 
hairy Harry, Heri's here. Hee hee, 
ho ho, here comes the show. 

Soft focus and go to black. Long 
beat. 

Heri took his beer away from 



his mouth and glared at the wall. 
"God's sake, you send all that 
black?" 

"Sure did," said Bnrcke equably. 

"Man, you don't do that for 
anything but the second coming. 
What you think they expect with 
all that black? It sucks 'em in. but 
boy, you got to pay off." 

"We paid off," said Burcke. 
"Here it comes." 

"The horse act, right?" 

"Wrong," said Burcke. 

Dark stage. Desk, pool of light. 
Zoom in, Burcke, jaw clamped. In 
a face as sincere and interested as 
that, the clamped jaw is pretty 
grim. 

Bubcke: Tonight the Heri Gonza show brings you a true story. 
Although the parts are played by 
professional actors, and certain 
scenes are shortened for reasons 
of time, you may be assured that 
these are real events and can be 
proved in every detail. 

"What the hell is this?" roared 
Heri Gonza. "Did you air this? Is 
this what went out when I was 
knocking myself out with that 
horse act?" 

"Sit down," said Burcke. 

Heri Gonza sat down dazedly. 

Burcke at desk. Lifts book and 
raps it. 

Burcke: This is a ship's rough 
log, the log of the Fafnir 203. 
How it comes to be on this desk, 



ne 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



on your wall, is, I must warn you, 
a shocking story. The Fafnir is a 
twelve-cabin luxury cruiser with 
a crew of twelve, including stewards and the galley crew. So was 
the 203, before it was rebuilt. It 
was redesigned to sleep four with 
no room over, with two cabins 
rebuilt as a small-materials shop 
and a biological laboratory, and 
all the rest taken up with powerplant, fuel and stores. The ship's 
complement was Dr. Iris Barran, 
mathematician— 

Fade in foredeck of Fafnir, girl 
standing by computer. 

Dr. George Rehoboth Horowitz, microbiologist— 

Bespectacled man enters, 
crosses to girl, who smiles. 

Yeager Kearsarge, pilot first 
class— 

Kearsarge is a midget with a 
long, bony, hardbitten face. He 
enters from black foreground and 
goes to control console. 

Sam Flannel, supercargo. 

Widen lighting to pass cabin 
bulkhead, discovering large man 
strapped in acceleration couch, 
asleep or unconscious. 

"I got it," said Heri Gonza in 
the projection room. "A rib. It's 
a rib. Pretty good, fellers." 

"It isn't a rib, Heri Gonza," said 
Burcke. "Sit down, now." 

"It's got to be a rib," said Heri 
Gonza in a low voice. "Slip me a 
beer I should relax and enjoy the 
altogether funny joke." 



"Here. Now shush." 

Burcke: . . . mission totally contrary to law and regulation. Destination: Iapetus. Purpose: collection of the virus, or spores, of 
the dreaded children's affliction 
iapetitis, on the theory that examination of these in their natural habitat will reveal their exact 
internal structure and lead to a 
cure, or at the very least an immunization. Shipowner and director of mission: (long beat) Heri 
Gonza. 

Fourteen hours out . . . 

Fade Burcke and desk and take 
out. Dolly in to foredeck. 

Horowitz crosses to side cabin, 
looks in on Flannel. Touches 
Flannels face. Returns to computer and Iris, 

Horowitz: "He's still out cold. 
The tough boy is no spaceman." 

Iris: "I can't get over his being 
here at all. Why ever did Heri 
want him along? 

Horowitz: Maybe he'll tell us. 

Small explosion. High whine. 

Kearsarge: A rock! a rock! 

Iris: (frightened) What's a 
rock? 

Kearsarge waddles rapidly to 
friction hooks on bulkhead, 
snatches off helmets, throws two 
to Horowitz and Iris, sprints with 
two more into cabin. Gets one 
on Flannel's lolling head, adjusts 
oxygen valve. Puts on his own. 
Returns to assist Iris, then Moskowitz. 



The Comedians Children 



Ims: What is it? 

Kearsarge: Nothing to worry 
you, lady. Meteorite. Just a little 
one. IH get it patched. 

From control console, sudden 
sharp hiss and cloud of vapor. 

Iris: Oh! And what's that? 

Kearsarge: Now you got me. 

Kearsarge goes to console, 
kneels, peers underneath. Grunts, 
fumbles. 

Horowitz: What is it? 

Kearsarge: Ain't regulation, 
'sail I know. 

Horotvitz kneels beside him 
and peers. 

Horowitz: What's this? 

Kearsarge: Bottom of main firing lever. Wire tied to it, pulled 
that pin when we blasted off. 

Horowitz; Started this timing 
mechanism. . . . What time did it 
pop? 

Kearsarge: Just about 14:30 
after blastoff. 

Horowitz: Think you can get 
it off there? I'd like to test for 
what was in it, 

Kearsarge gets the device off, 
gives it to Horowitz, who takes it 
into lab. 

Cut to cabin, closeup of Flannel's helmetecl face. He opens his 
eyes, stares blankly. He is very 
sick, pale, insane with dormant 
fear. Suddenly fear no longer dormant. With great difficulty raises 
head, raises strapped-down wrist 
enough to see watch. Suddenly 
begins to scream and thrash 
around. The releases arc right by 



111 

his hands but lie can't find them. 
Iris and Kearsarge run In. Kearsarge stops to take in the situation, then reaches out and pulls 
releases. Straps fall away; Flannel, howling, leaps for the door, 
knocking the midget flat and 
slamming Iris up against edge of 
door. She screams. Kearsarge 
scrambles to his feet, takes off 
after Flannel like a Boston terrier 
after a bull. Flannel skids to a 
stop by the lifeboat blister, starts 
tugging at it. 

Kearsarge: What the hell are 
you doing? 

Flannel ( blubbering ) : 14:30 
... 14:30 ... I gotta get out, gotta 
get out . . . (screams) 

Kearsarge: Don't pull on that, 
y'damn fooll That's not the hatch, 
it's the release! We got spin on 
for gravity— y'll pitch the boat a 
hundred miles off! 

Flannel: Oh, lemme out, it's 
too late! 

Kearsarge punches upwards 
with both hands so unexpectedly 
that Flannel's grip is broken and 
lie pitches over backwards. Kearsarge leaps on him, twists his oxygen valve, and scuttles back out 
of the way. Flannel lumbers to 
his feet > staggers over to the boat 
blister, gets his hands on the 
wrong lever again, but his knees 
buckle. Inside the helmet, his face 
is purpling. Horowitz comes running out of the lab. Kearsarge 
puis out an arm and holds him 
back, and together they watch 



I is 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



Flannel sag down, fall, roll, 
writhe. He puts both hands on 
helmet, tugs at it weakly, 

Horowitz: Don't for God's 
sakes let him take off that helmet! 

Kearsarge: Don't worry. He 
can't. 

Flannel slumps and lies still. 
Kearsarge goes to him and opens 
valve a little. He beckons Horoivitz and together they drag him 
back to the cabin and with some 
difficulty get him on the couch 
and strapped down. 

Horowitz: What happened? I 
had my hands full of reagents in 
there. 

Kearsarge: Space nutty. They 
get like that sometimes a ft* -r 
blackout. He wanted out. Tried 
to take the boat. 

Horowitz: He say anything? 

Kearsarge: Buncha junk. Said, 
14:30, 14:30. Said it was too late, 
had to get out. 

Horowitz: That snivvy under 
the console popped at 14:30. He 
knew about it. 

Kearsarge: Did he now. What 
was it? 

Horowitz: Cyanide gas. If wo 
hadn't been holed and forced to 
put the helmets on, we'd Ve had 
it. 

Kearsarge: Except him. He 
figured to be up an' around 
lookin' at his watch, and when 
she popped, he'd be in the boat 
headed home and we'd kcop 
blasting till the pile run dry, 
som'res out t'ords Algol. 



Horowitz: Can you fix those 
releases so he can't reach them? 

Kearsarge: Oh sure. 

Fade. Light pick up Burcke at 
tlie side. 

Burcke ; [as narrator) They got 
an explanation out of Flannel, 
and it satisfied none of them. He 
said he knew nothing of any cyanide. He said that Heri, knowing 
he was a bad spaceman, had told 
him that if it got so bad he 
couldn't stand it, he could always 
come back in the lifeboat. But if 
he did that, he'd have to do it 
before 14:30 after blastoff or there 
wouldn't be fuel enough to decelerate, start back, and maneuver 
a landing. He insisted that that 
was all there was to it. He would 
not say what he was doing aboard, 
except to state that Heri Gonza 
wanted him to look out for Heri's 
interests. 

No amount of discussion made 
anything clearer. Heri certainly 
coidd not have wanted the expedition to fail, nor his ship 
hurled away from the solar system. They reluctantly concluded 
that some enemy of Heri Gonza's 
must have sabotaged them— someone they simply didn't know. 

The weeks went by—not easy 
ones, by any means, in those close 
quarters, without any event except Iris Barran's puzzling discovery that the ship required DO 
astrogator after all: what the veteran Kearsarge couldn't handle 
in his head was easily treated in 



The Comedian's Children 



119< 



the computer. Why, then, had 
Heri Gonza insisted on her cramming on astrogation? 

Zoom in to Saturn until it fills 
a quadrant. String out the moons, 

Heri Gonza watched the bridge 
sequence, as Saturn swept close 
and the moons rolled by like 
broken beads, and little Iapetus 
swam close. Iapetus is not a moon 
like most, round or oblate, but a 
rock, a drifting mountain some 
500 miles in diameter. And before 
them was the solution to the mystery of the changing moonlight. 
Some unknown cataclysm has 
cloven Iapetus, so that it has one 
sheer face, nearly four hundred 
square miles of flat plain (or cliff, 
depending on how you look at 
it) made of pale grey basaltic 
material. Since Iapetus always 
maintains one face to Saturn, it 
always appears brighter as it 
rounds the eastern limb, and dimmer as it goes west, the albedo of 
the flat face being much higher 
than the craggy ruin of the rest 
of its surface. 

"Burckee, Burckee, Burckee ol' 
turkey," murmured the comedian 
in accents of wonder, "who the 
hell writes your stuff? Who writes 
your lousy, lousy stuff?" 

Stock shot, Fafnir putting down 
tail-first on rocky plain, horizon 
washed out and, black space 
brought down close. Rocks sharpcornered, uneroded. Long shot, 



stabilizing jacks extending widest. 
Ladder out. Two suited figures 
ride it down, the other two climb 
down. 

Close-up, all four at tail-base. 

Horowitz: (filter mike) Check 
your radios. Read me? 

All: Check. Read you fine. 

Horowitz: Each take a fin. 
Walk straight out with the fin as 
a guide, and when you've passed 
our scorch area, get a rock scraping every five feet or so until 
you're far enough away that the 
horizon's a third of the way up 
the hull. Got that? No further. 
( Beat ) And I can almost tell you 
now, we aren't going to find one 
blessed tiling. No virus, no spore, 
no nothing. My God, it's no more 
than twelve, thirteen degrees K in 
the shadows here. Anyway . . . 
let's go. 

Burcke: (of) Scratch and hop, 
scratch and hop. In this gravity, 
you don't move fast or push hard, 
or you 11 soar away and take minutes to come down again. Shuffle 
and scratch, scratch and sweep, 
scratch and bop, It took them 
hours. 

Close-up, Kearsarge, looking 
down. 

Kearsarge: Here's something. 

Closeups, each of the other 
three, looking up, turning head at 
the sound of Kearsarge's voice
Horowitz: What is it? 

Kearsarge: Scorch. A regular 
mess of it. Hell, you know what? 
Swope toppled his ship. I can see 



120 



VKNTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



where lie came down, then where 
he took off, scraping along to the 
big edge there. 

Flannel: Wonder lie didn't 
wreck her. 

Kearsarce: He did. He 
couldn't hurt the hull any in this 
gravity, but he sure as hell wiped 
off liis antennae, because there 
they are: landing, range, transmission— every one, by God. No 
wonder he come barrelling in the 
way he did. You can't land a Fafnir on manual, but you can try, 
and he tried. Poor oY Swopie. 

Horowitz: Everybody over 
there by Kcarsarge. Maybe Swope 
picked up something where he 
scraped. 

Long shot of the four working 
around long scorch and scrape 
marks. 

Burcke: (off, narrating) They 
filled their specimen sacks and 
brought them it 1 ward, and then 
for seventy-two hours they went 
through their dust and stones 
with every test Horowitz could devise. . . . He had been quite right 
in his first guess. The nioonlet 
Iapetus is as devoid of life as the 
inside of an autoclave. 

Cut to forcdeck set, but upended, the controls at highest 
point, the floor what teas tlie after 
hidkhrad. Iris moving around 
with slow shuffle, setting out magnetized plates on a steel table, 
each one hitting loudly. In background, Flannel fusses with small 
electron mike, watching screen 



and moving objective screws. 
Lifeboat blister open, Kcarsarge 
inside, working. 

Airlock cycles, Opens, and 
Horowitz comes in, suited, toHh 
sack. He is weary. Iris helps with 
helmet. 

Houowny.: I've had it. Let's get 
home. We can get just so dutybound. 

Iris: What's this "home?' I don't 
remember. 

Horowitz: You for home, 
Kearsarge? 

Kearsarce: Any time you're 
through hoein' this rock. 

Horowitz: What are you doing 
in there? 

Kearsarge: Just routine. Figured you might want to buzz 
around the other side with the 
boat. 

Horowitz: Nosir. I came close 
enough on foot. I say we're done 
here. A man could sit home with 
a pencil and paper and figure out 
the density of sub-microscopic 
growth this place would have to 
have to bring any back on the 
hull. We'd be hip deep in it. The 
iapctiris virus didn't come from 
Iapetus, and that, friends, is for 
sure and official. 

Kearsarce: (off) Oh my holy 
mother. (He pops out, puttycolored.) George, get over here. 

Iris: (curiously) What is it? 

She goes over and disafflicars 
for a moment inside the boat, with 
Kearsarge and Horowitz. Off, she 
gasps. Then, one by one they 



The Comedian's Children 



121 



climb out and stand looking at 
Flannel. Sensing tlie silence, l\e 
looks up and meets their eyes. 

Flannel: What I got, blue 
horns or something? 

Horowitz: Show him, Kearsarge. 

Kearsarge beckons. There is a 
strange pucker of grim amusement on his craggy face. 

Keabsauge: Come look, little 
feller. Then you can Join our club. 

Reluctantly, the big man goes 
over to the blister and follows 
Kearsarge into the lifeboat. Dolly 
after them, swing in to the instrument panel, under it and look 
up. 

Lashed to the projecting lower 
end of the main thrust control is 
a silver can with a small cylinder 
at the near end. 

Flannel: (pointing stupidly) 
Is that . . . that the same tiring 
that
Keahsahce: A little smaller, but 
then you don't need as much 
cyanide for a boat. 

Flannel: (angry) Who the 
hell put it there? You? 

Kearsarce: Not me, feller. I 
just found it. 

Horowitz: It's been there all 
along, Flannel. Kearsarge is right: 
you belong to the club too. You 
sure it was Heri Conza told you 
to take the boat? 

Flannel: Sure it was. He 
I couldn't have nothing to do with 
this. ( Suddenly it hits him ) Jesus! 
I mighta— 



Horowitz: We'll have plenty 
of time to talk this over. Let's 
pack up the testing stuff and haul 
out of here. 

Flannel: (to no one) Jesus. 

Heri Conza lay back in the 
projection room and sipped his 
beer and watched the stock shot 
of a Fafnir taking off from a rock 
plain. "You really get all that glop 
out of that book, Burcke m' boy?" 

"Every bit of it," said Burcke, 
watching the screen. 

"You know how it is in space, 
a fellow's got to do something 
with his time. Sometimes he 
writes, and sometimes it's fairy 
tales, and sometimes you can get 
a pretty good show out of a fairy 
tale. But when you do that, you 
call it a fairy talc. Follow me?" 

"Yup.
"This was really what went out 
on the air tonight?" 
"Sure is." 

Very, very softly, Heri Conza 
said, "Poor Burcke, Poor, poor ol' 
Burcke." 

Close-up, hands turning pages in 
rough logbook. Pull back to show 
Burcke with book. He looks up, 
and wlien he speaks his voice is 
solemn. 

Buhoce: Time to think, time to 
talk it over. Time to put all the 
pieces in the same place at the 
same time, and push them against 
each other to see what fits. 

Fade to black; but it is not 



122 



VK.VTCHE SCIENCE FICTION 



black after all: instead, starry 
spare. Van across to pick up ship, 
a silver fish with a scarlet tail. 
Zoom in fast, dissolve through 
hull, discovering foredeck. The 
four lounge around, really relaxed, 
willing to think before speaking, 
and to speak carefully. Horowitz 
and Kearsarge sit at the table ignoring a chessboard. Iris is 
stretched on the deck with a 
rolled-up specimen sack under her 
head. Flannel kneels before a 
spread of CanfieUl solitaire. Horowitz is watching him. 

Horowitz: I like to think about 
Flannel. 

Flannel: Think what? 

Horowitz: Oh... the alternatives. The 'ifs.' What would Flannel do if this had been different, 
or that. 

Flannel: There's no sense in 
that kind of thinkin*— if this, if 
that This happened, or that happened, and that's all there is to 
it. You got anything special in 
mind? 

Houowitz: I have, as a matter 
of fact. Given that you had a job 
to do, namely to cut out and leave 
us with our cyanide bomb at the 
start of the trip— 

Funnel: (aroused) I to! you and 
toV you that wasn't a job. I didn't 
know about the damn cyanide. 

IIohowitz: Suppose you had 
known about it. Would you have 
come? If you had come, would 
you have tipped us off about it? 
And here's the question I thought 



of: if the first bomb had failed— 
which it did— and there had been 
no second bomb to tell yon thai 
you were a member of the Exit 
Club, would you have tried to 
do the job on the way home? 

Flannel: I was thinkin' about 
it, about what to do. 

Horowitz: And what did you 
decide? 

Flannel: Nothin'. You found 
the bomb in the boat so I just 
stopped thinkin'. 

IriS: (suddenly) Why did that 
really make a difference? 

Flannel: All the diff" nee in the 
world. Heri Gonza toT me to get 
in the lifeboat before fourteen an' 
a half hours and come back and 
tell him how things went. Now if 
there was just your bomb, could 
be that Heri Gonza wanted you 
knocked off. There was an accident and it din't knock you off, 
and here I am working for him 
and wonderin* if I shoon't take 
up where the bomb left off. 

Iris: Then we found the second bomb, and you changed your 
mind. Why? 

Flannel: (exasperated) whata 
ya all, simple or somepin? Heri 
Gonza, he tot me to come back 
and tell fiim how it went. If he 
tells me that an' then plants a 
bomb on me, how could I get 
back to tell him? A man's a fool 
to tell a guy to do somethin' an* 
then fix it so he can't. He's no fool, 
I Ieri Gonza I mean, an' you know 
it. Well then: if he din't plant my 



The Comedian's Children 



123 



bomb, he din't plant your bomb, 
because anyone can see they was 
planted by the same guy. An' if 
he din't plant your bomb, he don't 
want you knocked off, so I 
stopped thinkin* about it. Is that 
simple enough for ya? 

Ibis: I don't know that it's 
simple, hut it sure is beautiful. 

Horowitz; Well, one of us is 
satisfied of Heri Gonza's good intentions. Though I still don't see 
what sense it made to go to all 
the trouble of putting you aboard 
just to have you get off and go 
back right at the start. 

Flannel: Me neither. But do 
I have to understand everything 
he tells me to do? I done lots of 
things for him I didn't know what 
they was about. You too, Kearsarge. 

K BA hsarge : That's right. I drive 
this can from here to there, and 
from there to yonder, and I don't 
notice anything else, but if I 
notice it I forget it, but if I don't 
forget it I don't talk about it. 
That's the way he likes it and we 
get along fine. 

Iris: (forcefully) I think Heri 
Gonza wanted us all killed. 

Horowitz: What's that— intuition? And . . . shouldn't that read 
"wants"? 

IRIS: 'Wants/ yes. He wants us 
all killed. No, it's not intuition. It 
formulates. Almost. There's a 
piece missing. 

Flannel: Ah, y'r out of y'r 
mind. 



Kearsarge: Doubled. 

Horowitz: (good naluredhj) 
Shut up, both of you. Go on with 
thai. Iris. Maybe by you it formulates, but by me it intuits. Go on. 

Ibis: Well, lets use as a working hypothesis that Heri Gonza 
wants us dead— us four. He wants 
more than that: he wants us to 
disappear from the cosmos— no 
bodies, no graves, no nothing. 

Keabsarge: But why? 

Horowitz: Just you listen. We 
start with the murders and finish 
with the tvliy. YouU see. 

Ibis: Well then, the ship will 
do the removal. The cyanide— 
both cyanides— do the actual killing, and it hits so fast that the 
ship keeps blasting, out and out 
until the fuel is gone, and forever 
after that. We three are on it; 
Flannel crashes in a small craft 
and if anybody wonders about it, 
they don't wonder much. Is there 
any insignia on that boat, by the 
way, Kearsarge? 

Kearsarge: Always. 

Ibis: Go look, will you? Thanks. 
Now, what about the traces we 
leave behind us? Well, we took 
off illegally so notified no one 
and filed no clearances. You, 
George, were already in hiding 
from Heri Gonza's rjersecutions; 
Kearsarge here is so frequently 
away on indeterminate trips of 
varying lengths that he would 
soon be forgotten; Flannel here— 
no offense. Flannel— I don't think 
anyone would notice that you're 



124 



VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



gone for good. As for me, Herl 
Conza himself had me plant a 
story about going off secretly for 
some solitary research for a year 
or so. What's the matter, Kcarsarge? 

Kearsarge : I wouldn'ta believed it. No insignia. Filed off 
and sanded smooth and painted. 
Numbers off the thrust block. 
Trade-name off the dash, even. 
I ... 1 wouldn'ta believed it 

Horowitz : Now you'd better 
listen to the lady. 

Iris: No insignia. So even poor 
Flannel's little smashup is thoroughly covered. Speaking of Flannel, I say again that it was stretching credibility to put him aboard 
that way— unless you assume that 
he was put aboard like the rust of 
us, to be done away with. I certainly came under false pretenses: 
Heri Conza not only told me he 
needed an astrogator for the trip, 
which he didn't, but had me bone 
up on the subject. 

Now we can take a quick look 
at motive. George Horowitz here 
is the most obvious. He has for a 
long time been a thorn in the flesh 
of that comedian. Not only has he 
concluded that Heri Gonza 
doesn't really want to find a cure 
for iapetitis— he says so very 
loudly and as often as he can. In 
addition, George is always on the 
very verge of whipping the disease, something that frightens 
Heri Gonza so much that he's actually hoarding patients so George 



can't get to them. Also, he doesn't 
like George. 

Why kill Flannel? Is he tired 
of you, Flannel? Did you boggle 
something he asked you to do? 

Flannel: He don't have to kill 
me. Miss Iris. He could fire me 
any time. I'd feel real bad, but I 
wouldn't bother him none. He 
knows that. 

Iris: Then you must know too 
much. You must know something 
about him so dangerous he won't 
feel safe until you're dead. 

Flannel: So help me lady, 
there ain't a single thing like that 
I know about him. Not one. Not 
that I know of. 

Horowitz: There's the key, 
Iris. He doesn't know he knows it. 

Kearsarce: Then that's me too, 
because if there's a single thing 
I know that he'd have to kill me 
lor then 1 don't know what it is. 

Iris: You said 'key.' Lock and 
key. A combination of things. Like 
if you put what Flannel knows 
with what Kearsarge knows, they 
will be dangerous to Heri Conza. 

Flannel and Kearsarge gape at 
each other blankly and $imultan~ 
coushj shrug. 

Horowitz: I can give you one 
example of a piece of knowledge 
we all have that would be dangerous to him. We now know 
that the disease virus does not 
originate on Iapetus. Which 
means that poor Swope was not 
responsible for bringing It to 
earth, and, further, the conclu


The Comedian's Children 



125 



sion that the little Tresak girl— 
the first case— caught it from the 
wreckage of the space ship, was 
unwarranted. 

Flannel: I hrung that picture 
of that little girl standing in the 
wreck, I brung it to Heri Conza. 
He liked it. 

Iius: What made you do that? 

Flannel: I done it all the time. 
He told me to. 

Honowrrz: Bring him pictures 
of little girls? 

FLANNEL! Girls, boys . . . but 
pretty ones. I got to know just 
the ones he would like. He liked 
to use 'em on his show. 

Iris and Horowitz lock glance* 
for one horrified second, and then 
pounce all but bodily on Flannel. 

Inis: Did yon ever show him a 
picture of any child who later contracted the disease? 

Flannel; (startled) Wli ... I 
dunno. 

lHis:(s7ioufmg) Think! Think! 

Horowitz: (also shouting) You 
did! You did! The Tresak girlthat photograph of her was taken 
before she had the disease! 

Flannel: Well yeah, her. And 
that little blond one he had on 
the telethon that din't speak no 
English from Est'onia, but you're 
not letlin' me think. 

Horowitz: (subsiding) And 
you didn't know what it was you 
had on him that he considered 
dangerous. 

Flannel: What? 

Kearsarge: I remember that 



little blond girl. I flew her from 
Esthonia. 

Iris: Before or after she had 
the disease? 

Keaksabce: (shrugging) The 
kind of thing I never noticed. She 
. . . she looked all right to me. 
Real pretty little kid. 

Iris: How long before the telethon was that? 

Kearsarce: Week or so. Wait, 
I can tell you to the day. (He 
rises from the chess table and goes 
to a locker, from which he brings 
a notebook. He leafs.) Here it is. 
Nine days. 

Iris: (faintly) he said, on the 
telethon, three days . . . first symptoms. 

Honowrrz: (excitedly) May I 
see that? (Takes Imok, riffles it, 
throtcs it on the table, runs to lab, 
comes hack with cardboard fde, 
fans through comes up with 
folder.) Iris, take Kearsargc's 
book. Right. Now did he fly to 
Belem on the ninth of May? 

Irls: The sixth. 

Horowitz: Rome, around 
March twelfth. 

Iris: March twelfth, Marchhere it is. The eleventh. 

Horowitz: One more. Indianapolis, middle of June. 

Inis; Exactly. The fifteenth. 
What is that you have there? 

He throws it down in front of 
her. 

Horowitz: Case files. Arranged 
chronologically by known or estimated date of first symptom, in 



126 



VF.NTUBE SCIENCE FICTION 



an effort to find some pattern of 
incidence. No wonder there was 
never any pattern. God in Heaven, 
if he wanted a clinic in Australia, 
cases would occur in Australia. 

Flannel: {bewildered) I don't 
know what you all are talkin' 
about. 

Kkarsarcf.: (grimly) I think I 
do. 

Iris: Now do you think youre 
worth murdering— you who can 
actually place him on the map, at 
the time some child was stricken, 
every single time? 

Kearsarge; (huskily) I'm 
worth murdering, I . . . didn't 
know. 

Flannel: (poring over the case 
file) Here's that one I seen in 
Bellefontaine that time, she had 
on a red dress. And this little guy 
here, he got his picture in a magazine 1 found on street in Little 
Rock and I had to go clear to St. 
Louis to find him. 

Kearsarge hops up oil a cluiir 
and hicks Flannel in the head. 

Flannel: (howling) Hooo— 
wow! What you wanna hafta do 
that for? Ya little— 

Horowitz: Cut it out, you two. 
Cut it out! That's better. We don't 
have room for that in here. Leave 
him alone, Kearsarge. His time 
will come. Heaven help me, Iris, 
it's been in front of my nose right 
from the start, and I didn't see it. 
I even told you once diat I was so 
close because I could synthesize 
a vims which would actually 



cause the disease— but it wouldn't 
maintain it? 1 had this idee fixe 
that it was an extra-terrestrial disease. Why? Because it acted like 
a synthetic and no natural terran 
virus does. Serum from those kids 
always acted that way— it would 
cause a form of iapetitis which 
would fade out in three months 
or less. All you have to do to cure 
ihe damn thing is to stop injecting it! 

Iris: Oh, the man, the lovely 
clever man and his family all over 
the world, the little darlings, the 
prettiest ones he could find, whom 
he never, never failed to visit 
regularly . , . (Suddenly, she is 
crying) I was so s-sorry for him! 
Remember the night he . . . tore 
himself open to tell us he ccouldn't have k-kids of his own? 

Keabsarge: Who you talking 
about— Heri Gonza? For Pete's 
sake, he got an ex-wife and three 
kids he pays money to keep 'em 
in Spain, and another ex-wife in 
Paris France with five kids, three 
lu's, and that one in Pittsburghman, that comedian's always in 
trouble. He hates kids— I mean 
really hates 'cm. 

(Iris begins to laugh. Probably 
hysteria. ) 

Dissolve to black, then to starry 
sftace. To black again, bring up 
pool of light, resolve it into: 
Burckc, sitting at desk. He closes 
log book. 

Bvhcke: This is, I regret to say, 



The Comedian's Children 



127 



a true story. The Fafnir 203 came 
in at night six days ago at a small 
field some distance from here, and 
Dr. Horowitz phoned me. After 
considerable discussion it was decided to present this unhappy 
story to you in the form written 
up by the four people who actually experienced it. They are here 
witli me now. And here is a much 
maligned man, surely one of the 
greatest medical researchers alive 
—Dr. Horowitz. 

Honowixz: Thank you. First, I 
wish to assure everyone within 
reach of my voice that what has 
been said here about iapetitis is 
true: it is a synthetic disorder 
which is, by its very nature, harm* 
less, and which, if contracted, 
will pass away spontaneously in 
from two to twelve weeks. Not a 
Single child lias died of it, and 
those who have been its victims 
the longest— some up to two years 
—have unquestionably been lavishly treated. A multiple murder 
was attempted upon my tlirec 
companions and myself, of course, 
but it was our greatest desire to 
see to it that that charge is not 
pressed. 

BunctE: I wish to express the 
most heartfelt apologies from myself and all my colleagues for 
whatever measure of distress this 
network and its affiliates may 
have unwittingly brought you, the 
public. It is as an earnest of tlus 
that we suffer, along with you, 
through the following film clip, 



taken just two days ago in the 
I. F. clinic in Montreal. What you 
see in my hand here is a thin rubber glove, almost invisible on the 
hand. Fixed to its fingertips is a 
microscopic forest of tiny sharp 
steel points, only a few tliousandtlis of an inch long. And this 
metal box, just large enough to 
fit unobtrusively in a side pocket, 
contains a jellied preparation of 
the synthetic virus. 
Fade to.
Willi hilarity in a hospital word. 
Children in various stages of iapetitis, laughing liilariously at tlic 
capering, growling, gurgling, 
belching funny man as he moves 
from bed to bed, Peep! at you, 
peep-pee)> at you, and one by one 
ruffling the little heads at the 
nape, dipping the fingertips in the 
side jacket pocket between each 
bed. 

Dissolve, and bring up Burckc. 

Buhcke: Good night, ladies, 
gentlemen, boys and girls . . . and 
...I'm sorry. 

The lights came up in the projection room. There was nobody 
there with Ileri Gonza but 
Burcke: all the others had quietly 
moved and watched the last few 
scenes from the doorway, and 
slipped away. 

"You did air it?" asked the 
comedian, making absolutely 
sure. 

"Yes." 

Heri Gonza looked at him with


VENTURE SCIENCE FICTION 



out expression and walked toward 
the stage door. It opened as he 
approached, and four people 
came in. Flannel, Kearsarge, 
Horowitz, Iris Barran. 

Without a word Flannel 
stepped up to the comedian and 
hit him in the stomach. Heri Gonza sank slowly to the floor, gasping. 

Horowitz said, "We've spent a 
lot of time deciding what to do 
about you, Heri Gonza. Flannel 



wanted just one poke at you and 
wouldn't settle for anytlring else. 
The rest of us felt that killing was 
too good for you, but we wanted 
you dead. So we wrote you that 
script. Now you're dead." 

Heri Gonza rose after a moment and walked through the stage 
door and out to the middle of 
acres and acres of stage. He stood 
there alone all night, and in the 
morning was gone. 



WE'VE FOUND 

SOMETHING FINE . 

Digging in a few forgotten, dusty corners, we've come across boxes 
containing hundreds of copies of first-line mysteries we published in the 
not-too- distant past. And we want lo share them with you. 

They include Bestseller Mysteries and Jonathan Press Mysteries— reprints 
of the best detective and crime novels of recent years— as well as a supply 
of Mercury Mystery Book- Magazines, which include in each issue a top 
original mystery book, together with assorted fascinating short articles 
and stories on the always fascinating subject of crime. 

So that you may share in this wealth (and, we'll be honest, help us dear 
out our storage space) we offer a full 10 assorted copies of these finds 
for only $1.00! Original value: $3.50. At this price, we regret that we 
cannot fill any special orders—you'll have to let us do the picking. But 
you'd better hurry—this offer is good only until we run out of copies. 
Send your dollar to: 

FINDS 
MERCURY PRESS, INC. 
527 Madison Ave., N. Y. 22, N. Y. 




VcnturingS . . . (continued from p. S) 

fiction than any other living (human?) being— this in the course of 
editing the annual "S-F" collection of the year's best stories. Of the 
thirty-four stories (out of a couple of thousand entries) that wound up 
in the first two volumes of "S-F," there are, I think, two that might 
possibly qualify for Mr. Bester's book— Damon Knight's "Stranger Station," and J. G. Ballard's "Bella Primadonna." Both of these are among 
the most memorable of the whole group; but so are, for instance, Avram 
Davidson's "The Golem," which is as old a notion in fantasy as yon 
might wish to come across, and R. Bretnor's "Doorstop," a short and, 
indeed penetrating, piece about the fearful reactions of one ordinary 
man abruptly made aware in real life of the imminence of alien visitors. 
("You can't write a penetrating story about galactic travel if it's based 
on a bicycle built for two," says Mr. Bester. No?) 

But perhaps the best arguing point would be Alfred Bester's own 
already "classic" novel, "The Demolished Man," which was as good a 
piece of science-fiction as I'd care to name— but not because of pyrotechnic spelling games or marvellous inventions, or the reorganization 
of the body politic to accommodate the "Esper League" (though all of 
these added to the pleasures of reading). It was good because, a)Mr. 
Bester is a first-rate fiction writer, whose characters come alive on the 
page; b) Mr. Bester is a thoughtful man, whose extrapolations arc 
carried far enough in so that the backdrops and incidental properties 
of his stories are satisfyingly self-consistent. 

This is what counts, for me: that the extrapolation— however close to 
what is known or far off into the wild black yonder— be internally consistent, thoughtfully sustained, and soundly built up on itself. Let a story 
commence with no more startling a notion than that man will reach the 
moon— or let it presume the evolution of humanity into attenuated ion 
streams, feeding on cosmic raylets— if the author can hang onto his own 
ideas for the duration (like remembering, for instance, that men in 
space suits must have some provision for their toilet needs— and that ion 
streams must not); then I am happy with both the nature and extent 
of his extrapolation. If he is also capable of convincing me that his 
characters are real— i.e., can evoke from inside them emotions with which 
/ can empathize, be they men of today or tomorrow, space-suited or 
positronic-brained, protoplasmic or evanescent— then I am happy with 
his story. 

—Judith Mebril 



JL5RINGING YOU 




ADVENTURE in the here and now, adventure in ages to come on strange, 
far-off worlds— both are yours to enjoy when you subscribe 
to Mercury's two outstanding science fiction magazines: 

VENTURE— Science fiction with a flare for the dramatic, the offbeat, 
the unusual— that's the fare offered by F&SF's new sister 
magazine. Also, in each bi-monthly issue: Theodore Sturgeon's 
book reviews, Isaac Asimov's science-in-the-news column. 

FANTASY AND SCIENCE FICTION- Longtime favorite with science 
fiction readers, F&SF each month features top-notch tales by the 
field's best-known writers: Heinlein, Anderson, Asimov, 
Sturgeon, many others. Plus articles to bring you up to 
date on s f doings in books, and on the stage and screen. 

SPECIAL OFFER: You can now subscribe to both F&SF and VENTURE at 
the special rate of $7.00 for 12 issues of each. Or, if you prefer, single-magazine subscriptions are available at our usual 
reader- rates. Just fill out the coupon provided below. 



Worlds of Adventure VEMay-e 
Mercury Press, Inc. 

527 Madison Ave., New York 22, N. Y. 

Please enter my subscription ta: 

□ 12 issues of VENTURE Science Fiction ($4.00) 

□ 12 issues of FANTASY AND SCIENCE FICTION ($4.00) 

□ 12 issues of each magazine above (SPECIAL OFFER: $7.00) 
Q I enclose Q Please bill me. 

Name 

Address 

City Zone Sferfe 






A 



CLIFTON FADIMAN writer 
jmd editor, judftc of thr 
Br«>k-i>f-the-Monlh Club, 
writes: J - i F i of ui hot hu 
men ipecitif i»cnpr-rrn(tin({. 
Mine (j science fiction. To my 
mind Fantasy and Science 
Helton regularly supplies 
finest Ike field has to offer 
(« the way of short fiction. | 



SPUING BYINGTON. 

ftimou* Aor of the Broadway singe end motion 
nktiiifs. nnw itnrrini: in the 
CHS TV *hi>w "Urvfmhei 
Bride." writes: "If your 
iiruiKirmdon it n cIi-'Hary, 
|MMM «fifl. incUmUc. arthrihf. it needs ,-j<T<i'r. /'or 
r/ii« 7 iirMfrite otw Urtie a 
I h of f on/flJV and Science 

Fiction, Improvement will 

he noted after the first dost. 



BA511 DAVENPORT, writer 
nn.l editor, judge of the 
B.-k-of-th< -Month Club, 
write!: "I hare hint a fan 
of ir i, Tin- /it-tion «H my ■ 
awl nt The Maaazinc of 
Fanlato and Science Fiction 
f,.t all tit life. FirSF uioa 
fj.v wine nf the hex! writing 
in the field, and the fu ll! 

in line of great importance. 



HUGO GERNS6ACK, 

pimiiTr in icirncr fiction 

publishing, writer and <dltor. 
write*: "Pins ca chanter, plus 
, 'i vl t..- menu' chase — is a 
French irui.nn. Iti'iicntdhly 
accurate of much of our 
laiterday science fiction Sot 
loin the cyclntmnic Magazine 
of Fantasy and Science fiction 
which injects sophisticated 
nefo|)ri, pregnant with 
i'iiifi»;iii«riiiti, into many 
o/ its best narrative*. 

OR.VILLE PRfSCOTT, literary 
critic und author, Book 
Heview Editor for the New 
York Times, turites: "People 
who think that their literary 
t.Q. U (AO high for them 
to vniny tlw Maitaz'me of 
Ftmttitu and Seietie: l ii tion 
don't know what they arc 
missing. The numhtr of wetlwritttn. intteniout and enter, 
taming stories it regularly 
fMukil i' astonishingly 
high." 



BIN graikr, radio kbA 
television nu tst 11 nrfi n K 
special events reporter: 
r *Setnpt fictinn. 1 think. 
offers a wonderful education 
for it-- readert— it extends 
their umlctstanding la 
inonu the entire cntmo*." 




READ THE MAGAZINE OF 

FANTASY AND 
SCIENCE FICTION 

Stars of the entertainment world . . . notables in 
the news . . . distinguished authors and editor* 
—oil owe much of their success to imagination, So 
when they want relaxation or stimulation in reading, they turn naturally to the finest work) of 
imagination; tales of science fiction, And the/ 
find such stories — exciting, fail-paced and exceedingly well written -in THE MAGAZINE OF 
FANTASY AND SCIENCE FICTION. Here the/ 
find current top- notch en such as Robert Helnlein, Arthur C. Clarke, Theodore Sturgeon and 
Isaac Asimov; plus unexpected fantasies from 
writers famous in other fields, such os Stuart 
Palmer and Mark Van Doren. As a bonus, F&SF 
has o unique record of finding stimulating new 
talents— such fine writers os Mildred Clingerman, 
Richard Matheson ond Chad Oliver first appeared 
in these pages. ... In a word, here is the best 
of fantasy and science fiction. 



35' 



at belter newsstands every month 



527 MADISON AVENUE NEW YORK 22, N 




