Self Portrait By BERNARD WOLFE 

October 5, 1959 

WELL, here I am at 
Princeton, ifacs is quite 
a place, quite a place, 
but the atmosphere's darned informal. My colleagues seem to 
be mostly youngish fellows 
dressed in sloppy dungarees, 
sweatshirts (the kind Einstein 
made so famous) and moccasins, 



and when they're not puttering in 
the labs they're likely to be lolling on the grass, lounging in front 
of the fire in commons, or slouching around in conference rooms 
chalking up equations on a blackboard. No way of telling, of 
course, but a lot of these collegiate-looking chaps must be in the 
ms end, whatever that is. You'd 
think fellows in something secret 



SELF PORTRAIT 



59 



like that would dress and behave 
with a little more dignity. 

Guess I was a little previous 
in packing my soup -and -fish. 
Soon as I was shown to my room 
in the bachelor dorms, I dug it 
out and hung it way back in the 
closet, out of sight. When in 
Rome, etc. Later that day I discovered they carry dungarees in 
the Co-op; luckily, they had the 
pre-faded kind. 

October 6, 1959 

"VTET the boss this morning — 
hardly out of his thirties, 
crew-cut, wearing a flannel hunting shirt and dirty saddleshoes. 
I was glad I'd thought to change 
into my dungarees before the interview. 

"Parks," he said, "you can 
count yourself a very fortunate 
young man. You've come to the 
most important address in America, not excluding the Pentagon. 
In the world, probably. To get 
you oriented, suppose I sketch 
in some of the background of 
the place.*' 

That would be most helpful, I 
said. I wondered, though, if he 
was as naive as he sounded. EMd 
he think I'd been working in 
cybernetics labs for going on six 
years without hearing enough rumors about ifacs to make me 
dizzy? Especially about the MS 
end of if ACS? 



"Maybe you know,** he went 
on, "that in the days of Oppenheimer and Einstein, this place 
was called the Institute for Advanced Studies. It was run pretty 
loosely then — in addition to the 
mathematicians and physicists, 
they had all sorts of queer ducks 
hanging around — poets, egyptologists, numismatists, medievalists, 
herbalists, God alone knows what 
all. By 1955, however, so many 
cybernetics labs had sprung up 
around the country that we 
needed some central coordinating 
agency, so Washington arranged 
for us to take over here. Naturally, as soon as we arrived, we 
eased out the poets and egyptologists, brought in our own people, 
and changed the name to the Institute for Advanced Cybernetics 
Studies. We've got some pretty 
keen projects going now, prer-ty 
keen." 

I said I'd bet, and did he have 
any idea which project I would 
fit into? 

"Sure thing," he said. "You're 
going to take charge of a very 
important lab. The Pro lab." I 
guess he saw my puzzled look. 
"Pro — that's short for prosthetics, 
artificial limbs. You know, it's 
really a scandal. With our present 
level of technology, we should 
have artificial limbs which in 
many ways are even better than 
the originals, but actually we're 
still making do with modifies 


60 




 



tions of the same primitive, 
clumsy pegs and hooks they were 
using a thousand years ago. I'm 
counting on you to get things 
hopping in that department. It's 
a real challenge." 

I said it sure was a challenge, 
and of course I'd do my level best 
to meet it. Still, I couldn't help 
feeling a bit disappointed. Around 
cybernetics circles, I hinted, you 
heard a lot of talk about the 
hush-hush ms work that was going on at ifacs and it sounded 
so exciting that, well, a fellow 
sort of hoped he might get into 
that end of things. 

"Look here, Parks," the boss 
said. He seemed a little peeved, 
"Cybernetics is teamwork, and 
the first rule of any team is that 
not everybody can be quarterback. Each man has a specific 
job on our team, one thing he's 
best suited for, and what you're 
best suited for, obviously, is the 
Pro lab. We've followed your 
work closely these last few years, 
and we were quite impressed by 
the way you handled those photoelectric-cell insects. You pulled 
off a brilliant engineering stunt, 
you know, when you induced 
nervous breakdown in your robot 
moths and bedbugs, and proved 
that the oscillations they developed corresponded to those which 
the human animal develops in 
intention tremor and Parkinson's 
disease. A keen bit of cybernetic 



thinking, that. Very keen." 

It was just luck, I told him 
modestly. 

"Nonsense," the boss insisted. 
"You're first and foremost a talented neuro man, and that's exactly what we need in the Pro 
department. There, you see, the 
problem is primarily one of duplicating a nervous mechanism in 
the metal, of bridging the gap 
between the neuronic and electronic. So buckle down, and if 
you hear any more gossip about 
ms, forget it fast — it's not a 
proper subject of conversation 
for you. The loyalty oath you 
signed is very specific about the 
trouble you can get into with 
loose talk. Remember that." 

I said I certainly would, and 
thanks a whole lot for the advice. 

Damn! Everybody knows MS 
is the thing to get into. It gives 
you real standing in the field if 
it gets around that you're an ms 
man. I had my heart set on getting into MS. 

October 6, 1959 

TT never rains, etc. : now it turns 
* out that Len Ellsom's here, 
and he's in ms! Found out about 
it in a funny way. Two mornings 
a week, it seems, the staff members get into their skiing and 
hunting clothes and tramp into 
the woods to cut logs for theif 
fireplace*. Well, this morning I 



SELF PORTRAIT 



61 



went with them, and as we were 
walking along the trail Goldweiser, my assistant, told me the 
idea behind these expeditions. 

"You can't get away from it," 
he said. "e=mc 3 is in a tree trunk 
as well as in a uranium atom 
or a solar system. When you're 
hacking away at a particular tree, 
though, you don't think much 
about such intangibles — like any 
good, untheoretical lumberjack, 
you're a lot more concerned with 
superficialities, such as which way 
the grain runs, how to avoid the 
knots, and so on. It's very restful. So long as a cyberneticist is 
sawing and chopping, he's not 
a sliver of uncontaminated cerebrum contemplating the eternal 
slippery verities of gravity and 
electromagnetism : he's just one 
more guy trying to slice up one 
more log. Makes him feel he belongs to the human race again. 
Einstein, you know, used to get 
the same results with a violin." 

Now, I've heard talk like that 
before, and I don't like it. I don't 
like it at all. It so happens that 
I feel very strongly on the subject. I think a scientist should 
like what he's doing and not want 
to take refuge in Nature from 
the Laws of Nature (which is 
downright illogical, anyhow). I, 
for one, enjoy cutting logs precisely because, when my saw 
rasps across a knot, I know that 
the innermost secret of that knot. 



as of all matter in the "Universe, 
is e=mc 2 . It's my job to know 
it, and if s very satisfying to know 
that I know it and that the general run of people don't. I was 
about to put this thought into 
words, but before I could open 
my mouth, somebody behind us 
spoke up. 

"Bravo, Goldie," he said. "Let 
us by all means pretend that we 
belong to the human race. Make 
way for the new cyberneticists 
with their old saws. Cyberneticist, 
spare that tree!" 

I turned around to see who 
could be making jokes in such 
bad taste and — as I might have 
guessed — it was Len Ellsom. He 
was just as surprised as I was. 

"Well," he said, "if it isn't Ollie Parks! I thought you were out 
in Cal Tech, building schizophrenic bedbugs." 

After M. i. T. I had spent some 
time out in California doing 
neuro-cyber research, I explained 
— but what was he doing here? I'd 
lost track of him after he'd left 
Boston; the last I'd heard, he'd 
been working on the giant robot 
brain Remington -Rand was developing for the Air Force. I remembered seeing his picture in 
the paper two or three times 
while he was working on the 
brain. 

"I was with Remington a couple of years,'* he told me. "If I 
do say so myself, we built the 



42 




 



Air Force a real humdinger of 
a brain — in addition to solving 
the most complex problems in 
ballistics, it could whistle Dixie 
and, in moments of stress, produce a sound not unlike a Bronx 
cheer. Naturally, for my prowess 
in the electronic simulation of 
I.Q., I was tapped for the brain 
department of these hallowed 
precincts." 

"Oh?" I said. "Does that mean 
you're in ms?" It wasn't an easy 
idea to accept, but I think I was 
pretty successful in keeping my 
tone casual. 

"Ollie, my boy," he said in an 
exaggerated stage whisper, putting his finger to his lips, "in the 
beginning was the word and the 
word was mum. Leave us avoid 
the subject of brains in this keen 
place. We all have a job to do 
on the team." I suppose that was 
meant to be a humorous imitation of the boss; Len always did 
fancy himself quite a clown. 

We were separated during the 
sawing, but he caught up with 
me on the way back and said, 
"Let's get together soon and have 
a talk, Ollie. It's been a long 
time." 

He wants to talk about Marilyn, I suppose. Naturally. He has 
a guilty conscience. I'll have to 
make it quite clear to him that 
the whole episode is a matter of 
complete indifference to me. Marilyn is a closed book in my life; 



he must understand that. But can 
you beat that? He's right in the 
middle of ms! That lad certainly 
gets around. It's the usual Ellsom charm, I suppose. 

The usual Ellsom technique for 
irritating people, too. He's stilt 
trying to get my goat; he knows 
how much I've always hated to 
be called Ollie. Must watch Goldweiser. Thought he laughed 
pretty heartily at Len's wisecracks. 

October 18, 1959 

THINGS are shaping up in the 
Pro lab. Here's how I get 
the picture. 

A year ago, the boss laid down 
a policy for the lab : begin with 
legs because, while the neuromotor systems in legs and arms 
are a lot alike, those in legs are 
much simpler. If we build satisfactory legs, the boss figures, w« 
can then tackle arms; the main 
difficulties will have been licked. 

Well, last summer, in line with' 
this approach, the Army picked 
out a double amputee from the 
outpatient department of Walter 
Reed Hospital — fellow by the 
name of Kujack, who lost both 
his legs in a land mine explosion 
outside Pyongyang — and shipped 
him up here to be a subject i* 
our experiments. 

When Kujack arrived, the 
neuro boys made a major dec** 



SELF PORTRAIT 



sion. Tt didn't make sense, they 
agreed, to keep building experimental legs directly into the 
muscles and nerves of Kujack's 
stumps ; the surgical procedure 
m these cine-plastic jobs is complicated as all getout, involves a 
lot of pain for the subject and, 
what's more to the point, means 
long delays each time while the 
tissues heal. 

Instead, they hit on the idea 
of integrating permanent metal 
and plastic sockets into the 
stumps, so constructed that each 
new experimental limb can be 
snapped into place whenever it's 
ready for a trial. 

By the time I took over, two 
weeks ago, Goldweiser had the 
sockets worked out and fitted to 
Kujack's stumps, and the muscular and neural tissues had knitted satisfactorily. There was only 
one hitch : twenty-three limbs 
had been designed, and all 
twenty- three had been dismal 
flops. That's when the boss called 
me in. 

There's no mystery about the 
failures. Not to me, anyhow. 
Cybernetics is simply the science 
of building machines that will 
duplicate and improve on the 
organs and functions of the animal, based on what we know 
about the systems of communication and control in the animal. All 
right. But in any particular cybernetics project, everything de


pends on just how many of the 
functions you want to duplicate, 
just how much of the total organ 
you want to replace. 

That's why the robot -brain 
boys can get such quick and 
spectacular results, have their 
pictures in the papers all the 
time, and become the real glamor 
boys of the profession. They're 
not asked to duplicate the human 
brain in its entirety — all they 
have to do is isolate and imitate 
one particular function of the 
brain, whether it's a simple operation in mathematics or a certain 
type of elementary logic. 

The robot brain called the 
Eniac, for example, is exactly 
what its name implies — an Electronic Numerical Integrator and 
Computer, and it just has to be 
able to integrate and compute 
figures faster and more accurately 
than the human brain can. It 
doesn't have to have daydreams 
and nightmares, make wisecracks, 
suffer from anxiety, and all that. 
What's more, it doesn't even have 
to look like a brain or fit into the 
tiny space occupied by a real 
brain. It can be housed in a sixstory building and look like an 
overgrown typewriter or an automobile dashboard or even a pogo 
stick. All it has to do is tell you 
that two times two equals four, 
and tell you fast. 

When you're told to build an 
artificial leg that'll take the place 



64 




 



of a real one, the headaches begin. Your machine must not only 
look like its living model, it must 
a/so balance and support, walk, 
run, hop, skip, jump, etc., etc. 
Also, it must fit into the same 
space. it must feel every
thing a real leg feels — touch, heat, 
cold, pain, moisture, kinesthetic 
sensations — as well as execute all 
the brain - directed movements 
that a real leg can. 

So you're not duplicating this 
or that function ; you're reconstructing the organ in its totality, 
or trying to. Your pro must have 
a full set of sensory-motor communication systems, plus machines to carry out orders, which 
is impossible enough to begin 
with. 

But our job calls for even more. 
The pro mustn't only equal the 
real thing, it must be superior! 
That means creating a synthetic 
neuro-muscular system that actually improves on the nerves and 
muscles Nature created in the 
original! 

When our twenty-fourth experimental model turned out to 
be a dud last week — it just hung 
from Kujack's stump, quivering 
like one of my robot bedbugs, 
as though it had a bad case of 
intention tremor — Goldweiser 
said something that made an impression on me. 

"They don't want much from 
us," he, said sarcastically. "They 



just want us to be God." 

I didn't care for his cynical 
attitude at all, but he had a 
point. Len Ellsom just has to 
build a fancy adding machine 
to get his picture in the papers. 
/ have to be God! 

October 22, 1959 

rvON'T know what to make 
" of Kujack. His attitude is 
peculiar. Of course, he's very cooperative, lies back on the fitting 
table and doesn't even wince 
when we snap on the pros, and 
he does his best to carry out instructions. Still, there's something 
funny about the way he looks at 
me. There's a kind of malicious 
expression in his eyes. At times, 
come to think of it, he reminds 
me of Len. 

Take this afternoon, for in- « 
stance. I've just worked out an 
entirely different kind of leg 
based on a whole new arrangement of solenoids to duplicate 
the muscle systems, and I decided to give it a try. When I 
was slipping the model into place, 
I looked up and caught Kujack's 
eye for a moment. He seemed to 
be laughing at something, although his face was expressionless. 

"All right," I said. "Let's make 
a test. I understand you used to 
be quite a football player. Well, 
just think of how you used to 



SELF PORTRAIT 



kick a footbalt and try to do it 

now." 

He really seemed to be trying; 
the effort made him sweat. All 
that happened, though, was that 
the big toe wriggled a little and 
the knee buckled. Dud Number 
Twenty-five, I was sore, of course, 
especially when I noticed that 
Kujack was more amused than 
ever. 

"You seem to think something's 
pretty funny," I said. 

"Don't get me wrong, Doc," 
he said, much too innocently. 
"It's just that I've been thinking. 
Maybe you'd have more luck if 
you thought of me as a bedbug." 

"Where did you get that idea?" 

"From Doc Ellsom. I was having some beers with him the other 
night. He's got a very high opinion of you, says you build the 
best bedbugs in the business." 

I find it hard to believe that 
Len Ellsom would say anything 
really nice about me. Must be 
his guilt about Marilyn that 
makes him talk that way. I don't 
like his hanging around Kujack. 

October 25, 1959 

rw^HE boss came along on our 
J- woodcutting expedition this 
morning and volunteered to work 
the other end of my two-handled 
saw. He asked how things were 
coming in the Pro lab. 

"As I see it," I said, "there 




*6 




 




are two sides to the problem, the 
kinesthetic and the neural. We're 
making definite progress on the 
K side — I've worked out a new 
solenoid system, with some miniature motors tied in, and I think 
it'll give us a leg that moves 
damned well. I don't know about 
the N side, though. It's pretty 
tough figuring out how to hook 
the thing up electrically with the 
central nervous system so that 
the brain can control it. Some 
sort of compromise system of 
operation, along mechanical 
rather than neural lines, would 
be a lot simpler." 

"You mean," the boss said with 
a smile, "that it's stumping you." 

I was relieved to see him taking it so well because I know 
how anxious he is to get results 
from the Pro lab. Since Pro is 
one of the few things going on 
at ipacs that can be talked about, 
he's impatient for us to come up 
with something he can release to 
the press. As the public relations 
officer explained it to me at dinner the other night, people get 
worried when they know there's 
something like ifacs going, but 
don't get any real information 
about it, so the boss, naturally, 
wants to relieve the public's curiosity with a good, reassuring story 
about our work. 

I knew I was taking an awful 
chance spilling the whole K-N 
thing to him the way I did, but 



SflP PORTRAIT 



47 



I had to lay the groundwork for 
a little plan I've just begun to 
work on. 

"By the way, sir," I said, "I 
ran into Len Ellsom the other 
day. I didn't, know he was here." 

"Do you know him?" the boss 
said. "Good man. One of the best 
brains -and -games men you'll find 
anywhere," 

I explained that Len had gotten his degree at m.i.t. the year 
before I did. From what I'd 
heard, I added, he'd done some 
important work on the Remington-Rand ballistics computer. 

"He did indeed," the boss said, 
"but that's not the half of it. 
After that he made some major 
contributions to the robot chess 
player. As a matter of fact, that's 
why he's here." 

I said I hadn't heard about the 
chess player. 

"As soon as it began to play 
a really good game of chess, 
Washington put the whole thing 
under wraps for security reasons. 
Which is why you won't hear any 
more about it from me." 

I'm no Eniac, but I can occasionally put two and two together 
myself. If the boss's . remarks 
mean anything, they mean that 
ah electronic brain capable of 
playing .games has been developed, atv\ that it's led to something important- militarily. Of 
course! I could kick myself for 
■not having guessed it before. 

68 



Brains -and-games — that's what 
MS is all about, obviously. It had 
to happen: out of the mathematical analysis of chess came a robot 
chess player, and out of the chess 
player came some kind of mechanical brain that's useful in 
military strategy. That's what 
Len Ellsom's in. the middle of. 

"Really brilliant mind," the 
boss said after we'd sawed for 
a while. "Keen. But he's a little 
erratic — quirky, queer sense of 
humor. Isn't that your impression?" 

"Definitely," I said. "I'd be the 
last one in the world to say a 
word against Len, but he was always a little peculiar. Very gay 
one moment and very sour the 
next, and inclined to poke fun 
at things other people take seriously. He used to write poetry." 

"I'm very glad to know that,'* 
the boss said. "Confirms my own 
feeling about him." 

So the boss has some doubta 
about Len. 

Octooer 27, 1959 

UNPLEASANT evening with 
Len. It all started after dinner when he showed up in my 
room, wagged his finger at me 
and said, "Ollie, you've been 
avoiding me. That hurts. 
Thought we were pals, thick and 
thin and till debt and death do 
us part." 

} A I A X y SCIENCE FICTION 



I saw immediately that he was 
drunk — he always gets his words 
mixed up when he's drunk- — and 
I tried to placate him by explaining that it wasn't anything 
like that; I'd been busy. 

"If we're pals," he said, "come 
on and have a beer with me." 

There was no shaking him off, 
so I followed him down to his 
car and we drove to this sleazy 
little bar in the Negro part of 
town. As soon as we sat down 
in a booth, Len borrowed all the 
nickels I had, put them in the 
jukebox and pressed the levers 
for a lot of old Louie Armstrong 
records. 

"Sorry, kid," he said. "I know 
how you hate this real jazzy stuff, 
but can't have a reunion without 
music, and there isn't a polka 
or cowboy ballad or hillbilly 
stomp in the box. They lack the 
folksy touch on this side of the 
tracks." Len has always been very 
snobbish about my interest in 
folk music. 

I asked him what he'd been 
doing during the day. 

"Lushing it up," he said. "Getting stinking from drinking." He 
still likes to use the most flamboyant slang; I consider it an 
infantile form of protest against 
what he regards as the "genteel" 
manner of academic people. "I 
got sort of restless this morning, 
so I ducked out and beat it into 
New York and looked up my 



friend Steve Lundy in the Village. Spent the afternoon liquidating our joint assets. Liquidating our assets in the joints." 

What, I wanted to know, was 
he feeling restless about? 

"Restless for going on three 
years now." His face grew solemn, as though he were thinking 
it over very carefully. "I'll amend 
that statement. Hell with the 
Aesopian language. I've been a 
plain lush for going on three 
years. Ever since — " 

If it was something personal—* 
I suggested. 

"It is nor something personal," 
he said, mimicking me. "G". i»s I 
can tell an old cyberneticist pal 
about it. Been a lush for three 
years because I've been scared 
for three years. Been scared for 
three years because three years 
ago I saw a machine beat a man 
at a game of chess." 

A machine that plays chess? 
That was interesting, I said. 

"Didn't tell you the whole truth 
the other day," Len mumbled. "I 
did work on. the Remington-Rand 
computer, sure, but I didn't come 
to ifacs directly from that. In 
between I spent a couple years 
at the Bell Telephone Labs. 
Claude Shannon— or, rather, to 
begin with there was Norbert 
Wiener back at M.I.T.— it's complicated . . ." 

"Look," I said, "are you sure 
you want to talk about it?" 



SELF PORTRAIT 



4,9 



"Stop wearing your loyalty 
oath on your sleeve," he said belligerently. "Sure I want to talk 
about it. Greatest subject I know. 
Begin at the beginning. Whole 
thing started back in the Thirties 
with those two refugee mathematicians who used to be here at 
the Institute for Advanced Studies when Einstein was around. 
Von Morgan and Neumanstern, 
no, Von JVeumann and Morganstern. You remember, they did a 
mathematical analysis of all the 
possible kinds of games, pokef, 
tossing pennies, chess, bridge, 
everything, and they wrote up 
their findings in a volume you 
certainly know, The Theory of 
Games. 

"Well, that got Wiener started. 
You may remember that when 
he founded the science of cybernetics, he announced that on the 
basis of the theory of games, it 
was feasible to design a robot 
computing machine that would 
play a better than average* game 
of chess. Right after that, back 
in '49 or maybe it was *50, Claude 
Shannon of the Bell Labs said 
Wiener wasn't just talking, and 
to prove it he was going to build 
the robot chess player. Which he 
proceeded withforth — forthwith — 
to do. Sometime in '53, I was 
taken off the Remington-Rand 
project and assigned to Bell to 
work with him." 

"Maybe we ought to start 



back," I cut in. "I've got a lot 
of work to do." 

"The night is young," he said, 
"and you're so dutiful. Where 
was I? Oh yes, Bell. At first our 
electronic pawn-pusher wasn't so 
hot — it could beat the pants off 
a lousy player, but an expert 
just made it look silly. But we 
kept improving it, see, building 
more and more electronic anticipation and gambit-plotting 
powers into it, and finally, one 
great day in '55, we thought we 
had all the kinks ironed out and 
were ready for the big test. By 
this time, of course, Washington 
had stepped in and taken over 
the whole project. 

"Well, we got hold of Fortunescu, the world's champion chess 
player, sat him down and turned 
the robot loose on him. For four 
hours straight we followed the 
match, with a delegation of big 
brass from Washington, and for 
four hours straight the machine 
trounced Fortunescu every game. 
That was when I began to get 
scared. I went out that night and 
got really loaded." 

What had he been so scared 
about? It seemed to me he should 
have felt happy. 

"Listen, Ollie," he said, "for 
Christ's sake, stop talking like a 
Boy Scout for once in your life." 

If he was going to insult me— 

"No insult intended. Just listen. 
I'm a terrible chess player. Any 



70 




 



five -year -old could chatemeck — 
checkmate — me with his brains 
tied behind his back. But this 
machine which I built, helped 
build, is the champion chess 
player of the world. In other 
words, my brain has given birth 
to a brain which can do things my 
brain could never do. Don't you 
find that terrifying?" 

"Not at all," I said. "You made 
the machine, didn't you? Therefore, no matter what it does, it's 
only an extension of you. You 
should feel proud to have devised 
a powerful new tool." 

"Some tool," he sneered. He 
was so drunk by now that I could 
hardly understand what he was 
saying. "The General Staff boys 
in Washington were all hopped up 
about that little old tool, and 
for a plenty good reason — they 
understood that mechanized warfare is only the most complicated 
game the human race has invented so far, an elaborate form 
of chess which uses the population of the world for pawns and 
the globe for a chessboard. They 
saw, too, that when the game of 
war gets this complex, the job 
of controlling and guiding it becomes too damned involved for 
any number of human brains, no 
matter how nimble. 

"In other words, my beamish 
Boy Scout, modern war needs 
just this kind of strategy tool; 
the General Staff has to be mech


anized along with everything else. 
So the Pentagon boys set up ifacs 
and handed us a top-priority 
cybernetics project: to build a 
superduper chess player that 
could oversee a complicated military maneuver, maybe later a 
whole campaign, maybe ultimately a whole global war. 

"We're aiming at a military 
strategy machine which can digest reports from all the units on 
all the fronts and from moment 
to moment, on the basis of that 
steady stream of information, 
grind out an elastic overall strategy and dictate concrete tactical 
directives to all the units. Wiener 
warned this might happen, and 
he was right. A very nifty tool. 
Never mind how far we've gotten 
with the thing, but I will tell 
you this : I'm a lot more scared 
today than I was three years 
ago." 

So that was the secret of ms! 
The most extraordinary machine 
ever devised by the human mindt 
It was hard to conceal the thrill 
of excitement I felt, even as a 
relative outsider. 

"Why all the jitters?" I said. 
"This could be the most wonderful tool ever invented. It might 
eliminate war altogether." 

Len was quiet for a while, gulping his beer and looking off into 
space. Then he turned to me. 

"Steve Lundy has a cute idea," 
he said. "He was telling me about 



SELF PORTRAIT 



71 



it this afternoon. He's a bum, you 
see, but he's got a damned good 
tnind and he's done a lot of reading. Among other things, he's 
smart enough to see that once 
you've got your theory of games 
worked out, there's at least the 
logical possibility of converting 
your Eniac into what he calls an 
Strategy Integrator and Computer. And he's guessed, simply 
from the Pentagon's hush-hush 
policy about it, that that's what 
we're working on here at ifacs. 
So he holds forth on the subject 
of Emsiac, and I listen." 
"What's his idea?" I asked. 
"'He thinks Emsiac might eliminate war, too, but not in the 
.way a Boy Scout might think. 
What he says is that all the industrialized nations must be 
working away like mad on Emsiac, just as they did on the atom 
bomb, so let's assume that before 
long all the big countries will 
have more or less equal ms machines. All right. A cold war gets 
under way between countries A 
and B, and pretty soon it reaches 
the showdown stage: Then both 
countries plug in their Emsiacs 
and let them calculate the date 
on which hostilities should begin. 
If the machines are equally efficient, they'll hit on the same date. 
If there's a slight discrepancy, 
the two countries can work out 
a compromise date by negotiation. 



"The day arrives. A's Emsiac 
is set up in its capital, B's is set 
up in its capital. In each capital 
the citizens gather around their 
strategy machine, the officials 
turn out in high hats and cutaways, there are speeches, pageants, choral singing, mass 
dancing — the ritual can be worked out in advance. Then, at an 
agreed time, the crowds retreat to 
a safe distance and a committee 
of the top cyberneticists appears. 
They climb into planes, take off 
and— this is beautiful — drop all 
their atom bombs and H-bombs 
on the machines. It happens simultaneously in both countries, 
you see. That's the neat part of 
it. The occasion is called International Mushroom Day. 

"Then the cyberneticists in 
both countries go back to their 
vacuum tubes to work on another 
Emsiac, and the nuclear physicists go back to their piles to 
build more atom bombs, and 
when they're ready they have 
another Mushroom Day. One 
Mushroom Day every few years, 
whenever the diplomatic -strategic 
situation calls for it, and nobody 
even fires a B-B gun. Scientific 
war. Isn't it wonderful?" 

BY the time Len finished this 
peculiar speech, I'd finally 
managed to get him out of the 
tavern and back into his car. I 
started to drive him back to the 



f2 




 



Institute, my ears still vibrating 
with the hysterical yelps of Armstrong's trumpet. I'll never for 
the life of me understand what 
Len sees in that kind of music. 
It seems to me such an unhealthy 
sort of expression. 

"Lundy's being plain silly," I 
couldn*t help saying. "What 
guarantee has he got that on your 
Mushroom Day, Country B 
wouldn*t make a great display of 
destroying one Emstac and one 
set of bombs while it had others 
in hiding? It's too great a chance 
for A to take — she might be 
throwing away all her defenses 
and laying herself wide open to 
attack." 

"See what I mean?" Len muttered. "You're a Boy Scout." 
Then he passed out, without saying a word about Marilyn, Hard 
to tell if he sees anything of her 
these days. He does see some 
pretty, peculiar people, though. 
I'd like to know more about this 
Steve Lundy. 

November 2, 1959 

I'VE done it! Today I split up 
the lab into two entirely independent operations, K and N. 
Did it all on my own authority, 
haven't breathed a word about 
it to the boss yet. Here's my line 
of reasoning. 

On the K end, we can get results, and fast: if it's just a mat


ter of building a pro that work* 
like the real leg, regardless of 
what makes it work, it's a cinchBut if it has to be worked by the 
brain, through the spinal cord, 
the job is just about impossible. 
Who knows if we'll ever learn 
enough about neuro tissue to 
build our own physico-chemicoelectrical substitutes for it? 

As I proved in my robot mothl 
and bedbugs, I can work up electronic circuits that seem to duplicate one particular function ofanimal nerve tissue — one robot is 
attracted to light like a moth, 
the other is repelled by light like 
a bedbug — but I don't know how 
to go about duplicating the tissue 
itself in all its functions. And UtH 
til we can duplicate nerve tissue, 
there's no way to provide our 
artificial limbs with a neuromotor system that can be hooked 
up with the central nervous system. The best I can do along 
those lines is ask KUjack to kick 
and get a wriggle of the big toe 
instead. 

So the perspective is clear. Mechanically, kinesthetically, motorically, I can manufacture a 
hell of a fine leg. Neurally, it 
would take decades, centuries 
maybe, to get even a reasonable 
facsimile of the original — and 
maybe it will never happen. It's 
not a project I'd care to devote 
my life to. If Len Ellsom had 
been working on that sort of thing, 



SELF PORTRAIT 



7* 



he wouldn't have gotten his picture in the paper so often, you 
can be sure. 

So, in line with this perspective, I've divided the whole operation into two separate labs, 
K-Pro and N-Pro. I'm taking 
charge of K-Pro myself, since it 
intrigues me more and I've got 
these ideas about using solenoids 
to get lifelike movements. With 
any kind of luck I'll soon have 
a peach of a mechanical limb, 
motor-driven and with its own 
built-in power plant, operated by 
push-button. Before Christmas, I 
hope. 

Got just the right man to take 
over the neuro lab — Goldweiser, 
my assistant. I weighed the thing 
from every angle before I made 
up my mind, since his being 
Jewish makes the situation very 
touchy: some people will be snide 
enough to say I picked him to be 
a potential scapegoat. Well, Goldweiser, no matter what his origins 
may be, is the best neuro man I 
know. 

Of course, personally — although my personal feelings don't 
enter into the picture at all — I am 
just a bit leary of the fellow. 
Have been ever since that first 
log-cutting expedition, when he 
began to talk in such a peculiar 
way about needing to relax and 
then laughed so hard at Len's 
jokes That sort of talk always 
indicates to me a lack of reverence 



for your job: if a thing's worth 
doing at all, etc. 

Of course, I don't mean that 
Goldweiser's cynical attitude has 
anything to do with his being 
Jewish; Len's got the same attitude and he's nor Jewish. Still, 
this afternoon, when I told Goldweiser he's going to head up the 
N-Pro lab, he sort of bowed and 
said, "That's quite a promotion. 
I always did want to be God." 

I didn't like that remark at all. 
If I'd had another neuro man as 
good as he is, I'd have withdrawn 
the promotion immediately. It's 
his luck that I'm tolerant, that's 
all. 

.November 6, 1959 

T UNCH with Len today, at my 
invitation. Bought him several Martinis, then brought up 
Lundy's name and asked who he 
was, he sounded interesting. 

"Steve?" Len said. "I roomed 
with him my first year in New 
York." 

I asked what Steve did, exactly. 

"Reads, mostly. He got into the 
habit back in the 30s, when he 
was studying philosophy at the 
University of Chicago. When the 
Civil War broke out in Spain, he 
signed up with the Lincoln Brigade find went over there to fight, 
but it turned out to be a bad mistake. His reading got him in a 



74 




 



lot of trouble, you see; he'd gotten used to asking all sorts of 
questions, so when the Moscow 
Trials came along, he asked about 
them. Then the N.K.V.D. began 
to pop up all over Spain, and he 
asked about it. 

"His comrades, he discovered, 
didn't like guys who kept asking 
questions. In fact, a couple of 
Steve's friends who had also had 
an inquiring streak were found 
dead at the front, shot in the 
back, and Steve got the idea that 
he was slated for the same treatment. It seemed that people who 
asked questions were called saboteurs, Trotskyite-Fascists or something, and they kept dying at an 
alarming rate." 

I ordered another Martini for 
Len and asked how Steve had 
managed to save himself. 

"He beat it across the mountains into France," Len explained. 
"Since then he's steered clear of 
causes. He goes to sea once in a 
while to make a few bucks, drinks 
a lot, reads a lot, asks some of the 
shrewdest questions I know. If 
he's anything you can put a label 
on, I'd say- he was a touch of 
Rousseau, a touch of Tolstoi , 
plenty of Voltaire. Come to think 
of it,* a touch of Norbert Wiener 
too. Wiener, you may remember, 
used to ask some damned iconoclastic questions for a cyberneticist. Steve knows Wiener's books 
by heart." 



Steve sounded like a very colorful fellow, I suggested, 

"Yep," Len said. "Marilyn used 
to think so." I don't think I 
moved a muscle when he said it; 
the smile didn't leave my face. 
"Ollie," Len went on, "I've been 
meaning to speak to you about 
Marilyn. Now that the subject's 
come up — " 

"I've forgotten all about it," I 
assured him. 

"I still want to set you 
straight," he insisted. "It must 
have looked funny, me moving 
down to New York after commencement and Marilyn giving 
up her job in the lab and following two days later. But never 
mind how it looked. I never made 
a pass at her all that time in 
Boston, Ollie. That's the truth. 
But she was a screwy, scatterbrained dame and she decided she 
was stuck on me because I dabbled in poetry and hung around 
with artists and such in the Village, and she thought it was all so 
glamorous. I didn't have anything 
to do with her chasing down to 
New York, no kidding. You two 
were sort of engaged, weren't 
you?" 

"It really doesn't matter," I 
said. "You don't have to explain." 
I finished my drink. "You say 
she knew Lundy?" 

"Sure, she knew Lundy. She 
also knew Kram, Rossard, Broyold, Boster, De Kroot and Havre. 



SELF PORTRAIT 



7$ 



She knew a whole lot of guys before she was through." 

"She always was sociable.'* 

"You don't get my meaning," 
Len said. "I am not talking about 
Marilyn's gregarious impulses. 
Listen. First she threw herself at 
me, but I got tired of her. Then 
she threw herself at Steve and he 
got tired of her. Damn near the 
whole male population of the Village got tired of her in the next 
couple years." 

"Those were troubled times. 
The war and all." 

"They were troubled times," 
Len agreed, "and she was the 
source of a fair amount of the 
trouble. You were well rid of her, 
Ollie, take my word for it. God 
save us from the intense Boston 
female who goes bohemian — the 
icicle parading as the torch." 

"Just as a matter of academic 
curiosity," I said as we were leaving, "what became of her?" 

"I don't know for sure. During 
her Village phase she decided her 
creative urge was hampered by 
compasses and T-squares, and in 
between men she tried to do a bit 
of painting — very abstract, very 
imitative-original, very hammy. I 
heard later that she finally gave 
up the self-expression kick, 
moved up to the East Seventies 
somewhere. If I remember, she 
got a job do! ig circuit designing 
on some project for I.B.M." 

"She's .probably doing well at 



it," I said. "She certainly knew 
her drafting. You know, she 
helped lay out the circuits for the 
first robot bedbug I ever built." 

November 19, 1959 

¥>IG step forward, if it isn*t unseemly to use a phrase like 
that in connection with Pro research. This afternoon we completed the first two experimental 
models of my self-propelled 
solenoid legs, made of transparent plastic so everything is 
visible — solenoids, batteries, motors, thyratron tubes and transistors. 

Kujack was waiting in the fitting room to give them their first 
tryout, but when I got there J 
found Len sitting with him. Theie 
were several empty beer cavs 
the floor and they were aabbi"j£ 
away a mile a minute. 

Len knows how I hate to see 
people drinking during working 
hours. When I put the pros down 
and began to rig them for fitting, 
he said conspiratorially, "Shall 
we tell him?" 

Kujack was pretty crocked, too. 
"Let's tell him," he whispered 
back. Strange thing about Kujack, he hardly ever says a word 
to me, but he never closes his 
mouth when Len's around. 

"All right," Len said. "You tell 
him. Tell him how we're going 
to bring peace on Earth and good 



76 




 



will toward bedbugs." 

"We just figured it out," Kujack said. "What's wrong with 
war. It's a steamroller." 

"Steamrollers are very undemocratic," Len added. "Never 
consult people on how they like 
to be flattened before flattening 
them. They just go rolling along." 

"Just go rolling, they go on 
rolling along," Kujack said. "Like 
Old Man River." 

"What's the upshot?" Len demanded. "People get upshot, shot 
up. In all countries, all of them 
without exception, they emerge 
from the war spiritually flattened, 
a little closer to the insects — like 
the hero in that Kafka story who 
wakes up one morning to find he's 
a bedbug, I mean beetle. All because they've been steamrolled. 
Nobody consulted them." 

"Take the case of an amputee," 
Kujack said. "Before the land 
mine exploded, it didn't stop and 
say, 'Look, friend, I've got to go 
off ; that's my job. Choose which 
part you'd prefer to have blown 
off — arm, leg, ear, nose, or whathave-you. Or is there somebody 
else around who would relish being clipped more than you would? 
If so, just send him along. I've got 
to do some clipping, you see, but 
it doesn't matter much which part 
of which guy I clip, so long as I 
make my quota.' Did the land 
mine say that? No! The victim 
wasn't consulted. Consequently 



he can feel victimized, full o 
self-pity. We just worked it out.' 

"The whole thing," Len said. 
"If the population had been 
polled according to democratic 
procedure, the paraplegia and 
other maimings could have been 
distributed to each according to 
his psychological need. See the 
point? Marx corrected by Freud, 
as Steve Lundy would say. Distribute the injuries to each according to his need — not his economic need, but his masochistic 
need. Those with a special taste 
for self -damage obviously should 
be allowed a lion*s share of it. 
That way nobody could claim 
he'd been victimized by the 
steamroller or got anything he 
didn't ask for. It's all on a voluntary basis, you see. Democratic." 

"Whole new concept of war," 
Kujack agreed. "Voluntary amputeeism, voluntary paraplegia, 
voluntary everything else that 
usually happens to people in a 
war. Just to get some human 
dignity back into the thing." 

"Here's how it works," Len 
went on. "Country A and Country B reach the breaking point. 
It's all over but the shooting. All 
right. So they pool their best 
brains, mathematicians, actuaries, 
strategists, logistics geniuses, and 
alt. What am I saying? They 
pool their best robot brains, their 
Emsiacs. In a matter of seconds 



SELF PORTRAIT 



77 



they figure out, down to the last 
decimal point, just how many 
casualties each side can be expected to suffer in dead and 
wounded, and then they break 
down the figures. Of the wounded, 
they determine just how many 
will lose eyes, how many arms, 
how many legs, and so on down 
the line. Now — here's where it 
gets really neat — each country, 
having established its quotas in 
dead and wounded of all categories, can send out a call for 
volunteers." 

"Less messy that way," Kujack said. "An efficiency expert's 
war. War on an actuarial basis." 

"You get exactly the same results as in a shooting war," Len 
insisted. "Just as many dead, 
wounded and psychologically 
messed up. But you avoid the 
whole steamroller effect. A tidy 
war, war with dispatch, conceived 
in terms of ends rather than 
means. The end never did justify 
the means, you see; Steve Lundy 
says that was always the great 
dilemma of politics. So with one 
fool sweeps — fell swoop — we get 
rid of means entirely." 

"As things stand with me," Kujack said, "if anything stands 
with me, I might get to feeling 
sore about what happened to me. 
But nothing happens to the volunteer amputee. He steps up to 
the operating table and says, 'Just 
chop off one arm, Doc, the left 



one, .please, up to the elbow if 
you don't mind, and in return 
put me down for one-and-twothirds free meals daily at Longchamps and a plump blonde 
every Saturday.' " 

"Or whatever the exchange 
value for one slightly used left 
arm would be," Len amended. 
"That would have to be worked 
out by the robot actuaries." 

By this time I had the pros 
fitted and the push-button controls installed in the side pocket 
of Kujack's jacket. 

"Maybe you'd better go now, 
Len," I said. I was very careful 
to show no reaction to his baiting. 
"Kujack and I have some work 
to do." 

"I hope you'll make him a 
moth instead of a bedbug," Len 
said as he got up.- "Kujack's just 
beginning to see the light. Be a 
shame if you give him a negative 
tropism to it instead of a positive 
one." He turned to Kujack, wobbling a little. "So long, kid. I'll 
pick you up at seven and we'll 
drive into New York to have a 
few with Steve. He's going to be 
very happy to hear we've got the 
whole thing figured out." 

I spent two hours with Kujack, 
getting him used to the extremely 
delicate push-button controls. I 
must say that, drunk or sober, 
he's a very apt pupil. In less than 
two hours he actually walked! A 
little unsteadily, to be sure, but 



7« 




 



his balance will get better as he 
practices and I iron out a few 
more bugs, and I don't mean bedbugs. 

For a final test, I put a little 
egg cup on the floor, balanced a 
football in it, and told Kujack to 
try a place kick. What a moment! He booted that ball so 
hard, it splintered the mirror on 
the wall. 

November 27, 1959 

LONG talk with the boss. I 
gave it to him straight about 
breaking up the lab into K-Pro 
and N-Pro, and about there being little chance that Goldweiser 
would come up with anything 
much on the neuro end for a long, 
long time. He was awfully let 
down, I could see, so^ I started 
to talk fast about the luck I'd 
been having on the kinesthetic 
end. When he began to perk up, I 
called Kujack in from the corridor and had him demonstrate his 
place kick. 

He's gotten awfully good at it 
this past week. 

"If we release the story to the 
press," I suggested, "this might 
make a fine action shot. You see, 
Kujack used to be one of the 
beat kickers in the Big Ten, and 
a lot of newspapermen will still 
remember him." Then I sprang 
t>ie biggest news of all. "During 
tie last three days of practice, sir, 



he's been consistently kicking the 
ball twenty, thirty and even forty 
yards farther than he ever did 
with his own legs. Than anybody, 
as a matter of fact, ever has with 
real legs." 

"That's a wonderful angle," the 
boss said excitedly. "A world's 
record, made with a cybernetic 
leg!" 

"It should make a terrific picture," Kujack said. "I've also 
been practicing a big, broad, 
photogenic grin." Luckily the 
boss didn't hear him — by this 
time he was bending over the legs, 
studying the solenoids. 

After Kujack left, the boss congratulated me. Very, very warmly. It was a most gratifying moment. We chatted for a while, 
making plans for the press conference, and then finally he said, 
"By the way, do you happen to 
know anything about your friend 
Ellsom? I'm worried about him. 
He went off on Thanksgiving and 
hasn't been heard from at all ever 
since." 

That was alarming, I said. 
When the boss asked why, I told 
him a little about how Len had 
been acting lately, talking and 
drinking more than was good for 
him. With all sorts of people. The 
boss said that confirmed his own 
impressions. 

I can safely say we understood 
each other. I sensed a very definite rapport. 



if, t <= PORTRAIT 



79 




10 



OAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



November 30, 1959 



¥T was bound to happen, of 
" course. As I got it from the 
boss, he decided after our talk 
that Len's absence needed some 
looking into, and he tipped off 
Security about it. A half dozen 
agents went to work on the case 
and right off they headed for 
Steve Lundy's apartment in the j 
Village and, sure enough, there 
was Len. 

Len and his friend were both 
blind drunk and there were all 
sorts of incriminating things in 
the room — lots of peculiar books 
and pamphlets, Lundy's identification papers from the Lincoln 
Brigade, an article Lundy was 
writing for an anarchist -pacifist 
magazine about w,hat he calls 
Emsiac. Len and his friend were 
both arrested on the spot and a 
full investigation is going on now. 

The boss says that no matter 
whether Len is brought to trial or 
not, he's all washed up. He'll 
never get a job on any classified 
cybernetics project from now on, 
because it's clear enough that he 
violated his loyalty oath by discussing MS all over the place. 

The Security men came around 
to question me this morning. 
Afraid my testimony didn't help 
Len's case any. What could I do? 
I had to own up that, to my 
knowledge, Len had violated Security on three counts; he'd dis


»1 



cussed MS matters with Kujacfc 
in my presence, with Lundy (according to what he told rae), and 
of course with me (I am technically an outsider, too) . I also 
pointed out that I'd tried to make 
him shut up, but there was no 
stopping him once he got goingDamn that Len, anyhow. Why 
does he have to go and put me in 
this ethical spot? It shows a lack 
of consideration. 

These Security men can be too 
thorough. Right off they wanted 
to pick up Kujack as well. 

I got hold of the boss and explained that if they took Kujack 
away we'd have to call off our 
press conference, because it would 
take months to fit and train another subject. 

The boss immediately saw the 
injustice of the thing, stepped in 
and got Security to calm down, at 
least until we finish our demonstration. 

December 23, 1959 

W/^HAT a dayl The press conference this afternoon was 
something. Dozens of reporters 
and photographers and newsreel 
men showed up, and we took 
them atl out to the football field 
for the demonstrations. First the 
boss gave a little orientation talk 
about cybernetics being teamwork 
in science, and about the difference between K-Pro and N-Pro, 



pointing out that from the practical, humanitarian angle of helping the amputee, K is a lot more 
important than N. 

The reporters tried to get in 
some questions about ms, but he 
parried them very good -humoredly, and he said some nice things 
about me, some very nice things 
indeed. 

Then Kujack was brought in. 
He really went through his paces, 
walking, running, skipping, jumping and everything. It was 
damned impressive. And then, to 
top off the show, Kujack placekicked a football ninety-three 
yards by actual measurement, a 
world's record, and everybody 
went wild. 

Afterward Kujack and I posed 
for the newsreels, shaking hands 
while the boss stood with his arms 
around us. They're going to play 
the whole thing up as ifacs* 
Christmas present to one of our 
gallant war heroes (just what the 
boss wanted: he figures this sort 
of things makes ifacs sound so 
much less grim to the public), 
and Kujack was asked to say 
something in line with that idea. 

"I never could kick this good 
with my real legs," he said, holding my hand tight and looking 
straight at me. "Gosh, this is just 
about the nicest Christmas present a fellow could get. Thank 
you, Santa." 

I thought he was overdoing it 



B2 




 



e bit toward the end there, but 
the newsreel men say they think 
it's a great sentimental touch. 

Goldweiser was in the crowd, 
and he said. "I only hope that 
when / prove I'm God, this many 
photographers will show up." 
That's just about the kind of remark I'd expect from Goldweiser. 

Too bad the Security men are 
coming for Kujack tomorrow. 
The boss couldn't argue. After 
all, they were patient enough to 
wait until after the tests and 
demonstration, which the boss 
and I agree was white of them. 
It's not as if Kujack isn't deeply 
involved in this Ellsom-Lundy 
case. As the boss says, you can 
tell a man by the company, etc. 

December 25, 1959 

SPENT the morning clipping 
pictures and articles from the 
papers; they gave us Quite a 
spread. Late in the afternoon I 
went over to the boss's house for 
eggnogs, and I finally got up the 
nerve to say what's been on my 
mind for over a month now. 
Strike while the iron's, etc. 

"I've been thinking, sir," I said, 
"that this solenoid system I've 
worked out for Pros has other applications. For example, it could 
easily be adapted to some of the 
tricky mechanical aspects of an 
electronic calculator." I went into 
some of the technical details 



briefly, and I could see he was 
interested. "I'd like very much 
to work on that, now that K-Pro 
is licked, more or less. And if 
there is an opening in MS — " 

"You're a go-getter," the boss 
said, nodding in a pleased way. 
He was looking at a newspaper 
lying on the coffee table; on the 
front page was a large picture of 
Kujack grinning at me and shaking my hand. "I like that. I can't' 
promise anything, but let me 
think about it." 

1 think I'm in! 

December 27, 1959 

CENT the soup-and-fish out 
^ to be cleaned and pressed. 
Looks like I'm going to get some 
use out of it, after all. We're having a big formal New Year's Eve 
party in the commons room and 
there's going to be square dancing, swing-your-partner, and all 
of that. When I called Marilyn, 
she sounded very friendly — she 
rememberer* to call me Oliver, 
and I was flattered that she did 
—and said she'd be delighted to 
come. Seems she's gotten very 
fond of folk dancing lately. 

Gosh, it'll be good to get out of 
these dungarees for a while. I'm 
happy to say I still look good in 
formals. Marilyn Ought to be 
quite impressed. Len always wore 
his like pajamas. 