Two weeks ago 1 bought a 'Joan the Wad ' and to-day I have won £232 10s 
Please send two more."— B.C., Tredegar, S. Wales. 



lixtract from " Everybody's Fortune Book," 1931. 




JOAN the WAD 

it the 

LUCKY CORNISH PISKEY 

who 

SEES ALL, HEARS ALL, DOES ALL 



Guaranteed dipped in water 
from the Lucky Saint's Well 



JOAN THE WAD is Queen of the Luckyj, 
Cornish Piskeys. Thousands of persons 
ail over the world claim that Joan fciie' 
Wad has brought them Wonderful Luck 
in the way of Health, Wealth and Happiness. 1 » 

HISTORY FREE FOR A STAMPl 
If you will send me your name and 
address and ail- stamp and a stamper* 
addressed envelope for reply, I will se 
you a History of the Cornish Piskey 
and the marvellous miracles 
accomplish. JOAN THE WAD Is 
Queen of the Lucky Cornish Pisk. 
A and with whom good luck and goo 

health always attend. 

AS HEALER 

One Lady writes: " My sister suffered very badly for years, but since I gave her 
a Joan the Wad to keep near her she is much easier. Do you think this is duej to 
Joan or the Water from the Lucky Well ? " 

AS LUCK BRINGER 

Another writes : " Since the War my wife and I have been dogged by persist) 
ill-luck, and we seemed to be sinking lower and lower. One day someone sent 1 
Joan the Wad. We have never found out who it was, but, coincidence if you lik 
within a week I got a much better job and my wife had some money left her. Sine 
then we have never looked back and, needless to say, swear by ' Queen Joan.' 

AS MATCHMAKER 

A young girl wrote and informed me that she had had scores of boy friends, but it j 
was not until she had visited Cornwall and taken Joan back with her that she mat'' 
the boy of her dreams, and as they got better acquainted she discovered he also | 
has " Joan the Wad." 

AS PRIZEWINNER 

A young man wrote us only last week : " For two years I entered competitio 
without luck, but since getting Joan the Wad I have frequently been successful! 
although I have not won a big prize, but I know that . . . , who won £2,000 : 
competition, has one because I gave it him. When he won his £2,000 he gave rfi J 
£100 for myself, so you see I have cause to bless ' Queen Joan.' " 

AS SPECULATOR 

A man writes : " I had some shares that for several years I couldn't give away; 
They were i/~ shares, and all of a sudden they went up in the market to 7?9.| 
I happened to be staring at Joan the Wad. Pure imagination, you miy say, but 
1 thought I saw her wink approvingly. I sold out, reinvested the money at grcate§ 
profit and have prospered ever since." 

All you have to do is to send a ij- stamp (Savings Stamps accepted) and a stamped 
addressed envelope for the history to — 

44, JOAN'S COTTAGE, LA N I VET, BODM1 

/•or Canada and U.S.A. send 50 cents for History, or 2 Dollars for both History and Masc\ 
For Australia, send Is. 6d. for History, or 8s. Od. for both History and Mascot. 



AUTHENTIC 

FICTION 

NUMBER TWENTY-THREE 

(Technical Editor : H. J. Campbell, F.R.H.S., M.S.C.I., F.B.I.S.) 



Editorial 


2 


Forrest J. Ackerman 


3 


Projectiles (Part \) 

4 


THE SINGING SPHERES 

5 


Projectiles (Part 2) 

110 


S.F. Handbook 


11f 



Printed in Great Britain and Published by 
HAMILTON & CO. (STAFFORD) LIMITED, 
1 & 2 Melville Court, Goldhawk Road, 
London, W. 12. 



EDITORIAL 

"old growler 9 ' back 



We know that a lot of readers 
have been looking forward to the 
story in this issue. Stress of 
other work has kept Jon J. Deegan from our pages, but his longawaited return is marked with a 
story that's even better than his 
others — and fully a few thousand 
of you have told us that you 
think his stories are the best we 
publish. 

Deegan, you say, has the knack 
of making his stories and characters seem terribly real and credible. And that, after all, is one 
of the highest points of attainment in fiction-writing. 

New readers — if there is anybody left who hasn't read us before — can judge for themselves. 
But all of you let us know what 
you think' of THE SINGING 
SPHERES. 

* 

An innovation in this issue is 
the inclusion of poetry. Though 
a good many other sf mags regularly publish poems, we have always considered that the space 
could be better spsnt on other 
things. This time, however, we 
have made an exception in the 
case of a poem sent in by a reader 
in Hong Hong. It appears on 
page 4 We do not intend to 
make a habit of this — unless 




popular demand says yes — but 
should anything exceptional turn 
up occasionally, we will print it. 

* 

AUTHENTIC SCIENCE FICTION is the one sf mag in Britain 
that takes an active, open interest 
in fandom. We want fandom to 
grow and flourish in this country 
as it does in the United States. 
There, according to the 1952 
OPERATION FANTAST handbook, 14 sf clubs and societies 
are actively at work airing views, 
exchanging magazines and letters, 
holding meetings. In Britain, the 
handbook says, there are 10 — one 
of them devoted exclusively to 
fantasy art. 

We would like to see these 
clubs grow and further clubs 
formed. Any reader who wishes 
to start a club, or wishes to appeal for more members to join 
an existing club, should send us 
a fetter with the details and we 
will endeavour to print it. 

There is no charge for these 
services, which are supplied as 
the contribution of ASFm towards 
the spreading of science fiction 
until it becomes a recognised and 
respected literary form. We 
know that it is the fans and the 
clubs who are raising the standards. Because of them, we have 
raised our own, so that now we 
are acclaimed as being at the top 
of British sf by people who know 
and love the field. 

The letters ASFm stand for 
something more than out title: 
they stand for quality fiction and 
for the encouragement of fandom. 

EDITOR. 



Forrest J. Ackerman 

writes from America . . . 



One would almost get the impression from the publishers' announcements that there will soon 
be more science fiction BOOKS 
per year issued than magazines! 
Among the promised titles are 
SPACE PLATFORM by Murray 
Leinster, THE DEMOLISHED 
MAN by Alfred Bester, FUTURE 
TENSE and DANGER! CRIME 
AHEAD by Ken Crossen (anthologies), MAROONED ON MARS 
by Lester del Ray, OUTPOST 
MARS by Cyril Judd, FIVE 
AGAINST VENUS by Philip 
Latham, THE CRYSTAL 
HORDE by John Taine, MAN OF 
MANY MINDS by E. Everett 
Evans, and SON OF THE STARS 
by Raymond F. Jones. 

Ray Bradbury was Guest of 
Honour at the California-wide 
science fiction conference held on 
June 28-29 in the seaside city of 
San Diego. Bradbury recently 
sold a 1,500-word story at the rate 
of 3/6 per word — fantastic in itself! 

A television contract has been 
finalised for van Vogt and Mayne 
Hull for the presentation of a 
weekly serial revolving around 
the Earth-Mars-Venus adventures 
of Moon-born man-plus in the 
years 1980 onwards. Yours sincerely is collaborating on the 
screen scripts, with 108 scenes 
completed at the present time. 

In Germany, Peter Lorre is 
starring in a film called "The Volcano People." In France, translated editions are scheduled of 
Philip Wylie's WHEN WORLDS 
COLLIDE, van Vogt's VOYAGE 
OF THE SPACE BEAGLE, 
Taine's SEEDS OF LIFE. 



An editor of one of the newer 
Stateside magazines tells me that 
he's risking coruscating criticism 
with his 4th issue, but if necessary he'll go out in a blaze of 
glory. The story is that he's 
bought a yarn that was turned 
down as too mature by the 
vauntedly adult magazines. How 
frustrated can a writer get? 




I myself recently did a tabootouching tale for the sf field. 
One editor told me he'd give a 
limb to be able to print it, but — ! 
Another returned it as "too hot to 
handle." But the third editor's 
reason^ for rejecting it floored 
me: "Our readers would be 
merely bored," he declared. "I 
don't find the theme so daring. 
In my magazine it would be old 
hat." 

Lighter note : ALIAS A WOOWOO by Sherwood Springer and 
THE DEVIL, YOU SAY? by 
Chas. Beaumont are two yarns 
which have whetted Hollywood's 
appetite as properties for the fantasy film cycle. "Ring Around 
Saturn" is a picture which will be 
produced in Technicolor!! 

Cordially 4sj. 
Read Forrest J. Ackerman's 
latest sf news from America, 
which will appear every month. 



projectiles (1) 

SONG FROM CHINA 



BEST EVER 

I'm not exactly a guy for passing out compliments, as my sf 
associates around the world will 
tell you, but a time comes when 
a person can no longer restrain 
himself, and is forced to serve 
praise where such is called for. 
This is certainly the case when 
it comes to criticize AUTHENTIC 
SCIENCE FICTION. It is by 
far the best scientifiction magazine ever to reach me from the 
shores of your country. Keep up 
the good work. 

RONALD S. FRIEDMAN, 
Brooklyn, New York. 

Those who know, as we do, the 
extent of Ron. Friedman's connection Kiich the sf fraternity all 
over the world will realise how 
proud we were to receive this 
letter. Thanks, Ron, you've 
bucked us up a lot. Let's hear 
from you again. 



STILL CLIMBING 

I enclose herewith 10/6 for the 
next six of the best of science 
fiction it has been my pleasure to 
read. 

Your books have climbed steadily since your first book "Mushroom Men from Mars." Your 
Covens are excellent, but I think 
more room could be given to your 
"Projectiles." 

Will we be having any more of 
those intrepid explorers of yours 
— Shiny Spear and the Old 
Growler Trio? 

M. T. GREEN, C/Mx904245. 

H.M.S. Pembroke, 
Chatham, Kent. 

Thank you, Michael, for your 
praise. ASFm seems to have anticipated your latter with this 
issue — more Projectiles, and the 
"Old Growler Trio." 

(Projectiles are con 



Congratulations on producing a 
really fine British sf magazine. 
I enjoyed DARAKUA greatly 
and consider it a story well told. 
The covers match the quality of 
the stories, but couldn't you get 
the price tucked down in the 
bottom corner? I enclose a copy 
of a poem I've written and would 
be proud to see it in AUTHENTIC SCIENCE FICTION. By 
the way, am I your most distant 
subscriber? 

Cpl. DUNN, R., 
80 Squadron, Kai-Tak, 
Hong Kong. 
Well, we don't know, Corporal. 
W e've got subscribers in the 
U.S.A., Australia and Java. Anyway, you're certainly a long way 
off. Here's your poem in print : 

Reach for the stars, you pioneer, 
Bring me them in your metal'd hand. 
The unsetting stars by which you steer, 
Or Saturn's jewelled waist-band. 

Your trade-wind is a rocket's blast, 
Your ship a sealed tube of steel, 
No sheets bent on a sturdy mast, 
No helmsman at the wheel. 

The planets, island-scattered in 
Endless oceans of dark space. 
Unknown, dangers wait for him 
Who wins the stellar race. 

Empires wait the conqueror's claim, 
Cortez and Raleigh live once more, 
Your life or death may bring you fame 
On some new world shore. 

And, Space-man, if your dying breath 
Be gasped in some non-Terran place, 
Pray that the message of your death 
Bring unity from Earth to Space. 

R. Dunn. 

FUTUREPHOTOGRAPHY 



Are any of your readers interested in futurephotography, that 
is, table-top photography of 
science fiction models? I have 
tried one or two, but with only 
one good result. 

Sgt. BRAIN, S., 
G.H.Q., Melf., 17. 
linued on p. 110.) 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



By Jon J. Deegan 

CHAPTER ONE 

Whistlers of the Ether 

WE had travelled nearly ten miles through the low, brown 
foothills of Kardoon before the noise began. Ahead of 
us lay a ridge of beige-coloured rock— bare and sun-baked as 
all the rest of this unappetising planet— while above spread a 
strange, pink sky, whose tint did nothing to offset effects of the 
sweaty, stifling atmosphere through which we marched. 

"I don't know about you," said Tubby Goss, our photographer, "but I'm taking ten minutes off for a rest ! " 

Behind the transparent morynium facepiece of his helmet, I 
saw his plump cheeks puff themselves with fatigue. Personally, I felt in no better shape. 

Young Hartnell's tanned, lean face grinned. "Now, now ! 
Think what the controller might say—" 
"Curse the controller!" said Tubby, cold-bloodedly. 
Quite frankly, I think any of us would have hesitated in 
other circumstances from using language of this sort, even 
light-heartedly, because outside transmitter switches have been 
known to be left on accidentally, with the result that muttered 
blasphemies inside an atmosphere suit ring out loud and clear 
on the controller's amplifiers. If there is one thing I wouldn't 
do for all the cobalt on Zenna II, it is to fall foul of a stonyhearted Inter-X controller, sitting up there in his room at the 
top of the ship, with powers of life and death over exploration 
parties during his spell of duty. ^ 

Because of their wide responsibilities, only men of rigid 
principles and strict standards are selected as controllers. It 
is to them that field squads report from time to time during 
wanderings over a planet undergoing investigation, and there 
are occasions when a controller must make decisions that 



5 



6 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



would frighten lesser men. A party might have to be sacrificed to avert an interplanetary or civil war, for instance, or 
their lives might be the price of getting back information of 
exceptional value to mankind. The controller has the unenviable job of making such decisions — often in a matter of 
seconds. 

At our headquarters aboard Interplanetary Exploration 
Bureau spaceship No. 2213 — everybody knows her affectionately as Old Growler, because of a peculiar noise from her 
gravity retractors —we have, I think, nine or ten controllers, 
working in six-hour shifts. No one among the rank and file 
can be certain, because, for reasons of discipline, we never, get 
to know controllers except as disembodied voices over loudspeakers. 

But on this trip, at least, we were free agents, although I 
noticed a cautionary eyebrow or so raised by higher-ups at 
the briefing session. Old Growler's present task was investigating the planetary system of Eta Herculis, and the powersthat-be tackled it in their usual systematic manner. The ship 
herself and the main squads concentrated on worlds shown by 
instruments to be worthy of intensive exploration; less promising globes received a visit only from scout ships bearing small 
crews, who reported on the prospects. 

The three of us — young Hartnell, physicist and geologist; 
Tubby, the photographer; and myself, a botanist of sorts — 
comprised one of the lesser crews, and they had directed us 
into the outer orbits towards a bare, inhospitable chunk of 
rock named Kardoon, while Old Growler cruised several 
million miles away in search of more profitable fields. A 
position and time had been fixed, reassuringly enough, for 
our return rendezvous. 

So whatever unpleasantnesses surrounded us at the moment, 
we were at least free to speak our minds about controllers. 
Needless to say, both Hartnell and Tubby used the opportunity to the full. 

"Let's take a breather, then," I said, secretly thankful. 
Despite the air-conditioning of a Bergmann Mark VIII suit, I 
felt sticky and exhausted. I looked across the hot, jagged 
slopes to our ship on the plain, scarcely visible now through 
the haze. "Even though they've built pedometers into these 
new suits they can't make us keep walking every minute of 
the day." 



THE SINGING SPHERES 7 

Someone, somewhere, had been sitting down on the job 
rather too literally and too long. The resultant protest 
travelled via usual official channels until now, on our current 
expedition, orders were that field squads must keep log-books 
of distance travelled on foot. Little pieces of red-tape annoyance like this are all part of Inter-X routine, and probably the 
order would be cancelled next time round in the hope that 
everyone had by then learned his lesson. 

"It's a great life if you keep your sense of humour," said 
Hartnell, squatting under a sheltered ledge of rock and yawning. "Tell 'em we haven't done much mileage to-day because of all the interesting specimens we've been collecting." 

If I didn't know this young devil-may-care so well I'd 
sometimes think him completely irresponsible. "They'd want 
to see the specimens," I said, discouragingly. "Probably 
they've heard that one before — " 

He laughed and said he thought he'd take a nap. Tubby 
decided it would be a good idea, too. 

I watched them close their, eyes and they were soon slumbering peacefully, completely undisturbed by the thought that 
they rested alone on a strange, far-off planet, where the foot 
of Man had never previously trodden. 

Enviously, I looked away. Tired though I might be, sleep 
wouldn't come. I stared out into the pink heat-haze and 
started one of those depressing trains of thought about whether 
life was worth while. Assorted adventures had come the way 
of out little party in the past. It was enlivening to look back 
on them — they were, of course, far from amusing at the time — 
and to think how the experiences had welded the three of us 
into a strong, affectionate comradeship. But such occasions 
were the exception rather than the rule. Space travel had become commonplace and only in the ranks of Inter-X engaged 
in pushing out Man's frontiers towards the myriad shimmering 
galaxies — did we recapture a pioneering spirit. Yet even so, 
the vast majority of work had become mere routine. We 
landed on world after world, only to find bare, uninhabited 
rock. Now and again there were traces of lichens on the 
stones, sometimes little wriggling things in a pool. They were 
carefully preserved and tabulated as specimens for fuller, more 
minute examination in the laboratories. I'd known many 
days when the sight of another fungi or lichen could easily 
have set me screaming with the monotony; and many more 
when I'd have been thankful even for these to break the 



8 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



profitless process of prodding chunks of sterile silica. 

A funny thing, I thought, that I couldn't stand the exciting 
times and didn't like it either when life was quiet. I looked 
again at Hartnell and Tubby, resting easily, and wondered 
whether I might be getting old. 

Anyway, Kardoon was already marked down in my mind 
as another uninhabited planet. The back-room boys aboard 
Old Growler thought so, at least. We took turns round the 
place in the scout ship, spying vast, brown deserts and a few 
grey seas. Hartnell put the vessel down near the shore and 
we went out to find the water steaming and heavy with ammonia. Tests with the Mesonic filter showed nothing — no 
scrap of plant life, no microscopic blob of protoplasm. After 
one or two other calls, he descended again near our present 
location on the pretext of gathering geological specimens, saying also that the foothill strata might produce results. 

In this way we came toiling towards the ridge, finding it 
heavy going despite the_ gravity-reactors in the Bergrnann 
suits. There was only one comfort — we certainly wouldn't be 
overworked and we wouldn't have to keep making the usual 
hourly reports to the controller. 

And with these reflections, I, too, slept. 

Nearly two hours later I awoke with a blinding headache. 
First thought was an oxygen-fault or an insulation filter gone 
wrong. Everything was working normally, though, so I 
turned up the oxygen a .little more for luck and felt better 
after a while. Hartnell and Tubby were both frowning in 
their sleep, with little puckers of flesh forming near the bridge 
of the nose, and stirring uneasily. 

Alarm prickled coldly along my backbone. Despite the 
head-swimming pain and ringing in my ears, I pulled myself 
beyond the sheltering rock and looked out. Everywhere was 
still deserted and desolate beneath that horrible sky. 

"Wake up, you two," I said. "Wake up!" 

I heard them groan in chorus. Then Hartnell opened his 
eyes, only to shut them again as though someone had hit him 
across the forehead. I staggered across and clicked round 
their oxygen taps two or three notches. 

"Suffering Sirius!" said Hartneil. He had a weakness for 
alliteration in moments of stress. "My head I" 



THE SINGING SPHERES 9 

"What the devil is it?" groaned Tubby. "Something we 
ate?" 

Our last meal had been in the scout ship and undoubtedly 
quite wholesome. 

Hartnell licked his lips wryly, as though trying to get rid of 
an unpleasant flavour. "Reminds you of a hangover after a 
night in a Z-bar, doesn't it, Pop?" 

Z-bars are where bright young spacemen relax between 
trips and certainly no places for a respectable, middle-aged 
botanist. "I wouldn't know," I said, coldly, and brought the 
discussion to a more reasonable level. "Could it be something in the atmosphere that gets past the filters?" 

Apparently it wasn't. Hartnell made one or two quick 
tests on gadgets I don't understand and said the air in this 
region was the same as elsewhere — very little oxygen, some 
nitrogen, lots of argon and other inert gases, with odd traces 
of fluorine and ammonia. "I'm sure there's nothing else," he 
said, baffled. "If only my head didn't ring so much — " 

"You get that, too?" asked Tubby, interestedly. "Sometimes the height brings it on with me — " 

It did with me, also, but I wasn't going to wait aimlessly 
while these two invalids discussed their symptoms. "How 
about radiations of some sort — " 

"That's right," said Hartnell. "High-pitched sort of ringing. Makes your ears feel numb inside — " 

"Yes, and funny-like, as though you're dazed — " 

"Radiations?" I said, firmly. "Could it be that?" 

"A kind of very high buzzer-note — whistling and ringing at 
the same time," went on Hartnell. "At least, the oxygen's 
easing the headache a bit, even though it doesn't seem to 
quieten the noise — " 

"Try swallowing quickly," suggested Tubby. "Or if you 
think it's safe to take the helmets off for a few seconds how 
about — " 

Obviously, they didn't intend to pay much attention to my 
suggestions, and in something of a temper. I decided I wouldn't 
listen to them, either. I put my thumb to my belt and flipped 
off the radio inter-com. 

And in the same instant the noise stopped. 

The silence which followed was so startling and so abrupt 
that for a moment I failed to realise it. The feeling of relief 
eclipsed everything else. 



10 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



Experimentally, I switched on again. 
" — so high-pitched, really, you can hardly hear it," Tubby 
was saying. 

"Your idea of swallowing doesn't seem to help much — " 

Over the sound of their voices I heard once again the incredibly shrill whine, almost beyond audible register. When 
I clicked the switch, all went silent. 

So I turned on the inter-com yet a second time and said in a 
firm voice: "If you two hypochondriacs would listen to me for 
a moment I could tell you that — " 

"Not actually loud, is it?" asked Hartnell. "Quite faint, 
really, but—well, penetrating — " 

"Shut up!" I yelled. 

That quietened them all right. I saw HartaelFs eyebrows 
rise inquiringly. "If you'd let me get a word in edgeways, I 
can give you the reason. Somebody's inter-com isn't properly 
adjusted. There's a heterodyne coming through. We went 
to sleep with the sets switched on and that whine sounding in 
our ears all the time. No wonder we got headaches." 

They both stared for a moment, then switched off simultaneously and I knew from their expressions that they once 
more experienced the blessing of silence. 

But I felt my face grow rather red, because the ringing persisted. Obviously, my own inter-com was to blame. 

Hartnell guessed this, and to his everlasting credit said 
nothing except "Let's have a look, Pop. It shouldn't take 
long to fix — " 

So far as possible, all gadgets in the Bergmann suits likely 
to need adjustment or emergency overhaul rest in outside 
pockets, from which they can be easily detached. I pulled out 
battery leads and undipped the set when a peculiar look on 
Hartnell's face froze me there, still holding the inter-com in my 
hand. He made no move to take it. 

"Now that's very funny. Pop," he said, quietly. (I could 
hear him over the outside transmitter, which was still working 
— whistle and all.) "Here's your set switched off — but my 
ears are still ringing." 

"Mine, too," agreed Tubby. 

Then I told them about the noise on the outside transmitter 
and we all looked at one another for quite a time without 
speaking. 

After that we began to turn our sets on and off in all 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



11 



manner of combinations — we couldn't do much by way of 
altering frequency, because the inter-coms were fixed and the 
outside transmitters merely gave us the choice of three preselected channels — but always the sound pursued us, never 
altering, either in tone or volume. 

Young Hartnell drew a deep breath. "You know what I 
think—?" 

I didn't like it at all. 

"Yes," said Tubby, shortly. Quite obviously, he didn't 
like it, either. 

"Our radio kit's in perfect order," went on Hartnell, unperturbed. "Therefore, we've only one answer — " 

"Static," said Tubby. "Atmospheric interference. Radiations from fission of sorts — " He didn't sound particularly 
confident in his objections. 

" — we're listening to a definite radio transmission ! " 

"Out here?" I demanded. "Sirius knows how many million 
miles away from anything?" 

I saw his teeth show in a white, attractive smile. Both 
Tubby and I liked matters even less then, because we'd seen 
Hartnell smile like that before. He always did it when things 
were getting tough. 

"We didn't hear it out there, did we?" He gestured down 
to the plain where our ship lay. "It's only since we've climbed 
this ridge — " 

I looked past his arm towards those desolate brown rocks 
and the horrible sky, feeling myself sweating more than ever. 
I caught Tubby's eye. Inside his suit he shrugged helplessly. 

Young Hartnell rubbed his hands briskly. "Well, come 
on. Let's get going and tick up a bit more mileage." 



CHAPTER TWO 

Rainbow Bubbler on the Rocks 

HPHE brow of the ridge lay some three or four hundred feet 
above us — a dark, frowning proclivity of rock, up which 
we toiled with the gravity gadgets set almost to maximum 
and chattering all the time in an attempt to take our minds off 
that persistent, irritating whistle. We had uncomfortable presentiments about what might meet our eyes when we looked 
into the valley which undoubtedly lay beyond. 

"Confound these straps!" said Tubby. "They're cutting 
my legs in two." 

"That's the worst of having a lot of surplus fat to carry 
round," said Hartnell, unsympathetically. "Now, if you were 
a straight, lithe figure of a man, like me — " 

Personally, I saved my breath for climbing, although there 
was something in Tiibby's complaint. Reactors are a standard fitting in the Bergmann suits and undoubtedly a great 
help in places where gravitation is abnormally strong or where 
operators must climb. Light harness inside the suit fits round 
waist and thighs and a small control lever on the belt applies 
the power. They won't lift a man into the air, of course, 
but they certainly take a weight off his feet. 

Not being an expert on such matters, I haven't the faintest 
idea how reactors work, but Hartnell once told me the theory 
goes right back to the eighteenth century, when one of those 
clever old physicists — I believe his name was Isaac Newton — 
evolved certain natural laws. One of the laws was to the 
effect that "every action has an equal and opposite reaction." 
Therefore, said Hartnell — as nearly as I could follow — the 
downward drag of gravity must be balanced somewhere by 
an upward thrust, and if you could only lay hands (so to 
speak) on this upward thrust the effects of gravitation could 
be largely offset. He said it was like having two equal 
weights suspended on a rope over a pulley, so that it needed 
only a touch of a finger to tip the balance whichever way you 
liked. 

Of course, the reactors weren't nearly so efficient as that, 
but the "finger-tip touch" — applied by an yttrium power


12 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



13 



pack — made the thing practical for as long as thirty-six hours 
at a time before re-charging. And, admittedly, working at 
full throttle was inclined to make the harness chafe somewhat, but I didn't see what they could do about that. 

Eventually we paused, the last level of rock scarcely two 
feet above our heads. We looked at one another. 
"Well," I said, "who's going to do it?" 
"We're in it together," said Hartnell. "We might as well 
do this together." 

I wasn't altogether displeased at the anti-climax that followed. Our three helmets rose slowly over the ridge and we 
saw stretching before us a wide, deserted basin of the inevitable brown desert, enclosed by foothills on the farther side 
and with a dry valley outlet eastwards. The plain extended 
fully four miles — and nowhere was there sign of vegetation 
or other life. 
Tubby drew a deep breath. "What now?" 
"You get your cameras busy on this delightful scene," said 
Hartnell. "Otherwise you'll have something apart from lack 
of mileage to explain to the controllers." He bit his lip and I 
knew he was thinking. "This confounded whistling — if we'd 
only got some sort of direction-finding gear — " 

"Do you get the impression that it's louder since we came 
from behind the rocks?" 

"Well — I wondered. Didn't like to say anything — " 
Eventually we decided to please our superiors with a few 
more figures ticked upon the pedometers, heading towards 
the outlet of this baked depression and feeling no small relief 
at being able to walk in more or less normal manner downhill between boulders and rough stones. 

After half an hour, when we were all sweating copiously 
again, Hartnell said, "Let's have another rest — " 

Tubby opened his mouth to say something, but thought 
better of it and merely grunted. 
"My eyes are smarting a bit, too," I said. "It's this glare." 
"Yes, I suppose so," said Hartnell, absently. Obviously he 
had something on his mind and we regarded him suspiciously. 

In silence we approached a big slab of rock, tilted on end, 
to find support for aching backs. From where I sat I could 
see right into the funnel-shaped exit from the plain as it 
dived down between precipitoiss, jagged cliffs. The light made 
some distant outcrop of coloured mineral shine like a tiny, 



14 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



lrndescent bubble. Idly, I closed one eye. Heat-haze 
caused reflections from the gay bubble, making a second pinpoint appear on the opposite cliff-fiice. 

I opened the eye again. The second little bubble didn't 
vanish. I squinted in various ways, trying to make them disappear or multiply and they obeyed in a thoroughly amusing 
fashion. I managed to increase the reflections to six before 
suddenly realising that the whole business was rather childish 
and then closed both eyes, prepared to doze. 

But the irritating whistle still sounded in my helmetlouder, if anything, and developing discordant harmonics. 

"It's hopeless trying to sleep with this row," complained 
Tubby. "In any case, we'd only wake up with more undeserved hang-overs." 

"Try focusing on that piece of mica or whatever it is shining in the valley," I suggested. "It'll wink back with all the 
colours of the rainbow. Highly entertaining and no strain on 
the intellect — " 

He did so. "I can see four—" 

I made it four, too— which was rather a peculiar coincidence. 
"Now it's only two—" 

He was right. There were a pair of the twinkling pinpoints, glowing violet, orange, green and yellow in quick 
succession and providing a welcome, colourful contrast after 
the terrain's monotonous shades of dull brown. 

"I make it four again," said Hartnell, suddenly. 

He was right. There were four. I felt the hair slowly 
prickling in the nape of my neck. "Not— not lamps? Not 
something signalling to us?" 

In the silence— except for that maddening ringing noise— 
the sweat trickled coldly down my spine. 

"Well," said young Hartnell, brightly, "we'd better go and 
find out!" 

No one can deny that Inter-X rewards its men well from a 
financial standpoint. There are, indeed, times of slackness 
and boredom when I often think it's a shame to take the 
money; on other occasions — such as when we wade through 
steaming swamps wondering whether something may jump 
out and grab us by the ankles or when we walk across an open 
plain to determine the source of strange signal lights— the 
salary isn't a penny too much. Now and again I'd willingly 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



15 



forego all my back pay to be safe and sound once more aboard 
Old Growler. This was one of those days. 

We snapped down the telescopic visors in our facepieces 
and stared unwinkingly as we walked. The four shining objects remained suspended on the cliff like lamps at the mouth 
of an old-style sailing harbour. They were definitely circular 
or spherical. 

When we had approached within half a mile, two of them 
moved— not like soap bubbles, floating aimlessly in the hot 
air, but with definite impetus. With a speed that might have 
deceived us but for the visors, they vanished behind a rocky 
ledge. 

"Perishing Procyon!" exclaimed Hartnell. "Did you see 
that?" 

I certainly had; Tubby, in fact, had done more and caught 
the whole proceeding with his telescopic lenses. Through the 
whistling I heard his cameras whirring softly. 

The remaining guardians of the valley— for this they 
appeared to be— stayed firm at their posts. Before long we 
were able to let the visors snap back and take a good look at 
them with normal eyesight. 

As we had imagined earlier, these objects were spherical or 
nearly so, with a soft, confused outline of rapidly-changing 
colour. Moreover, they were quite transparent, and the 
weathered stone to which they clung could easily be seen 
through their substance. 

It was when we stood no more than a hundred yards distant that one of the things slowly detached itself from the rock 
and floated towards us. The motion was leisurely— quite 
different from the agitated swoop to shelter made by the 
others. 

Goggle-eyed, I watched it move slowly nearer. 

"What in Andromeda is it?" asked Tubby. 

The thing bobbed suddenly, as though in alarm or menace, 
end my nerves almost literally shrieked with suspense. Then 
it resumed floating quietly— not towards us, but moving off to 
our left, where brown cliffs rose sharply on the far side of the 
basin and at no more than walking pace. 

We waited until it was nearly out of sight, and when we 
looked towards the valley-mouth again four others had joined 
the lone sentinel. 



16 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



"Well," said Hartnell, "I'll admit I've never seen anything 
quite like these before — " 
"Think they're — dangerous?" 

He shrugged. "Mr. Fuzzy-bubble over there—" he jerked 
a thumb in the direction of the departing sphere — "seemed to 
think we were. At least, it proves one thing—" 

"Oh?" I said. "What?" 

He stared curiously for a moment. "Didn't you notice, 
Pop? That row in the inter-com— these things cause it ! You 
heard the howl when that one jumped about just now—" 

I stared. "I thought it was just my nerves playing tricks," 
I confessed, rather sheepishly. 

"Well," said Tubby, "let's get on and see if we can't quieten 
'em a bit. This whistling's wearing me down." 

"A lot louder now, too," admitted Hartnell. 

At last we were able to see the objects at close quarters. 
Their general appearance did not change, but we finally estimated their size fairly accurately. The spheres varied between fifteen inches and two feet in diameter. They clung 
motionless, except for a faint twinkling of the outer envelope, 
and they were definitely responsible for the ringing sound we 
all heard. By now the noise had become so intense I wondered how long I might endure it. 

Suddenly we saw No. 1 returning from its journey to the 
cliffs. It hung before us a few seconds — changing colour more 
rapidly, I thought— then moved off slowly again in the direction from which it had come. It halted, moved a few yards, 
paused once more, floated on again. And each time the 
monotonous whistle on the inter-com altered its note very 
slightly. 

"What in Altair is it doing?" I asked. 

"Why," said Hartnell, "don't you see? It wants us to 
follow!" He paused, thoughtfully. "Only," he added, 
slowly, "I don't think we'll waste time that way." 



CHAPTER THREE 

Nursery For a Dying World 

"V OUNG Hartnell's gift of generalship has formed a notable 
feature of our past adventures. I suppose it boils down 
to an instinctive talent for doing the right thing at the right 
time, but in the present case I confess I'd have gone off after 
the floating bubble, anxious to co-operate in the interests of 
human knowledge. 

Yet when we came to analyse the situation, Tubby and I 
could see quite clearly how the land lay. We could ask ourselves several interesting questions. Why were the spheres so 
obviously guarding the valley-entrance? Why had they 
dodged to and fro with such agitation when they somehow saw 
us approaching across the enclosed plain? If they viewed us 
with suspicion— as, no doubt, they had every right to do — 
wouldn't they try to divert us from the valley? Finally— 
what did the valley itself contain? 

"Come on, then," said Hartnell. "Let's wander through 
that gap in the rocks and see what they're up to." He might 
have been suggesting a pleasant Sunday afternoon's walk instead of preparing to stick his neck into unimaginable perils, 
and Tubby followed him just as calmly. For my part, I 
wished we'd followed Mr. Fuzzy-bubble out across the desert. 

More spheres popped into sight from somewhere until 
when we reached the narrow cleft of rock there must have 
been fully a dozen clinging like limpets to the cliff-face. 

"Take no notice," said Hartnell. "Ignore 'em and keep 
going." 

It was all very well for him to talk like that. I looked at the 
nearest pair, now scarcely a dozen yards away. The noise 
over the inter-com became indescribable. Ringing and whistling sounds multiplied themselves to a shrieking crescendo. 

"I've — I've got to switch off!" I gasped. "I can't stand 
it any longer—" 

"No, Pop, no!" said Hartnell, urgently. "We might need 
to talk to each other in emergency—" 



17 



18 THE SINGING SPHERES 

Before I could answer, we all halted simultaneously in our 
tracks. Some intangible barrier — against which we pressed 
in vain — stretched itself across the narrow pass. I imagined 
myself leaning against a great, soft, invisible mattress, that 
yielded slightly but refused to give way, and the more I pushed 
against it the greater its resistance became. 

In baffled consternation we retreated — the only possible 
thing to do. Even Hartnell seemed shaken, and he was staring round in angry bewilderment when Fuzzy-bubble appeared again. (I don't know why I keep using this absurd 
name, so flippantly coined by Hartnell, except that it describes 
the object so accurately.) This particular sphere was easy to 
detect because all the others remained anchored to the rock 
instead of moving around freely, and somehow there was 
more purple among its flickering, ever-changing hues. It 
came quite close, as though to attract our attention, and resumed its alternate drifting and halting. 

We took no notice of this invitation, however, and walked 
back a little way to go into conference. 

"Well, now," said Tubby, sarcastically, "do you think the 
controller's likely to complain because I haven't got a photograph of — of a wall of thin air?" 

"It gives me the creeps," I said, shuddering. "I've never 
come across anything like it." 

"Beats me," confessed Hartnell. He looked up, though, 
and I caught a gleam in his eye. "Except—" 

I waited, saying nothing but expecting the worst. 

"Except," he went on, slowly, "it seems to be a case for 
applying Inter-X Manual of Instruction for Field Squads — " 

"Eh?" 

"—Section VI, Chapter Eight!" 

Maybe I hadn't been at my brightest. There was the heat, 
the monotonous whistle and those eerie, twinkling spheres — 
all conspiring to prevent my mind working clearly. Yet as 
soon as Hartnell pointed out the position I could appreciate it 
quite easily — just as when he had refused to be diverted by the 
purplish sphere's invitation to a nice long walk. 

Tubby saw the point equally promptly. "Come on, Pop. 
Get busy with the Mattus." 

"But this is fantastic ! " I said. "These things can't be intelligent! Why, they're — they're empty. You can see right 
through them ! " 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



19 



Young Hartnell grinned again. "We could see through that 
barrier— but it stopped us all right! And they didn't put it 
there for fun, any more than Fuzzy-bubble wanted to enjoy 
our company on a trip to the hills." 

If the spheres only knew, they had committed a tactical 
mistake. Opposition always made Hartnell more stubborn 
and determined, as I'd learned to my cost on occasions in the 
past. "So, obviously," he went on, "they're intelligent — intelligent life—" 

"Life? Them?" I'd know a lot of queer things on a lot 
of queer planets, but nothing like this. Yet against my better 
judgment I had to agree with him. Reasoning was present in 
the sphere's actions — and there was that invisible, inexplicable barrier across the valley-entrance. Newly placed there, 
too, unless the spheres possessed some particular quality that 
enabled them to pass through, because we had seen them 
earlier dodging to and fro. 

"The Mattus ! " said Hartnell, a trifle impatiently. "Come 
on, Pop. Don't waste time." 

The Mattus apparatus, of course, was what he'd meant by 
that reference to the Inter-X manual. Best description for the 
machine, I think, is an "electronic aid to telepathy." I don't 
know how the thing works, but the rough theory is that 
thought-impressions radiate like ether vibrations and when 
picked up by the Mattus aerial and suitably amplified their 
meaning can be understood. On several occasions in the past, 
confronted by intelligent life of various types on strange 
worlds the Mattus has proved worth its weight in corominium. 

Sometimes, during long, weary months of space-journeying, 
I've taken a book from the ship's library and read about the 
troubles known by our predecessors in Inter-X before Professor Mattus brought out his invention. How they achieved 
communication with some species is nothing short of a miracle 
— the worm-men of Athos, for instance, or the strange creatures back on Karmah, who weave weir.d patterns with their 
tentacles. In some instances it needed years of concentration and research to exchange even the simplest thoughts. 

No one must imagine, of course, that the Mattus machine 
made things easy, but on our last trip alone — where the research chiefs experienced delighted amazement by the fact of 
intelligent life existing on no fewer than four of Vega's eight 
planets — I had successfully established contact with the tor


20 THE SINGING SPHERES 

toise-men of Krellig II, the starfish creatures of Zeton and 
even the mobile orchids on Orbis. The gadgets were standard equipment now for all field parties, and regulations laid 
it down that one member of every squad must carry a Mattus 
fitted into his atmosphere suit. With a pair like young Hartnell and Tubby, you could bet it would be me! 

Externally, the Mattus showed as a slender, telescopic antenna; internally, a thin cadmium plate rested gently on the 
operator's forehead at the touch of a switch. The apparatus 
proper fitted into a small, rectangular casing, screwed to the 
gravity-reactor in the shoulder-pack. 

Instructions recommend that the extended antenna be 
"placed in close proximity to the subject's brain-case," while 
the operator "concentrates with full power of intellect, to the 
exclusion of all other thoughts, upon his expedition's peaceful 
intexitions and the desire for cordial relationships with the 
subject." 

No one need be particularly bright to deduce that these 
suggestions were penned by some stuffy old headquarters 
scientist sitting comfortably in his laboratory-office. Few 
specimens that I'd experimented on possessed visible braincases, although the idea was sound insofar as thought-impulses must naturally radiate more strongly near their source. 
Anyhow, had they kindly pointed out the brain-cases on these 
floating spheres I'd have been greatly obliged. 

"Don't stand there day-dreaming," said Hartnell, again, 
"Snap out the Mattus rod and shove it in Fuzzy- bubble's 
face." 

It was all very well for him to talk like that. He hadn't got 
to work the machine, and I confessed to a cold, creepy feeling 
every time I tried it out. 

Somewhat reluctantly, then, I clicked over the few simple 
controls and moved slowly forward, holding the rod extended 
towards the sphere. I had a ridiculous impression that if I 
got near enough to give it a good prod it might vanish with an 
audible pop. 

I tried to close my ears against that maddening whistle over 
the inter-com and concentrate, as instructed. At first there 
was nothing. There rarely is, of course. Not until subject 
and operator become mysteriously attuned is it possible to 
sense emotions — usually fear, distrust and hostility, mingled 
with curiosity. 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



21 



"He's coming nearer," said Hartnell, quite unnecessarily. 
"Getting anything, Pop?" 

"No," I said, brusquely. "Not a thing." 

I stood there, ten or twelve yards in front of the others, busy 
concentrating. It's difficult to describe impressions received 
over the Mattus. Sometimes definite pictures appear, on 
other occasions the operator. — hardly knowing how — becomes 
suddenly aware of what the other party is thinking. Most 
uncanny of all, it often seems that a tiny voice whispers across 
an alien, psychic void. In all cases the nervous strain is 
terrific and I never finish a session without finding myself 
soaked in perspiration. 

And while my arm ached with holding out the rod and the 
inside of my suit grew insufferably hot and stuffy, I gradually 
knew a strange, hopeless depression. It was useless, of 
course. Either the spheres weren't intelligent or I was too exhausted to receive their mental images. There wasn't much 
sense carrying on. Surelv I could put my time to better use 
than standing on the hot, bare rock of a dying world, trying to 
communicate with its last few inhabitants. My mind was 
gripped by an ineffable sadness at the futility of it all — 

I jumped so violently that I bit my tongue. A dying world? 
The last few inhabitants? Now what in Betelgeuse could 
have put that into my mind? 

"All right, Pop?" asked Hartnell, eagerly, seeing my sudden 
movement. "Managed to do anything?" 

"Yes," I said, blinking away tears of pain. "I've bitten my 
confounded tongue!" 

He told me not to waste time being funny, but to get on 
with the job. I might have given him quite a brisk answer, 
but I thought once more about those two strange impressions 
I'd had and applied myself again to the Mattus. 

Sadness and despair were still there, mingled with slight distrust, but no definite hostility. A dying world? I could well 
believe it. We had seen no sign of life anywhere in the grim, 
silent deserts or the sluggish, ammonia-laden seas. 

Then, somehow, I sensed pronounced curiosity. I stared 
again at the purple, shimmering sphere — like a hovering lightning ball — scarcely more than eight paces distant and wondered whether this thing could possibly have a mind. Concentrating upon a composite mental image of our journey and 



22 THE SINGING SPHERES 

eventual landing on Kardoon, I found myself sweating more 
than ever. 

Incredulity pulsed strongly. "From another, world?" 

I felt my heart-beat quicken. 

"And you come in peace?" 

Yes, I said, we came in peace. 

"Will you be able to help us—?" 

"If it lies within our power." 

I switched off, trembling with the effort and with the wonder 
of it all. Professor Mattus's machine had done the trick again. 

Hartnell and Tubby saw me lower the rod. "No luck, Pop?" 

"Oh, yes, it's worked all right. It seems we've got a rescue 
job on our hands — " 

"Makes a nice change, anyway," said young Hattnell. "As 
a rule they're only too anxious to see the back of us." 

When my breath returned I made another attempt. Fuzzybubble waited patiently, suspended some four feet from the 
ground, while his friends twinkled unmovingly on the rocks. 

"Why did you keep us out of the valley?" I asked. "And 
how?" 

The answer to the second question didn't make me much 
wiser. I caught something about "force-beams" that made 
me raise my eyebrows, but the rest was incomprehensible. 

We had been barred from passing, apparently, because there 
lay entrance to what was described as "all that is left to usfrom bygone glories— our single legacy bequeathed by the 
Wise Ones who passed over in the Day of Cataclysm " 

"There, too, said the sphere, with profound sorrow, "rests 
the only nursery of our species. Alas, they are now pitifully 



CHAPTER FOUR 



The Nursery 

TYTHlLE we walked once more towards that irregular gap 
between the high cliffs I saw four of the waiting spheres 
detach themselves and float quickly ahead of us, while Fuzzybubble and the others acted as escort. 

Unhindered now, we moved into the rocky cleft, only to 
find a steep, rough declivity, down which we stumbled and 
slid with considerable discomfort. It struck me as uncanny 
that for untold centuries the spheres had been using this pathway, yet the loose shale remained untrodden. I couldn't get 
used to the idea of things moving about the place without 
leaving tracks, and it wasn't particularly pleasing to see them 
travelling effortlessly alongside while we staggered across a 
rugged terrain. 

The narrow defile became a winding canyon, flanked by 
precipices of such terrifying height that they shut much light 
from the lower slopes, yet eventually we emerged into another 
wide plain fully four miles across. In the mouth of the gorge, 
where going was easier, we hesitated, not knowing which 
direction to take. 

Above the whistling which persisted in our inter-coms, 
Hartnell and Tubby must have heard my exclamation of alarm 
before they themselves were affected. Something caught hold 
and swung me gently but firmly to the right, almost making 
me lose balance. It was like being guided and half-lifted by 
invisible cushions — a quite different sensation from the gravityreactors, where pressure manifests itself on the harness. 

"Galloping galaxies ! " exclaimed Hartnell. "Now we know 
what Fuzzy-bubble means about force-beams ! " 

"But— but how can they do it?" 

He shrugged, taking matters more calmly than I did. "You 
work the Mattus, Pop. Why not ask 'em?" 

Irritated, Tubby said: "And if they're the cause of this 
confounded ringing noise, ask 'em to stop it." 

When I held the rod towards the purplish sphere and 
switched on again there was no doubt about Fuzzy-bubble's intelligence. He grasped the idea straightaway, and communication became easier, as it usually did when the parties concerned grew more attuned. 

23 



24 THE SINGING SPHERES 

"Force-beams? They come naturally to us. We project 
them to do our work. Watch — " 

I warned the others over the inter-com. "Look out — he's 
giving us a demonstration — " 

A small stone ten feet away was lifted into the air, brought 
across without visible means and deposited gently at my feet. 

"Suffering Sirius ! " gasped Hartaell. "How did he do that?" 

A large, flat rock, perched on end, slowly over-balanced 
and tilted forward, finally to crash in a cloud of brown dust. 

"It must be a trick," said Tubby, goggle-eyed but sceptical. 
"A trick — probably done with mirrors ! " 

However it was done, we were all suitably impressed. 

"The force-beams are our hands," said Fuzzy-bubble. 
"How otherwise could we manipulate materials? Or operate the Wise Ones' wonderful machine?" 

And the more we came to think about matters the more 
humble we felt. Throughout inhabited planets of the known 
universe there is one great envy among intelligent creatures — 
the hands of Man. With these hands he can raise vast buildings and construct great space-ships; he can operate intricate 
and delicate apparatus; he can make tools and turn a screw; 
he can grasp an object to crush it or caress the scales on a 
butterfly's wing. No other manual appendages are half so 
strong, so adaptable or so sensitive. 

Yet here were strange, shining, tenuous spheres possessed 
of a natural instrument capable of performing many tasks 
beyond the capabilities of four fingers and a thumb. Force-beams could reach into a radio-active furnace to mould 
material there; they could hold white-hot beryllium in place 
beneath an electronic forging-hammer; most wonderful of all 
they could perform manipulative surgical operations inside a 
body without breaking the skin. 

But one other thought brought me out in a sweat — a cold 
sweat of apprehension this time, by way of a change. What 
would be the effect of a force-beam directed against the 
Mattus? Might it not strike the operator into madness? 
And couldn't they also upset radio receivers or gravity-reactors. 

Luckily, to take my mind from such morbid reflections, we 
passed at that moment a large, circular hole in the cliff-face 
—an aperture which was definitely of artificial construction, 
lor the funnel-like sides, narrowing to a black hole about ten 
!eet in diameter, were perfectly smoothed. 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



25 



"Entrance to the Grand Halls," said Fuzzy-bubble, without 
waiting to be asked. "Therein lie the assembly rooms and 
the salon of our honoured ruler, Makkub. Yet first you shall 
be permitted to see the nursery — only one now remaining on 
Kardoon. It is a place most jealously guarded, for it contains out hope for the future." Again I sensed that strange, 
ineffable sadness, 

For a further half-mile we skirted the cliff-face, still working 
a way round that circular, enclosed plain, until another narrow 
defile broke the jagged embrasure. Upon the brink of a deep, 
irregular basin which fell away suddenly from this approach, 
we found ourselves gazing upon a scene of fantastic beauty. 

The boulders and rough rocks which lined this depression 
were crowded with spheres of all sizes and colours. Under 
the pinkish sky they continually glowed and shimmered with 
an almost dazzling radiance. Now and again one floated free 
from the crowded masses, rising hesitantly into the air to be 
tenderly greeted by others apparently hovering over the area 
for just such a purpose. They bustled it carefully into a tunnel-mouth cutting the far side of the basin. 

"These are our children," said Fuzzy-bubble, with wistful 
pride. "See — there is another born now. The nurses take it 
to the incubator, where the history and learning of our race 
will be imparted to him — " 

If we had never previously been certain that the strange, 
maddening whistle which afflicted the inter-com was due to 
Kardoon's spheres, we knew it now, as we stared at those 
glistening clusters on the bare, rough stone. For in addition 
to the persistent singing sound — still so loud that only fascination of the surroundings enabled us to half-close our ears — 
there now came faintly in the background a delicate whispering and chirping, like the "cheeps" of newly-hatched chickens. 

"From the rocks?" demanded Tubby, incredulously, when 
I translated. "They sprout from the bare rocks? But that's 
impossible — " 

Frankly, I felt like agreeing with him. In our various 
travels we had encountered many forms of life — yet every one 
needed nutriment of various kinds, even if they took such 
substances direct from the soil, as did the intelligent plants of 
Orbis. But stones — mere chunks of silica, without carbon, 
oxygen, potassium, carbon . magnesium, or any other chemical 
elements necessary for life? 



26 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



We turned to Hartnell, usually more knowledgeable on 
bizarre subjects than ourselves. Strangely enough, he didn't 
seem particularly surprised. He started a long lecture about 
"autotrophic" — or self-nourishing — bacteria that had been 
known for centuries to exist on inorganic materials. Even in 
the twentieth century, he said, scientists found such bacteria 
at work on raw sulphur in the vicinity of volcanoes and that 
deposits of iron ore were formed by the activities of autotrophic iron bacteria. 

"I don't know for certain, mind you," he went on, with an 
excessive rush of modesty, "but by the same argument why 
shouldn't these spheres flourish on some mineral or other. 
Maybe, radio-activity comes into it — " 

I tackled Fuzzy-bubble on the subject. He seemed both 
gratified and impressed that strange creatures like ourselves 
could possess a knowledge of the spheres' fundamental principles. I felt we had achieved a good mark. The sphere 
sang shriller than ever with increased confidence in our ability 
to retrieve the destiny of Kardoon and emitted a flood of telepathic impressions to describe his race's mode of existence. 

Once loosed from nursery rocks, apparently, the spheres 
had no need of further nourishment. They were charged with 
sufficient energy to last them the rest of their "lives," and 
when this quantum had been expended the shining envelopes 
merely disappeared into nothingness. 

"Not even a tombstone to mark the spot," said Hartnell. 
Personally, I didn't think it a matter for levity, and said so. 

Fuzzy-bubble intercepted something of young Hartnell's 
comment from my reply and scattered interested inquiries, 
whereupon I, in turn, had to describe the nature of our own 
mode of birth and death. 

"So in your world, when an individual comes to the end of 
his days there remains some token that he has existed?" 

I visualised for him the immense Garden of Rest back at 
headquarters near Zeta Saggitarius — a place of green trees 
and bright flowers, dotted with endless lines of little grassgrown mounds marked with white head-stones. 

"His name?" inquired Fuzzy-bubble. "The place is 
marked with his name and with the day when he expended 
the living spark?" 

I nodded, mentally, thinking the conversation had become 
unduly morbid. Moreover, I didn't tell him of those other 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



27 



little forlorn mounds — isolated on alien worlds — where InterX men lay after giving their lives in adding to the su 
of human knowledge. 

"That is a very great wonder," said Fuzzy-bubble, en 
viously. "For me and my kind there is — nothing." 

He fell silent for a time, reflecting upon these things, and i 
the interval I recounted the conversation for Hartnell and 
Tubby, while we stared at the watchful nurse-spheres hovering over the rocky basin and the little, growing bulbs clinging 
to their birth-stones — some delicate shades of orange and 
emerald, others very tiny and almost colourless. 

"Once — in the glorious days of the Wise Ones — Kardoon 
had many nurseries. Our race poured forth by increasing 
thousands from the vast broods of Mehlon, along the mountainous valley of Jammele and in the fertile fields skirting our 
great inland lakes. On the shore beside the waters of Pakklezar they outnumbered grains of sand." He paused again. 
"Now — alas — we are but few. The magic of life has departed from our planet. Here you see the only remaining 
nursery. Soon this, too, will cease to function— unless you 
help us." 

Not having the faintest idea what we could do about it, I 
mumbled some noncommittal reassurances. 

This seemed to please him in a half-hearted, sorrowful sort 
of way, whereupon he announced that the Hour of Audience 
approached and that we ought to be on our way to the Grand 
Halls to be presented to Makkub. 

"I've got to have a rest from this continual squealing," said 
Tubby, dejectedly. "It's ripping my nerves to rags. Can't 
you ask 'em if there's any way of stopping it, Pop?" 

"I'll try," I said, and mentioned the matter to Fuzzy-bubble. 

He seemed surprised. "You can hear us talk, too?" 

"Too?" 

"Oh, yes. We have all noticed those strange growling 
noises you make. Quite unintelligible, of course — " 

"Growling?" I frowned for a moment, then understanding dawned. In some peculiar manner the spheres generated radio waves by their communication with one another, 
although practically none of the resulting audio-frequencies 
were within human register. Similarly with them, when vibra 
tions from our. inter-com sets strayed in their direction and 
became automatically rectified, our own sound-waves were 



28 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



pitched so low by comparison that the spheres in their turn 
heard only the fringes of the higher registers. Consequently, 
these highest modulations of human vocal chords reached 
them as "growlings." 

After I'd explained the discomfort which arose, Fuzzybubble obligingly took measures to quieten his companions, 
but whistles from other spheres in the vicinity continued, 
although at lesser volume. 

"Well, that's a bit better," said Hartnell, more briskly. 
"Now what's this about a trip to the Grand Halls?" 

"I gather they mean that tunnel affair we passed just along 
here." 

"Hope it's not too dark and narrow," said Tubby, still in a 
mood of depression. "I've got my claustrophobia to think 
about—" 

We were all to have much more than that on our minds 
before very long. 

We halted at the point where the smooth rounded, funnelshaped entrance bored into the cliff face and stood staring 
into the ten-feet diameter of blackness at its end. Fuzzybubble and three other spheres preceded us, taking on startling brilliance once their natural colours became shielded 
from the light. They sailed easily and majestically inside. 
We, for our part, halted on the brink, seeing nothing and 
wondering along what path we must pass. 

Hartnell slashed the clear, white beam of his beryllium 
torch across the aperture, bringing simultaneous gasps from 
Tubby and myself. It showed no end to a vast, subterranean 
space inside. Then he depressed the lamp to ground level 
and we saw how the rock curved steeply away from our feet 
to disappear in unknown depths. 

"Hm," said Tubby, gesturing to the spheres. "All very 
well for them — but how in Andromeda do they expect us to 
get through?" 

"Climb down with the Karlin lines, I suppose," said Hartnell. 

I started convulsively. "You know I've got no head for 
heights—" 

He clicked his tongue in mock-disgust. "One with claustrophobia and another who wants to walk on the flat always. 
What's Inter-X coming to?" 

And all the time— while I watched him uneasily— he was 



THE SINGING SPHERES 

taking out the business end of an immensely strong two-mile 
Karlin line that always struck me as having no more strength 
and substance than a strand of gossamer, yet which possessed a tested breaking strain of more than two tons. 

He hitched the fastening to the rocks, heaved himself into 
the aperture and used the line to support himself in an almost 
horizontal posture while he walked carefully backwards down 
the smooth, curving wall. 

I could tell from Tubby's set expression that he didn't like 
these sort of antics any more than I did, but he hitched the 
Marless staple of his suit on the line and said, "Well, here 
goes. At least you'll have something soft to fall on, Pop, if 
you happen to come unstuck." 

Which bright remark, of course, didn't cheer me much. 
"Still going down," came Hartnell's voice over the intercom. "Getting on for a hundred and twenty feet. I think 
the wall's less steep now." 

Once I had lowered myself a short distance below the rim 
of that entrance aperture, light from outside became shut off. 
An incredible way down, Hartnell's torch cast vague, flickering reflections to the higher part of the line where I clung; 
up above, the attendant spheres floated like great, multicoloured moons in a starless sky. Their shrieking inquiry as 
they obviously discussed our queer method of progression cut 
through my mind like shrill, mocking laughter. No doubt the 
telepathy machine might have let me overhear a good deal 
of amused sarcasm, but I had other uses for my hands than 
waving a Mattus rod. 

"I was right, Pop," said Hartnell. "I'm practically walking upright now. The floor's almost level." 

A few minutes later, panting with relief, Tubby and I 
joined him. Exploring with the torch once more, however, 
showed how a further curving incline lay ahead, growing progressively steeper. 

"Why," I said, "the confounded place is hollow— just like 
the inside of a sphere!" 

Hartnell grinned. "We don't seem able to get away from 
'em, do we, Pop?" 

As it turned out. my description was not wholly accurate. 
However, the curving wall farthest from the entrance proved 
to rise only a comparatively short distance before producing 
a further circular aperture, which led into yet another great 



30 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



cavern. Briefest analogy, perhaps, would liken the caves to 
a series of eggshells laid end to end, with inter-comrmmicating 
holes punched between. 

Moreover, these further apertures proved climbable without 
use of the Karlin line, and for what seemed an eternity we 
kept climbing up one curved slope, heaving ourselves through 
the hole slithering down the other side, while all the time 
those damned spheres accompanied us effortlessly. 

Then, at last, an approaching tumult sounded over the 
inter-com — a whistling and singing so intense that it numbed 
the mind and set teeth on edge — and we knew that somewhere 
near at hand in the Great Halls a crowded assembly of Kardoon's eerie, inorganic inhabitants awaited us. 

"If they'd got the slightest sense of decency," panted Tubby, 
"they'd have used those force-beam affairs to give us a lift — " 

A purple sphere swooped from the heights and confronted 
us. It was Fuzzy-bubble. I switched on the Mattus. 

"Now I must leave you," he said, "to take my place with 
Makkub and his councillors. My friends will escort you to 
the Presence at the appointed time." 



CHAPTER FIVE 

"It Will Cost a Thousand Lives—" 

WHILE we stood there in the pitch darkness— for although 
the hovering spheres glowed brightly they cast no reflections into the depths of the cavern— I experienced my first 
doubts. I didn't like the tone of Fuzzy-bubble's last remark. 
He had spoken, as it were, of "The Presence"— in definite 
capital letters. Although fairly high up in the counsels of 
Kardoon — I imagined he must have been sent as an official 
investigator, once news of our approach was received — he 
obviously stood in some awe and apprehension of this Makkub, and we knew from experience that rulers who inspired 
such frame of mind among their subjects usually proved to 
be arrogant and overbearing dictators of some kind. 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



31 



The terrible row in the inter-com prevented me from thinking clearly, but we hesitated to switch off because of need to 
speak to each other at any moment when the summons came. 
Fortunately, as matters turned out, we didn't have to endure 
the uproar for long, because, without warning, the noise 
faded and died, letting the blessed relief of silence pour over 
us in healing waves. 

"Get ready," said Hartnell. "This is it." He paused a 
moment. "You know what's happening, don't you? Somewhere up there — in the throne room, or whatever they call it 
— your pal Makkub's made his ceremonial entrance and 
they've all fallen into a respectful silence." 

"I don't know," remarked Tubby, thoughtfully, "that 1 
altogether care for the sound of Makkub — " 

Neither did I, for that matter, and I didn't see why he 
should be described especially as my "pal." 

We never knew whether Fuzzy-bubble intercepted Tubby's 
previous remark and realised with remorse that his actions 
weren't those of a perfect host, or whether no one liked to 
keep Makkub waiting while we sweated and struggled along 
steep, curved banks. At any rate, the next we knew was a 
cluster of spheres suddenly appearing through the aperture in 
front of us and an alarming sensation of being raised into the 
air towards them. 

"Galloping galaxies!" gasped young Hartnell. "They've 
got us in the force-beams ! " 

It wasn't exactly pleasant to hurtle through the darkness of 
those vast caverns, not knowing what lay immediately ahead. 
Peculiarly enough, I couldn't tell at what point the forcebeams gripped me. There was no particular feeling of being 
either pulled or lifted — merely a swift, effortless progress, 
during which I had the uncomfortable thought that we might 
be accidentally dashed against the rocks. Undoubtedly it was 
even more unpleasant for Tubby, because the spheres handling him lacked co-ordination at the start and tumbled him 
over in the air two or three times. Spluttered profanity 
reached us over the inter-com, but Hartnell said it was only 
poetic justice. 

Very soon, however, we saw two large green globes guarding an entrance move respectfully aside as our cavalcade 
approached. We sailed inside and there burst upon us a 
scene of such outlandish beauty and curiosity that we ex


32 THE SINGING SPHERES 

claimed aloud in sheer amazement. 

In what must have been the most gigantic, ellipsoid cavern 
of that entire subterranean system were assembled untold 
thousands of spheres, banked upon one another in layer after 
layer, like prodigious, shining masses of soap-lather. Their 
colours, winking and glowing, changed kaleidoscopically and 
unceasingly. 

But we were whisked quickly through this multitude and 
gently deposited in an open space where spheres of obvious 
importance rested upon a weirdly shaped structure that graded 
them according to rank. Situated. centrally were three solid, 
white obelisks, the principal pillar about six feet high and 
the others slightly shorter. On these rested the biggest 
globes we had seen so far, and they perched there so pompously and incongruously that I was seized with an insane 
desire to giggle. Thrones for counsellors of lesser importance extended in a semi-circle to either side — always this 
emphasis on circles, spheres and ellipsoids, I noticed — and I 
managed to recognise Fuzzy-bubble an instant before he 
moved into the area where we stood. 

Yet when I looked again at the great red sphere occupying 
the central obelisk I never felt less like laughing. It might 
well have been a huge, round, menacing face staring back at 
me with hostile curiosity. I understood quite well in that 
moment why his arrival had brought a sudden hush to the 
assembled populace, eliminating the awful, high-pitched singing from the inter-com. None of us had much desire for talking—even young Harwell and Tubby, who have metaphorically thumbed their noses at puffed-up pomposity in many 
corners of the universe. We sensed no definite, active evil— 
merely guarded hostility and an unmistakably powerful personality. I forgave Fuzzy-bubble for speaking of "The Presence" in capital letters. Without any particular enthusiasm 
—but duty is duty, after all — I switched on the Mattus. 

In the instant that contact was made there crowded upon 
me all the usual impressions of such occasions — curiosity, 
coupled with a certain amount of revulsion at our personal 
appearance and a small amount of natural enmity. Yet it 
was necessary for me to make an effort to shut out extraneous 
images and concentrate upon the principal characters. 

Fuzzy-bubble, after bobbing several times respectfully at 
the foot of Makkub's tall, narrow obelisk, embarked on a 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



33 



speech of explanation, setting the inter-com faintly squeaking and whistling again. 

"O mighty Makkub," he said— and I hope it's quite clear 
that in all our associations with the spheres of Kardoon no 
word passed, but that I am roughly translating mental impressions and emotions into understandable language — "these 
are the strange creatures who have come from another world 
and whom I have brought into your presence." 

Even without the Mattus I could have sensed the attention 
of that multitude focused upon us like thousands of great, 
coloured eyes. 

"In many ways they are inferior to us— yet in the crisis 
which has come upon our beloved Kardoon I would be failing in my duty as Counsellor of Scientific Inquiry if I did not 
ascertain whether some of their knowledge might be of use to 
us." 

Mention of "the crisis" brought a respectful hush, followed 
by a vague murmur of agreement with Fuzzy-bubble's succeeding sentence. He referred, of course, to the way his 
race was dying out. 

"In preparation for this, I have allowed the strangers to 
gaze Upon our precious nursery, that they may understand 
I he manner of our birth, so different from their own—" 

On either side of Makkub, occuping the two slightly smaller 
obelisks, rested a green sphere, and another of bright orange. 
The green sphere bounced up and down with rage so violently that for one absurd moment I feared he might puncture himself, but his paroxysms of fury pulsed through the 
Mattus with sufficient strength to make me definitely alarmed. 
"How dared you!" he roared. "How dared you imperil the 
luture generations by allowing these gross animals to gaze 
into our sacred ground? Their filthy radiations may spread 
poison — " 

The green sphere— his name was Pakkan — had done a good 
job of spreading poison, too, and the multitude hissed with 
horror. 

"No, no," said Fuzzy-bubble, hastily. "That is not so! 
I, personally, vouch that such a thing is impossible — " 

He was a bit late with his protestations, however, and the 
damage had been done. I saw Makkub's crimson perimeter 
vibrating visibly. "If these creatures' force-beams have con


34 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



taminated our one remaining nursery," he boomed, "they shall 
surely answer to me — to me, Makkub ! " 

Fuzzy-bubble trembled in turn—with unconcealed apprehension. "Pardon, O Makkub — but these creatures possess 
no force-beams. In that respect they are primitive and incomprehensible — " 

"Exactly ! " roared Pakkan. "You admit you do not understand them ! Therein lies the danger ! " He appealed to 
the council. "Is not that what I said?" 

"I crave permission to explain," began Fuzzy-bubble, with 
no small agitation. "I have learned certain things, which 
our counsellors should know — " 

Hartnell came on the inter-com. "What in Altair's happening, Pop? Is everything all right?" 

"Why are they bobbing about like that?" asked Tubby. 

I told them matters weren't exactly promising, but that 
Fuzzy-bubble was doing his best. 

"Well, don't just stand there," said Hartnell, rather unreasonably, I thought. "Say a piece on your own account and 
get Fuzzy- bubble to interpret — " 

Frankly, the idea of breaking in on the discussion uninvited 
never entered my head over-awed as I was by the powerful 
personalities of Makkub and Pakkan. "All right," I said. 
"All in good time." 

As it turned out there was no need to do so. That business 
of our being able to leave a marked resting place after death, 
instead of merely vanishing into thin air, caught Makkub's 
imagination very vividly — in the same way that Fuzzy-bubble 
had been impressed. 

"It has been a source of sorrowful reflection to me," he 
told the assembly, "that once the vital spark is expended there 
will be no means by which my loving subjects may express 
their gratitude for all the unremitting care I have devoted to 
their interests, for recollection — even of great ones — grows 
dim through the generations. But if it is possible to learn 
from these strangers how a permanent memorial to my 
honour may be established, perchance their arrival here may 
be turned to good account." 

Whereupon I breathed more easily and Fuzzy-bubble positively swelled with relief. It was the old vanity and egotism 
showing itself, even out here on Kardoon, in the uttermost 
limits of explored space. Pakkan glowed even greener with 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



35 



chagrin, but the bright orange sphere resting on Makkub's 
left spoke up to consolidate whatever position he held. 

"I — Zakkar — pronounce our ruler's words to interpret a 
wish that rests in the minds of all of us," he said, importantly. 
"Therefore I recommend to the council that these three 
monsters who have the temerity to travel from other worlds to 
investigate us — " he sniggered at such a foolish presumption 
on our part — "shall themselves be investigated." 

I didn't like his phraseology over-much and Makkub 
pounced on the far-from-flattering description. "Monsters 
are they, indeed. I heard just now the uncouth growling 
noises by which they communicate with one another. Obviously, they must be rated far. below ourselves in culture and 
natural gifts — we who are descendants of the Wise Ones and 
who have been entrusted with their wonderful heritage. These 
strange creatures exceed us only in their ability to leave a 
permanent memorial of themselves. This knowledge they 
shall be forced to transfer to us." He paused, while a tense, 
hushed assembly waited for his next words. "It is right that 
I, Makkub. should experience such honour. Then, when I 
am gone, there will be a place of pilgrimage in memory of 
me, where all men may come to worship." 

It was quite dreadful, of course, and I really felt like taking 
Hartnell's advice to join the discussion. 

Fuzzy-bubble bounced up and down in distress and took 
his life in his hands. "The unborn generations — " he bleated, 
pitifully. "Should they not help us there, too, in the study of 
life-giving rocks? Although ignorant, perchance we may 
find aid — " 

"Our ruler has given his decision," said Pakkan, in an 
awful voice. "How dare you question it?" 

Makkub's over-weening vanity was shaken by this interruption and he swelled visibly with rage. 

"It would be an even greater memorial," added Fuzzybubble, with remarkable presence of mind. I held my breath, 
waiting. 

"Makkub — the Father of His Race," said Zakkar, reflectively, as though quoting some fulsome epitaph. "Truly a 
lasting tribute." In that moment I forgave him his impolite 
descriptions of ourselves. 

And it became evident that Makkub was pondering the 
situation, too. His tenuous outer envelope shimmered and 



36 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



blazed like a spherical rainbow for fully half a minute, dominated all the time, however, by his natural crimson hue. 

At last he made up his mind and decided to kill two birds 
with one stone. "Hear, all men," he pronounced. "None can 
deny that the crisis which is upon Kardoon gathers speed, 
calling for decisions of unusual solemnity. Therefore do I — 
Makkub— by reason of the power vested in me, decree that 
the Day of Revelation shall be advanced two years, the 
ceremonies to take place at the next dawn. Then shall we 
know without fail whether these strangers can prove helpful 
to Kardoon and its people." 

A great, tremulous sigh echoed round the cavern from all 
those crowded, hovering spheres — a sigh of mingled fear and 
wonderment. Frankly, I hadn't the faintest idea what it was 
all about. 

"O wise Makkub ! " exclaimed Zakkar, profoundly. "How 
great are thy decisions ! How eminently does our ruler tread 
in the footsteps of those Wise Ones who are gone before ! " 

Pakkan obviously had something further on his mind. 
"The price—" 

"Such an important ceremony must not be stinted," said 
Makkub. "It is essential that we know what the future holds. 
It will cost a thousand lives — but they will be well spent!" 



CHAPTER SIX 

Legacy of the Wise Ones 

THE assembly in the Great Hall had dispersed. Six small 
blue spheres lifted Makkub from his throne and carried 
him away, followed by Pakkan and Zakkar, to vanish 
through an aperture in the cavern's far wall. Counsellors 
who had occupied positions on the semi-circular wings of that 
weird structure departed similarly, while the vast, chattering 
multitude left by the way we had entered. Their shrieking 
conversation made so terrible an uproar in the inter-com that 



THE SINGING SPHERES 37 

I switched off hurriedly, and I saw by their grimaces that 
Hartnell and Tubby suffered in the same way. 

The glow cast by those thousands of spheres faded rapidly 
and at last we found ourselves alone in the darkness, save for 
Fuzzy-bubble. I turned the inter-com control again and discovered everything to be fairly quiet. 

"Well, now," said Hartnell, patiently, "maybe you'll tell us 
what all that was in aid of?" 

"Me," said Tubby, "I'd like to find some corner where I 
could sit down comfortably." 

Peculiarly enough, Fuzzy-bubble expressed no particular 
surprise when I translated this last request. 

"That is understandable. I have already made arrangements so that you may have privacy." 

He led the way behind that strange, white throne to a series 
of tunnels. In shape and construction they resembled the 
huge caverns through which we had passed earlier, yet their 
roofs at the highest point extended only a few feet above our 
heads. There was barely room for us to step through the 
small, circular entrances between them. 

At length, Fuzzy-bubble showed us into an eggshell-shaped 
apartment— with highly polished walls, but no item of furniture. 

"Scarcely a home from home, is it?" inquired Hartnell, 
flashing a torch to examine the place. The light, incidentally, 
excited the sphere's especial interest, for although the inhabitants of Kardoon possessed ability to see in the dark, they 
could also perceive illumination. 

"It's a place, anyhow," said Tubby. "And Suffering Sirius 
—am I tired!" 

Personally, I wanted to know more about this "Day of 
Revelation" business. When I broached the matter, Fuzzybubble's demeanour held considerable awe and reluctance. 
"It is our legacy from the Wise Ones. A great and terrible 
mystery." 

As I sat there holding the Mattus rod, with Hartnell and 
Tubby dozing by my side, trying to make themselves comfortable on the awkwardly curved floor, I learned, in a series 
of well-ordered mental images, of a strange civilisation built 
on Kardoon untold centuries ago. Even at that time the 
planet held no vegetable or animal life, and the spheres came 
spontaneously from sterile rock— sterile so far as we humans 



38 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



know the meaning of the word, yet possessing rare chemical 
qualities that produced self-contained globes of force, capable 
of independent movement and, eventually, thought. Once 
mature and loosed from their birth-stones, the spheres required nothing — neither shelter nor food nor comfort nor 
sleep. They did not build or cultivate the land because 
there was no need — and nothing to grow, anyway. They 
occupied their lifetimes organising a society and investigating scientific phenomena; when the quantum of energy with 
which they had been born was expended, they merely 
vanished. 

I had a lot of questions for him, of course. "Are your 
people happy in their pursuits?" I asked. 

"Happy?" said Fuzzy-bubble, in some bewilderment. 
"What is that?" 

Not wishing to become involved in side-issues, I tried 
another tack. "How are your rulers chosen? Makkub, for 
instance — ?" 

He seemed surprised and at the same time a little disappointed with my powers of observation. "Makkub? He 
is a red sphere, of course. They are the natural rulers. When 
the nurses observe a red sphere emerge — it happens roughly 
every seventy years — it is taken to a special compartment to 
await the time when he must assume his responsibilities — " 

"Everyone accepts this? Kardoon has no — rebels?" 

He didn't like the question very much. "No, no — we are 
all united behind our beloved Makkub." He paused, and I 
gave him credit for frankness. "Now and again some malcontent arises. It is not good for order to be disturbed. 
Rebels and criminals are removed to the punishment deserts 
beyond the Great Sea." 

I wondered what happened to them there. How could you 
punish a thing that didn't feel pain or discomfort? Or imprison a creature that found no hardship in confinement? 

"They are obliged to labour in the mines or transportation 
squads— heavy, arduous work which quickly expends their 
lives. Gross cases are exterminated, of course — " 

"Exterminated?" 

"If they do not obey — although most of them do — they are 
turned over to the executioners, who interlock their forcebeams inside a criminal's envelope and tear it apart, bringing 
instant death," 



THE SINGING SPHERES 39 

I remarked that, in turn, it must be hard lines on the 
executioners, who obviously had to exert a good deal of their 
own energies. 

"Oh, they are privileged, of course. Many duties are excused them." 

I began to understand one or two matters which had previously escaped me. Their precious Makkub, for instance, 
mustn't waste energy even in moving. That was why six blue 
spheres so tenderly carried him from the obelisk-throne. 
Every action by the spheres used up a portion of precious 
life-force and brought nearer their day of dissolution. I supposed that in a way — at the same time more crude and yet 
more complicated — we ourselves came to an end similarly, 
provided we escaped disease or violence. 

"But," I said, "these bygone centuries when your people 
filled the planet's surface. What did they achieve? To what 
end was all their effort directed?" 

The answer came with a certain negative sadness. "Save 
for one thing — none knows ! There came the Day of Cataclysm and — " 

Fuzzy-bubble couldn't throw much light on this disaster, 
but I gathered that — whether it was due to some unimaginable war or cosmic upheaval — Kardoon became to all intents 
and purposes uninhabited. Moreover, the teeming nurseries 
lost practically all their lifegiving qualities and those that 
were left gradually petered out until, as we knew, only one remained. Most awful aspect of all, perhaps, lay in the fact that 
none was present to pass on knowledge to the new-born 
adults, so that progress had to begin again from scratch. 

Yet gradually the newcomers re-explored the stricken 
planet, made laws and evolved customs. They commenced 
once more to probe and inquire — and they discovered a very 
curious thing. 

"While building operations were in progress," said Fuzzybubble, "an engineer stumbled into an unknown cavern — " 

I interrupted. "But I thought you had no need of shelter 
or buildings — " 

"You have already seen our buildings — the Great Halls and 
the throne-room. There are many others. Although we 
ourselves require no living quarters there must be cover for 
our laboratories, lest storms disturb apparatus or dust drift 
into our machines. Moreover there are times when large 



40 THE SINGING SPHERES 

numbers of people must assemble near these machines, so 
that accommodation is required — " 

I felt my head swimming again, as it had done when that 
shrill singing over the inter-com reached unendurable intensity. Machines? 

"Into an unknown cavern," continued Fuzzy-bubble, picking up the threads again. "It still exists. It is our only link 
with the Wise Ones. Therein he discovered a strange engine 
which baffled our best scientists for many generations. Now, 
however, we have learned to operate it, although imperfectly. 
We call it the Machine of Revelation." 

For quite a long time I thought about waking Hartnell. 
This was more in his line than mine, but eventually I decided 
that a third party on the Mattus might make affairs more confused than they were already. Besides, I'd had an inspiration 
of my own. "Is this anything to do with the Day of Revelation?" I asked. 

"Oh, yes. That is the day — once every ten years — when 
the Machine may be operated." 

"And the next occasion's been advanced to— tomorrow?" 

Now the Mattus is undoubtedly a wonderful instrument, 
but in certain ways it possesses strange defects. All this time, 
while I had been translating the story into our own language, it 
had been pressing into my mind a torrent of hazy mental 
pictures and mysteriously acquired knowledge in order to 
carry out its job of communication. Yet I had no idea what 
the Machine looked like or how it worked or what purpose 
it accomplished. Perhaps Fuzzy-bubble himself didn't know — 

And then I grasped the explanation. I switched off hurriedly, not forgetting that the Mattus operates both ways and 
the sphere would otherwise have learned of my sudden 
doubts. Fuzzy-bubble was afraid — not only of the legendary 
Wise Ones and of the Machine itself, but of something else. 
It concerned the Machine— of that I was certain— but what 
could it be?" 

I switched on again. If Fuzzy -bubble had missed my 
attention during this brief period, he gave no sign. 

"The Machine," I said. "What does it do? " 

He seemed distinctly uncomfortable ,and embarrassed. 
Then, very slowly, half-unwillingly, he said, "It enables us to 
foretell the future—" 

And with that I had m hesitation about waking Hartnell. 



THE SINGING SPHERES 41 

I grabbed his arm and shook him madly, switching on the inter-com and yelling at the top of my voice. I heard Tubby 
jump convulsively and bump himself on the hard stone floor. 

"Great Virgins of Vega ! " said Hartnell. "What's happening?" 

"Makkub popped off or something?" demanded Tubby. 

"Listen!" I said. "That Day of Revelation business— it's 
a revelation, all right. They've got a machine that goes ahead 
in time!" 

For a moment astonishment slammed them into silence. 

Hartnell laughed and said: "Now I've heard everything!" 

"I've always wanted to take pictures of the day after tomorrow," said Tubby, disbelievingly. 

"Well, that's what Fuzzy-bubble's just told me," I said, with 
more than a hint of stuffiness. "I thought you'd want to hear 
about it instead of snoring your heads off—" How they could 
have gone to sleep in our present circumstances was entirely 
beyond me— but they did, and they definitely snored. 

"Sorry, Pop." Hartnell's voice held a note of apology that 
mollified me somewhat. "Now tell us again— slowly." 

Afterwards, of course, they were both eager to know more, 
so I contacted Fuzzy-bubble again. "The future? How far 
into the future?" 

The difficulty, I gathered, lay in the fact that they did not 
know how to operate the machine efficiently. Either the 
apparatus had deteriorated during long centuries of inattention or its principles were imperfectly understood. 

"Sometimes a few hours, sometimes a few days," came the 
reply. 

Hartnell frowned reflectively. "These bubbles are intelligent, all right. See what they're going to do? They don't 
know whether we can help 'em or not, so they're going to find 
out what we may get up to while we're here—" 

A good many objections came to mind. What guarantee 
was there that the machine told the truth? If it portrayed 
some unpleasant happening, couldn't measures be taken in 
advance to avert it? And if, as a result, a particular occurrence didn't materialise after being foretold, how could the 
spheres claim that the future was predicted accurately? 

"It reminds you of the old joke," said Hartnell. "The man 
who said if he knew where he was going to die he'd take good 
care never to go there — " 



42 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



But Fuzzy-bubble swore that their holy relic's truth had 
been corroborated every time. "To the farthest reaches^ of 
memory," he said, "the events it depicts have come true. 

The entire affair began to give me the creeps. I liked it 
even less when he explained how the apparatus worked. 

"In the days of the Wise Ones, it is said, they looked into the 
future over several years. With our present depleted population we dare not afford such expenditure— therefore the ceremonies are limited. A thousand lives are all that can be 
spared tomorrow—" 

My spine tingled coldly with horror and I began to sweat 
again. Was this what Makkub had meant? 

Fuzzy-bubble caught something of my reaction and seemed 
surprised. "You should not pity them," he said, with the 
first rebuke I had known him utter. "It is an honour to be 
chosen to operate the Machine of Revelation. There will be 
no lack of volunteers— many will be turned disappointed 
away. Even when the Wise Ones demanded countless millions, many more were prepared to make the sacrifice than 
were needed." . „ 

"Well," I said, helplessly. "If you put it that wayAfter which I tried to find out something more about the 
machine. The difficulty, as I saw it, lay in what might be 
described as "focusing"- the thing. Apparently it presented 
glimpses of future events in a series of disjointed pictures, 
which, in Hartnell's words, were "apt to dodge about a bit." 
Focusing was therefore necessary in four dimensions— length 
and breadth, to provide single-plane illustrations; depth, to 
determine the point on the planet's surface where these events 
were due to take place; and, finally, in time. I could well 
believe that manipulation might prove tricky. And all the 
while this fantastic apparatus must be fed with concentrated 
force from living sacrifices. . 

At last Fuzzy-bubble departed, announcing that m the hour 
before dawn he would call to escort us. 

Hartnell yawned and looked at his watch. "Another four 
hours I make it, Pop. I'm going to catch up some sleep. 
Doesn't seem much else we can do." 

But I remained awake a long time. If, in that moment, 
young Hartnell had known what sort of pictures the Machine 
of Revelation was due to produce, I don't think he would 
have got much sleep, either. 



CHAPTER SEVEN 



"We Who Die Salute the Wise Ones!" 

W/"E awoke in the darkness to see Fuzzy-bubble hovering 
like a ghostly purple disc some few feet away. I 
switched on the Mattus. "Come," he said. "It is almost 
time." 

Hartnell sat up on the curved floor, rubbing himself ruefully. "I've slept in more comfortable places than this, Pop." 

"Hope there's nothing strenuous on the programme," said 
Tubby. "My back's absolutely numb—" 

Mine was, too, but we couldn't spare the delay of useless 
moaning and groaning. "Let's get moving—" 

We progressed slowly through those pitch-black, eggshaped tunnels, guided by Fuzzy-bubble's dim radiance. 
"Soon," he told me, "we shall reach the research laboratories — " 

I raised my eyebrows. 

"That's a new one," said Hartnell. "What are they busy 
researching after?" 

The sphere's reply was suitably solemn. "There is only 
one subject that interests the rulers and the people of Kardoon— methods of increasing the population, thereby saving 
our race from extinction." 

Very much tempted to remark that throwing away a thousand inhabitants because of Makkub's idle curiosity wouldn't 
help the situation a lot, I decided to stay silent. 

After a while, Fuzzy-bubble said : "Now we arrive. I can 
explain nothing to you of what proceeds, save that our 
chemists try to solve the secret of life— how it is possible for 
our people to spring forth from one particular basin of rock 
while other basins, exactly similar, produce nothing. Once 
that problem is solved our difficulties are ended. 

Here was something else to keep quiet about, for biologists 
throughout the known universe had devoted their labours for 
centuries to such a quest. As with the singing spheres of Kardoon, they had nothing to report. 

Now the caverns became more elongated, and for the first 



43 



44 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



time since descending into these subterranean depths we saw 
— by the light of yellow and orange spheres working there — 
flat surfaces. Despite their craze for curves, the inhabitants 
had been unable to devise any sort of bench or table that 
conformed to their natural preference. For a start it must 
have exasperated them to have objects simply rolling all over 
the place. 

But level blocks of stone lined the tunnels where we walked, 
and on them rested the craziest, most complicated and most 
inexplicable array of apparatus I had ever dreamed of. All I 
could recognise as normal objects in a laboratory of that kind 
were small, jagged pieces of brown rock, lying in stone pans. 
So far as I could see, the only purpose served by the apparatus 
was to hold various substances. Crushing, heating, moulding 
and mixing operations were performed by those inevitable 
force-beams, after which the material merely rested in tubes 
or open basins until ready for the next process. Here and 
there queer flashes occurred, whereupon the Mattus unintentionally conveyed to me the workers' reactions of disappointment or gratification. 

In any case there was no time for long-winded explanations, 
and Fuzzy-bubble hurried us along the laboratory corridors 
to a larger cave, where we had to turn on the gravity-reactors 
to climb a pronounced gradient, and eventually into another 
gigantic hall lined with innumerable spheres drawn up in two 
main sections. 

"On the left," he said, "are those shortly to be honoured." 

I looked with some compassion upon the sacrificial throng. 
There seemed nothing to distinguish them from any other 
spheres we had seen floating through their underground halls 
— no special sizes or colours — and I wondered vaguely how 
they had been chosen. 

"On the right," continued Fuzzy-bubble, "those selected for 
the duties of High Escorts — " He broke off. "We must now 
join in the Ceremony of Tribute. Makkub approaches!" 

He came in, borne aloft by the six blue spheres, accompanied by Pakkan and Zakkar, and straightway launched into 
a florid speech about the importance of the occasion in Kardoon's history and how their noble sacrifices would never be 
forgotten. My eyes kept roving up and down the lines of 
waiting spheres and I felt slightly sick. There seemed many 
more than a thousand among the crowd due for "slaughter." 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



45 



Then he moved off again, through some aperture at the 
end of the hall, and the entire assembly commenced an intolerable screaming and ullulation of praise. Fortunately, 
Fuzzy-bubble indicated that we should follow the principal 
party and distance lessened the uproar somewhat, or we would 
surely have had to shut off the inter-coms. 

An atmosphere of tense, reverent expectation saturated the 
Mattus. Despite our previous conversation, I had really very 
little idea of how this Machine of Revelation would appear or 
what might happen when it commenced to work. 

"Why don't they get on with it?" demanded Tubby, in a 
low, strained voice. Whatever his inner feelings, he had his 
mind on the job, however, and I could hear the built-in 
cameras of his suit softly whirring. 

Heaving ourselves into the inevitable circular entrance, with 
steeply curving walls on either side, we stood upright to see 
that only a limited number of the elite were permitted to 
witness the demonstration. Broadly speaking— although we 
had no definite means of recognition — the audience was confined to Makkub, Pakkan, Zakkar and the counsellors who 
had perched with them on that queer throne. 

Then we turned to inspect the Legacy of the Wise Ones. 

"Now what in the name of Perishing Polaris is that supposed to be?" said young Hartnell, in a low voice. 

I wrote earlier that Kardoon's story was far from unique in 
the records of the universe — how on many planets there must 
be relics of past civilisations long since overwhelmed by catastrophe, leaving no trace save a crumbling monument, an indecipherable scroll or a strange apparatus to remind later 
generations of their vanished glories. We ourselves had experienced such things in the light-machine left by the Old 
Ones of Krellig II and the weird oracle which made laws for 
the inhabitants of Fellik. Here, also on Kardoon, rested an 
incomprehensible engine — and the very sight made us marvel 
that the spheres even guessed its purpose, much less learned 
how to operate it. 

The Machine of Revelation occupied the entire end of the 
cavern. It stood fully fifty feet wide, forty feet high and extended as far back as we could see. No attempt had been 
made to shield its working parts, and they rose in tier after 
tier to the roof — thousands of dead-white coiled tubes, looped 
into one another by rows both vertical and horizontal, heaped 



46 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



one upon the other in masses, following no particular pattern 
but mounted in ledges of polished stone unlike any we had 
seen before. From the centre of this maze stretched two convoluting cables, ending at the foot of a white, upright rod 
about five feet high — almost similar, in fact, to the "throne" 
upon which Makkub had squatted. The rods, in turn, were 
placed about five feet apart and wedged into two large pillars 
of that same unusual stone. Only one other part of the 
machine could be definitely distinguished — a trumpet-shaped 
tube, some three feet in diameter, which curved into the bowels 
of the machine. Its orifice opened somewhere near the door 
by which we had entered the hall. 

I looked at the great, complicated mass of apparatus that 
had squatted there through an incredible span of centuries and 
felt myself grow cold. 

Four spheres — two mauve and two pale lemon — moved forward to rest on either side of the upright rods. "They are 
the operators," said Fuzzy-bubble. "It is their duty to focus 
and control the machine to best advantage when the ceremony 
begins." 

The sensation of tense expectancy became insufferable. 
We were all waiting — waiting. I felt as though I were waiting 
for an execution. 

Then Makkub began a long, ceremonial explanation of 
why we were there earlier than usual — "Just as though everybody didn't know already," said Hartnell — and a good deal 
of ritual bobbing, weaving and gliding ensued. 

After this, his six blue bearers brought Makkub to a position immediately in front of where we stood and he addressed 
me directly through the Mattus. "Now, O strange and inexplicable monsters," he said, "shall we see whether any 
powers you may possess can be employed for the welfare of 
my people — whether your arrival in our domain is to prove 
good or evil." 

Obviously, Fuzzy-bubble had told him the purpose of the 
Mattus rod, and I thought rather indignantly that he might 
at least have warned me. However, Makkub didn't seem to 
expect comment — I was too overwhelmed by surprise and by 
his arrogant personality to give one, anyway — and moved his 
entourage to one side. The climax was due to begin. 

Immediately, a sphere floated through the aperture from 
the outer hall, bobbed slightly as though in homage to Mak


THE SINGING SPHERES 47 

kub and crjed : "We who die salute the Wise Ones." Then it 
darted into the queer, trumpet-shaped tube. I felt my heart 
thud in sympathy, and nausea welled hot and bitter in my 
throat. Then another sphere appeared, bobbed briefly and 
followed the first. Then a third . . . and a fourth . . . and a 
fifth . . . and a sixth — all following at intervals of about two 
seconds. 

We waited, hardly knowing what to expect. 

The masses of coiled tubes in the lower part of the machine 
glowed first — mainly crimson and purple, as though power 
caused them to become red-hot. The sacrificed spheres 
began to move faster and I saw pastel shades of rainbow 
radiance spreading throughout the apparatus until the entire, 
massive edifice pulsated softly with light. 

"Very nice, I'm sure," said Hartnell. "But what's it supposed to do?" 

I watched for a little while in the hope that I might learn 
something by following the operators' movements, then cursed 
myself for a fool. There were no visible controls, of course 
— the four spheres manipulated hidden, internal sections of the 
contraption by means of their force-beams. 

And then the Machine of Revelation — apparently warming 
up — commenced to work. First sign manifested itself as a 
vague, purplish radiance creeping along the upright rods. It 
grew in volume, thickened with white fumes and gradually 
spread across the gap. Within a matter of seconds I could 
have sworn it solidified, forming a tangible plate or screen five 
feet square, opaque as floating cloud. And upon this background faint images began to form. 

"Now," said Fuzzy-bubble, in a low, tense manner, "comes 
the Moment of Truth." Coloured lines flashed suddenly on a 
small plaque below the upright rods. "It is the second day — " 

We recognised the Kardoon landscape quite easily, with 
its brown, inhospitable cliffs, although the precise location 
escaped us. From a break in the jagged rocks poured spheres 
by the hundred, urgency demonstrated by their crowded, 
jostling, agitated flight. Then the picture faded. 

"Well," said Hartnell, drawing a deep breath, "that might 
be anything — " 

The coloured lines changed hue. Fuzzy-bubble came on 
the Mattus again. "It is still the second day — but rath* 
earlier, I think." 



48 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



We gasped involuntarily as the screen brought forth with 
particular clarity a view of the Great Halls, crammed with 
populace whom Makkub was apparently addressing. Hues 
were vivid, details perfect, and to heighten the effect the 
picture took on in some mysterious way a semblance of threedimensional solidity. Next instant it had" faded into milky 
mistiness. 

"The operators," explained Fuzzy-bubble. "They are 
having difficulties — " 

"They did very nicely just now — " 

Scene Three materialised— very similar to the first, except 
that this time swarms of spheres flocked back through the 
cleft in the rocks. 

"Mission accomplished," murmured Hartnell. "Wonder 
what they've been up to — " 

I asked Fuzzy-bubble about the time, but apparently the 
coloured line indicator had failed. 

Sacrificial spheres flung themselves recklessly into the tube, 
hardly stopping to make their obeisance. I wondered how 
many were now left of the original thousand. 

But the succeeding picture drove away thoughts of anyone 
save ourselves — for there we were, sitting in a corner of the 
rocks and looking out towards the brown, desolate plain. 
Seven or eight spheres clung to the cliff-face above us in a 
long line. I thought, somehow, that we looked rather forlorn. 

The scene flickered and dissolved, to be replaced on that 
unholy screen by a representation which set my scalp crawling with terror and spun my mind into a dizzy, unbelieving 
whirl. 

For we gazed upon an unmistakable Kardoon landscape — 
away from the rugged cliff-line this time. The plain stretched 
away into brown affinity under that uneasy, pink sky. In the 
foreground rested three mounds of small rocks, measuring 
about six feet long and two feet wide. At the head of each 
mound was placed a small slab of some flat, dark material, 
and as the screen sprang for an instant to that same brilliant 
clarity which had marked the third essay by the Machine 
of Revelation, I distinguished, through a haze of horror, cer-. 
tain significant words. 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



49 



The marker on the first mound read: Francis G. Hartnell, 
Tnter-X 2213/78. 

The second: Harold Goss, Inter-X 2212/140. 

The third: Jon J. Deegan, Inter-X 2213/37. 

The vanished Wise Ones of Kardoon had constructed an 
apparatus with power to represent events that had not yet 
occurred — a machine that was guaranteed by long experience to be accurate in every respect. And it had pictured 
for us our own graves ! 



CHAPTER EIGHT 
Under Sentence of Death 

ONLY the dimmest recollection remains in my mind of 
what happened when that dreadful picture faded from 
the screen. All counsellors seemed to understand its significance—we had to admit the spheres were nothing if not 
intelligent— and set up such a horrible screeching and whistling of discussion that I was obliged to switch off the intercom. Then I found myself hustled from the cave by pressure 
from force-beams, staggering and stumbling along tunnels 
until finally thrust into the alcove where we had spent the 
night. We lay there for quite a time, collecting our wits and 
getting our breath back. 

At last, young Hartnell sat up and said: "Well, Pop— 
what are we going to do to prove that machine a liar?" 
I felt very depressed. "Is it a liar?" 
"If d better be," said Tubby. He wrinkled his nose distastefully. "I've seen some planets in my time— but this is 
the limit, so help me!" 

"I could imagine better places to be buried on," said Hartnell. "The point is— I'm not anxious to be buried anywhere. 
Where's the catch? Could they fake that gadget in some 
way? If so, what are they up to?" 
"Fuzzy-bubble says it always tells the truth," I reminded 



50 THE SINGING SPHERES 

him, discouragingly. "I'm ready to believe him, too. After 
all, how can they fake pictures of things that haven't happened?" 

"You don't think the whole affair's a large, unpleasant 
hoax? Only the select few from the council have a chance 
to see the thing working, remember. Suppose Makkub waits 
till something happens, then sends the counsellors out to tell 
the populace it was exactly as the machine predicted." 

Automatically — forgetting the darkness — I shook my head. 
"That won't work. Fuzzy-bubble believed in the machine, 
right enough. He couldn't have deceived the Mattus — " 

This rather took the wind from Hartnell's sails, but he 
hadn't finished. "Or suppose the focus was wrong. Fuzzybubble said the machine goes several days ahead — yet all we 
saw is due to happen in the next few hours." 

Now as I remember this was not quite accurate. The first 
two scenes — the flight of spheres and the Great Hall assembly — were definitely timed to occur shortly; after that the 
coloured-line indicator ceased to register. "So," I said, "we 
still don't know whether we've a few hours or several days 
to live. Or any time in between." 

"The entire machine might have run amok," said Hartncll, hopefully. "Suppose that scene of the graves isn't due 
to take place, maybe, for fifty years—" 

Tubby sighed. "There's an awful lot of supposing going 
on—" 

"Once I get off this damned, dreary planet," I said, fretfully, "I'm going to take good care never to come back to be 
buried here — whether it's fifty or a hundred years from now ! " 

Hartnell declared he'd never encountered two ,more miserable and pessimistic individuals than Tubby and me. He 
said that if we refused to be cheered up by his highly intelligent speculations concerning the true nature of the 
Machine of Revelation we might at least stir ourselves to 
take escape action instead of merely sitting inside an oversized egg-shell moaning about cruel Fate. 

Tubby grunted. "There's half a dozen bubbles hanging 
round the entrance. Stick your head outside and you'll be 
slapped flat on your face by a force-beam!" 

This damped Hartnell's enthusiasm a little, but he persevered. I got the impression he would have concentrated 
more easily had he been able to pace up and down the floor. 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



51 



Curvature made this both uncomfortable and impossible, so 
he resumed squatting in brooding silence. Wishful thinking 
became replaced by hopelessness. 

"What d'you think they're going to do with us?" asked 
Tubby. 

Gloomy reflections were interrupted by sudden whistlings 
and chirrupings over the inter-com. We had scarcely time 
to sit up inquiringly before Makkub himself — without his 
six blue bearers or attendant counsellors — floated into the 
room. His deep red radiance reflected in sinister fashion 
from the walls and bathed our suits in a fierce, eerie glow. 

"Well, well," said Hartnell, softly. "Why this lack of 
pomp and circumstance? Has he come to strike a private 
bargain — or just to gloat?" 

We didn't have to wait long to find out. Staring rather apprehensively into the round, crimson "face" of Kardoon's 
hereditary ruler, I switched on the Mattus. His personality 
hit me with the force of a thrown brick. 

"Now, O misshapen ones from beyond the limbo, have you 
seen your fate in the Machine of Revelation? You will 
never return to the strange, undesirable world whence you 
sprang, but lie here on Kardoon, with those curious mounds 
to mark your testing place. That is the meaning of the 
pictures displayed by the Wise Ones' wonderful engine. The 
Council of Interpretation has thus decided, and its verdict 
cannot be gainsaid." 

I knew Hartnell and Tubby were bursting with curiosity, 
so I took time out to tell them what was happening. "Those 
graves — " 

"Yes?" 

"They're ours, all right!" 

Hartnell considered this for a moment. "In that case, 
Pop, tell the over-stuffed balloon a few home-truths— deflate 
him a bit ! If we're near the end we might as well have a 
run for our money!' 

There was a good deal of common sense in this, no doubt, 
so I swallowed once or twice to help pluck up my courage, 
and said: "O Makkub— we are not of Kardoon. We do not 
admit that the pictures in the Machine of Revelation concern us — " 

Instead of deflating, he began — literally — to swell and blaze 
with indignation. "Blasphemy!" he shouted. "An insult 



52 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



to the Wise Ones and their marvels! Silence, O Thing! 
Silence, I say! Or the prophecy may come true before its 
proper moment!" 

Very quickly, however, he cooled down and I sensed once 
more the envy and curiosity which had caused his visit. 
"Let us pre-suppose that the Machine has portrayed events 
truly. Ere you go beneath the ground is it not fitting that 
you should divulge the secret of the graves? If creatures 
such as yourselves achieve a permanent resting place, is it 
not fitting that I — Makkub — should also have the place of my 
dissolution perpetuated, so that all men may remember me?" 

"What's he on about?" demanded Tubby, impatiently. 
"Have you given him a piece of your mind?" 

"Yes. In return he called me a 'Thing'." 

Hartnell chuckled. "I'd like to hear the slanging match. 
Pity we don't own another Mattus." 

"It isn't funny," I said. "He's still thinking about a 
tombstone of his own." 

"Well tell him about the birds and the bees — like you did 
Fuzzy-bubble. Then he'll know why he can't have one." 

I did my best again with the facts of human life. Despite 
my revulsion for Makkub, I was struck once again by the 
sphere's undoubted intelligence. He understood, all right, 
but was being wilfully stupid through sheer egotism and selfimportance. 

"The body? And the spirit? You say that your grotesque 
shapes contain a holy and subtle element which departs at the 
moment of death— you know not where? The spirit is not 
buried with you?" He pondered on this for quite a time. 
"This spirit — it could be the same life-force as composes our 
own noble people?" 

I didn't feel equal to theological argument and kept silent. 
For his own selfish reasons, however, Makkub persisted in 
plodding on. "Truly, it proves our higher status, for we are 
not burdened with unpleasant husks, such as yourselves. 
Then perhaps we, too, are not wholly lost at the moment 
of dissolution, but depart — unseen — to some celestial plane?" 

T said I couldn't help him answer that. 

Mulling over the problem, he remained reasonably subdued for quite a time, but eventually began flashing and 
swelling indignantly. "Unjust!" he shouted. "Impossible 
that I — Makkub — greatest and most revered of my kind— 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



53 



should merely vanish! How will my people think of me 
when I am gone? What will become of them once their 
ruler is no longer visible?" 

I brought him to ground with a jolt before he got out of 
hand. "Others wait to become rulers— the red spheres in 
their special quarters. We know how they are segregated 
once they leave the rocks — " 

He cackled evilly. That's the only word for it— cackled. 
And to hear him sent my blood running coldly and brought 
out a clammy sweat. "They wait no longer! Lest impatience cause them to seek the throne before their rightful 
time— and to ensure that I, Makkub, earn permanent reverence in the history of Kardoon as its last monarch— they have 
all been privately destroyed!" 

Through eons of time and across light-years of space " the 
ancient madness still travels. Among all races burns the lust 
for power — creeping into the minds of creatures like some 
foul drug which demands greater and still greater doses. Yet 
ambition is never satiated — always the cry is for more, and 
in its attainment thousands are sacrificed and moral principles painfully evolved since the beginning of time stamped 
ruthlessly into the dust. 

Thus it was with Makkub. He knew that sooner or later 
he must die — he intended it to be as late as possible — but 
now, with our arrival, had come the breath-taking conception 
of being able to continue his domination after dissolution. 
The idea fascinated his vain and ruthless mind so greatly that 
he deliberately shut his eyes to impossibilities. 

Surely the Mattus must have betrayed the depth of my 
loathing and revulsion, but he gave no sign. Perhaps he was 
used to being regarded in this way. 

"Now," said Makkub, airily brushing aside all previous 
information and objections, "I have explained the importance 
of my having a monument. You will tell me how it is done." 

I sighed, despairingly. "Without a material body it is impossible." There was one ray of hope. "It is known for a 
stone to be erected as a memorial although no body is there — " 

"No, no," he said, hastily. "It would be of no use without 
my own holy essence — " 

"Can't be done!" I said, brusquely, fed up with this useless argument. 

Had he possessed teeth he would certainly have ground 



54 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



them in rage, but his fury did not reach the expected paroxysms and I suspected he still had something up his sleeve. 

"How's it going, Pop?" asked Hartnell. Usually he knows 
enough not to interrupt during a Mattus session, but it was 
quite understandable that both he and Tubby were in a state 
of some suspense. 

"Rather unpleasant. I'll tell you later. He's just coming 
to the worst bit, I think — " 

Makkub's attitude changed swiftly to one of cunning. 
"You have said, O barbarous and clumsy ones, that the pictures in the Machine of Revelation do not apply to you. 
Hear, then — unless you obey my wishes, I will make certain 
that they do!" 

He didn't say any more. At least he paid us the compliment of admitting we, too, possessed a certain intelligence. 
And with that thoroughly disturbing threat he bobbed out 
again. 

We talked round and round in circles for a long time, not 
getting anywhere, and finally fell into an uneasy doze. I remembered thinking how, up on the surface, that pink sky 
burnt with the brightness of noon, concentrating its glare on 
the bare, brown rocks. We were immured in a stone cell 
hundreds of feet below ground in conditions of considerable 
physical and mental discomfort. I wondered why I'd ever 
been such a fool as to complain about the warm air and 
deserts of Kardoon. I'd have given a lot to be back there. 

Sitting in the lowest portion of that eggshell-shaped room, 
we had formed ourselves into a tripod, leaning back to back, 
for greater ease. When something grabbed at my ankle I 
jumped up so speedily that Hartnell and Tubby nearly fell 
backwards in a heap. 

It was Fuzzy-bubble, attracting attention by using the forcebeam, and in no small state of agitation. "Come!" he said. 
"Makkub has ordered a Grand Assembly— and you must be 
present ! " 

"Now what are they up to?" asked Tubby, wearily. 
"In the throne room — where we were before?" asked Hartnell, curiously. 

"I suppose so." I looked at him in suspicion. "You've 
got something on your mind," I said, accusingly. 
"But don't you see, Pop? It's the first picture on that 



THE SINGING SPHERES 55 

damned machine— first in chronological order, that is— coming 
true!" 

We agreed it wouldn't be difficult for Makkub to engineer 
this, however, and decided to reserve judgment. Personally, 
haunted all the time by that last picture, I was only too 
pleased to do this. 

Then Hartnell chuckled and I grew apprehensive. ' Look 
here—" 

"All right, all right, Pop. Only an idea—" 

"I've known your ideas in the past — " 

"I wonder whether your pal Makkub hasn't over-reached 
himself—" If he had I didn't see how. "What's going to be 
the reaction if you suddenly said your piece in the middle of 
that ceremonial flim-flam in the Great Halls and told 'em how 
he'd had all the heirs to the throne knocked off?" 

I couldn't believe my ears. "Me? Me— tell 'em that?" 

"Why not?" He assumed that bland, child-like innocence 
which invariably accompanies his mote outrageous suggestions. 

"Lots of reasons. First, I'd probably be worked on by 
force-beams as soon as I opened my mouth, and dropped in 
little pieces all over the hall. Secondly, there's the regulations—" 

Although Inter-X parties are occasionally out of direct 
touch with the controller— and consequently immune from his 
guidance and instructions— the most, complete accounting is 
called for on return to the parent ship. Photographic records 
are minutely examined, specimens checked and all occurrences — together with reasons for action taken — included in a 
written report. This latter, especially, is most strictly studied, 
and woe betide any squad whose members have infringed the 
rules. 

Large volumes of regulations — salient features of which 
we are supposed to know by heart — have been drawn up in 
the light of long experience, and I, for one, am prepared to 
agree that although much red-tape is irksome there's usually 
a good reason for it. What Hartnell was getting at, of 
course, concerned political interference. The very thought of 
Inter-X men shoving their noses into another planet's domestic affairs always make the powers-that-be go hot under the 
collar. Whatever conditions we find on an inhabited world, 
it js our duty merely to inquire and record, lending material 



56 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



aid if requested by "the existing governmental regime." 
Material aid, mark you — not political advice. And in the 
present instance there was no doubt that Makkub represented 
the "existing governmental regime" on Kardoon. Every 
member of an exploration squad can't be expected to know 
about matters of high policy at headquarters, and therefore, 
not possessing the complete picture, may bring catastrophe 
even when acting in good faith. So the rule is "Stay aloof" 
and the authorities are quite emphatic about its observation. 

Hartnel] had an answer. "We're supposed to get back with 
the information, aren't we? That's always held up as an 
Inter-X man's first duty. How can we give 'em an absorbing 
account of life on Kardoon if we're dead and buried? Makkub's the only one who's holding us back, so if we dodge him 
we do the job we're supposed to. A slight infraction of one 
small rule to help us carry out the bigger regulation." He 
seemed quite pleased with this ridiculous and faulty logic. 

"Political interference — a small rule?" 

Fuzzy-bubble meantime began to get impatient and dodged 
up and down like a bouncing, purple ball. 

"We'd better go," I said. "Maybe the situation's improved 
since we last saw Makkub — " 

"There," said Hartnell, fondly, "speaks the true optimist!" 

I treated this essay in sarcasm with the contempt it deserved, and we made our way in silence through the awkward 
tunnels with the escort of spheres trailing along behind. 
Silence, that was, so far as vocal sounds were concerned. 
The inter-com began to bring us once again that terrible, 
numbing shriek of a thousand voices from the Great Halls. 
The sound, incredibly shrill, seemed to pierce my ear-drums 
and made me walk as though in some kind of daze. 

Then, when I felt I could bear it no longer, the noise died 
and we knew that Makkub must be making his official 
entrance. He was perched once more upon the ridiculous, 
rod-like throne when we went in, green Pakkan and orange 
Zakkar positioned on either side. Fuzzy-bubble floated to his 
place among the semi-circle of counsellors, leaving us standing in embarrassing prominence between the assembly and 
the rulers of this highly undesirable planet. 

Makkub, noting with obvious satisfaction, that I held the 
Mattus at the ready, wasted no time on preliminaries. He 
said a most urgent state of affairs had arisen; therefore he 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



57 



had called them together in emergency, and the first stage 
of the proceedings would be a public report from the Witness to the Archives. 

Whereupon a largish, yellow sphere moved forward to give 
an accurate, unvarnished account of the four scenes shown 
by the Machine of Revelation and, having said his piece, went 
respectfully back to his place. 

A huge, singing sigh echoed through the vast cavern as 
those multitudes of shining spheres appreciated the significance 
of that picture of the graves. 

It was cut short by Makkub getting busy again. He knew, 
lie said, how all his subjects adored and revered him as their 
ruler, and how he loved them all just as much. None 
doubted that he was their greatest figure of all time — not excluding those giants among the Wise Ones. 

"See, all men ! " he declaimed. "I am not as others among 
you, for I am a red sphere — and the mightiest Kardoon has 
ever known!" 

This sickening drivel went on for quite a while, and I 
strained at the Mattus to discover the crowd's reaction. Surprisingly, it was quite fervent. 

Then Makkub got round to us again. Some misguided 
persons who ought to have known better, he went on, conceived a strange idea that the three loathsomely fashioned visitors might possess knowledge of chemistry which would increase the fertility of the nursery rocks. Such a notion was 
ludicrous, of course — nothing short of blasphemy, indeed, for 
even the Wise Ones themselves had been unable to solve this 
ancient mystery. 

"I hail the Wise Ones ! " he shouted, suddenly. 

Back came a sour, screeching wail : "Hail, the Wise Ones ! " 

"In their profound farsightedness, the Wise Ones would not 
have wished that I, Makkub — greatest of his race- — should be 
less in memory than these gross creatures standing before you 
now. The Machine of Revelation has foretold how their 
tombs will be commemorated when, in a few hours, they are 
dead. I believe, also, that given sufficient sacrifices from 
among those who love me so well, the Machine will divulge 
the way in whch I, Makkub, am to be with you in memory 
through the centuries." 

His meaning began to dawn upon the packed hall and the 
jostling spheres sang again with increased adoration. 



58 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



"Therefore," continued this red, evil horror, "I call not 
for a thousand — or for ten thousand — but for hundreds of 
thousands to devote themselves to this experiment, so that I 
may know I am considered superior in the realm of creation 
to these peculiar monsters who have thrust themselves among 
us." He swelled and pulsated with sheer, grotesque megalomania. "The Wise Ones would have wished it to be done. 
Moreover, I — Makkub — here with you now — demand it!" 

I snapped off the inter-com and made urgent slapping 
motions for Hartnell and Tubby to do the same. I think 
Hartnell was a fraction of a second too late, though, and the 
first shrieks of enthusiastic tumult needled his ears so painfully that his face went white. 

Meantime, feeling more than slightly sick, I continued to 
"hear" proceedings over the Mattus. Hostility towards us 
became inflamed — probably quite a natural sequel to the rush 
of loyalty to the head that Makkub had engendered. Only 
here and there did I detect a discordant, objection, but such 
small voices were overwhelmed by great shouts of "Hail, the 
Wise Ones! Hail, Makkub!"' 

"Therefore," concluded Makkub, gleaming a more baleful 
crimson than ever, "shall great celebrations be proclaimed in 
honour of our dedicated multitude of heroes, and as a preliminary to the occasion all men shall witness the ceremonial 
tearing in pieces of these creatures from a far-off world! 
Afterwards their remains shall be placed in the graves and 
covered with small rocks, for we are a humane people. Moreover, the Machine of Revelation has so decreed it ! " 



CHAPTER NINE 

Forgotten Haunt of the Wise Ones 

"W7E were back in the dark little egg-shaped cell from which 
*^ we had so recently departed. Occasionally one of the 
spheres on guard outside' loomed for an instant in the entrance 
aperture like a pale green moon, found we were still among 
those present, and moved out of sight to join his fellows of 
the death watch. 

"Anybody got an idea what we might do?" asked Hartnell, at last. 

Nobody had. All the time our minds re-created that picture of three small mounds upon the Kardoon plain, with 
markers at their heads. Frankly, I didn't know what to make 
of it, except that even if the machine had slipped, Makkub 
meant to employ the incident for his own purposes. 

Then Fuzzy-bubble appeared in a state of agitated distress. "Come!" he said. "Come quickly! I have sent the 
guards away, but there is no time to lose!" 

We didn't stop to ask questions. Panting and stumbling, 
we followed him through the queer labyrinths of Kardoon, 
seeing nothing save the monotonous sequence of caverns until 
after more than half an hour he halted, hovering, before a 
roughly cut opening scarcely more than eighteen inches in 
diameter. "Inside," he said, "is an ancient cave of the Wise 
Ones. Here is part of their domain known only to a few of 
us. Take care when you enter, for the way is steep." 

Steep? He spoke only half the truth. I suppose, though, 
it was kind of him to warn us and the precipitous drop into 
pitch darkness didn't hold the same terrors for any being who 
could float grandly and confidently above. 

Hartnell hitched the Karlin line again and we followed him 
down in the approved style until thought of the height above 
me brought on a copious sweat. That cavern lying immediately inside the cliffs was by comparison a mere nutshell. Down and down we went, deeper into the darkness — 
a terrifying and apparently endless descent from which I 
drew only one comforting conclusion — I'd never have been 



59 



60 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



able to make it in daylight, even if Makkub himself had been 
after me with his own personal force-beam at the ready. 

Young Har.tnell only chuckled when I mentioned this to 
him. "I'll bet you would, Pop!" 

Tabs on the Karlin line read "1,250 feet" when at last the 
sheer wall commenced slowly to curve out from beneath our 
aching feet and betrayed the fact that here again the enormous excavation formed the inevitable ellipsoid. The monstrous size of an invisible arch over our heads set me trembling, although I tried not to think about it. Hartnell turned 
up his outside microphone-set to full powet and shouted, 
but the place was too vast for echoes to survive. 

Once on the floor of this incredible grotto, Fuzzy-bubble 
led us to where a small hole provided admission to a recess 
with an almost level floor. The hiding place provided me 
with the first easy moment for a long time. At least we 
would be safe here from Makkub and his minions. 

"There is trouble," said Fuzzy-bubble, unhappily. 
"Trouble such as we have not known on Kardoon in my 
time—" 

"Don't tell me," I said. "Let me guess. It's Makkub and 
his demand foe — for sacrifices. The populace cry out in 
protest." 

He seemed astonished. "How could you know?" An 
alarming possibility entered his mind. "Would Makkub h<». 
aware of this, also?" 

I doubted it and asked him to tell me more. A section of 
the council hadn't been happy about Makkub for some time, I 
learned. Now, with his insane demand for the population to 
be decimated in order to satisfy a vain and crazy ambition, 
they had decided something must be done. 

"Treason!" laughed Hartnell, delightedly. "Sheer treason! We'll get away from here yet!" 

I didn't think the situation at all funny. Neither did he 
the next instant when a yellow sphere bobbed through the 
entrance and we all feared the guards were upon us. 

"Make no alarm," said Fuzzy-bubble, reassuringly. "It is 
Fandar." 

And surprisingly enough I then recognised the yellow visitor as the Witness to the Archives, who had said his piece in 
the assembly. 

"Two thousand!" said Fandar, aghast. "I have been 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



61 



ordered to provide two thousand sacrifices from my already 
under-staffed department. It is wicked— monstrous— " 

Despite the demonstrations of enthusiams, far from sufficient candidates had applied for the honour of sacrifice, 
whereupon Makkub had introduced some sort of conscription. 

"Our precious records ! " wailed the yellow sphere. "How 
can they possibly be spared?" 

Kardoon possessed no written history. All data considered necessary of preservation remained stored in the 
minds of the Witness to the Archives and his large staffs, who, 
approaching the end of their days, transferred their quantum 
of information to new, young spheres. But if two thousand 
must go, and insufficient other spheres came from the nursery 
to receive the knowledge, how could the records be preserved? 

"Well," said Hartnell, in a gratified tone. "He's the very 
chap we want to talk to. He'll know how they faked those 
pictures m the machine. Maybe mass hypnotism or something — 

There are times when he has the wildest ideas, and I felt 
rather glad to hear Tubby pour large gushes of cold water 
over his latest effort. "You can't take" pictures of hypnotic 
mirages," he said, discouragingly. "My stuff turned out all 
right. 

Naturally, Hartnell wasn't in the least abashed. He waved 
a hand and said airily : "Go on, Pop, ask him. He'll know 
how it was done." 

As it happened, Fandar didn't take kindly to the suggestion that trickery entered into the working of the machine 
and Fuzzy-bubble had to do a lot of soothing and explain 
how the insult was due to our ignorance and so forth No 
matter what they thought of Makkub, the spheres didn't intend to stand for reflections being cast in the integrity of the 
Wise Ones. 

"This I tell you," said Fandar, solemnly. "I am old and I 
have witnessed the Machine of Revelation operated in days 
even before Makkub became our ruler. All that it has ever 
portrayed has come to pass in identical terms." 

"So, also, have I stated," declared Fuzzy-bubble. I 
gathered he didn't like to be forced into taking sides against 
his own people. "Yet the strangers hesitate to believe Per


62 THE SINGING SPHERES 



haps it is because they rebel at knowing they will never again 
see their own kind but occupy graves on a far-off planet." 

"He's right about that," said Tubby, fervently. 

Looking on the bright side— as always— Hartnell suggested 
we simply had to stay put in our little cave to make a liar of 
the machine. "These things are supposed to happen pretty 
soon, aren't they? We could last out a couple of days on 
the water and oxygen we've got left — maybe longer." 

"One picture's come true, anyway," I said. "If you ask 
me, another's in progress right now." 

"Oh?" 

"Those spheres streaming out from the rocks. Don't you 
think they're already searching?" Tubby whistled in dismay, 
and even Hartnell seemed impressed. "Suppose they find the 
scout, ship? If they fiddle around with force-beams and 
trip the firing mechanism, we'll never see it again — " 

Young Hartnell laughed and said I was becoming a regular little ray of sunshine. 

Seeing no future in morbid speculations, I turned again to 
Fuzzy-bubble and Fandar. "If the people rise against. Makkub. how will they depose him? Has he not guards to protect him? And is he not the rightful ruler?" 

"It rests with the council," said Fandar. "A majority 
against him, voting thrice, can oblige him to relinquish the 
throne to a new monarch. This is known from our ancient 
records. And," he added, bitterly, "it is this department 
which Makkub has ordered me to turn over in its entirety 
to the sacrifice." 

If ever we had encountered a cunning and malevolent intelligence, this was it. 

"There are other things you should know," I said, slowly. 
The decision to give this information probably ran counter 
to the authorities' "no politics" rule, but at. the thought of 
that damned, red, evil sphere I grew inclined to throw the 
entire Inter-X manual beyond the outer nebula;. "In order 
that none may challenge his authority, Makkub has secretly 
destroyed all the other red spheres!" The Mattus pulsed 
powerfully with indescribable sensations of disgust, horror 
and anguish. "Is such a situation provided for in your 
archives?" 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



63 



It wasn't. Even in the days of the Wise Ones nobody had 
foreseen a time when sacred red spheres might be totally 
lacking. 

"Now, truly, all is lost ! " declared Fandar. "I must hasten 
to bid our friends wait — " 

"Even now they prepare to act!" moaned Fuzzy-bubble, 
desperately. "They will be detected and destroyed!" 

Vibrations of my bewilderment radiated from the Mattus. 
"I don't understand. Surely when the council learn what 
Makkub has done they will all turn against him—?" 

"It does not matter now," said Fuzzy-bubble, hopelessly. 
"Without Makkub we should have no one. Kardoon must 
possess a ruler — and there are no red spheres!" 

I wondered if, after all, they were as intelligent as we'd believed, but, taking the charitable view, no one can think of 
everything. "The counsellors have powers. They can make 
the decision of voting against the ruler. Why should they not 
make other decisions concerning the leadership of the people?" 

Surprisingly enough, this took some time to sink in. 

Then, at last, they understood, and had they possessed 
voices the words must have sounded very awed and hushed in 
the darkness. "Now we know that the spirit of the Wise 
Ones is surely with you ! " whispered Fuzzy-bubble. "A brave 
new conception — " 

Frankly, I couldn't see what there was to get so excited 
about in this elementary principle of democracy. 

"What have you done to 'em, Pop? They seem a bit 
agitated — " 

I said it was only a suggestion for a Council of Regency. 
"Apparently they've never thought of such a thing before." 

"Well, tell 'em to spread the glad news instead of wasting 
time bobbing up and down like that!" 

I, too, wondered whether the counsellors might not turn 
against Makkub in a body as soon as they learned of Makkub's horrible manoeuvre to consolidate his own power, but 
hopes were dashed as soon as Fuzzy-bubble and Fandar 
sighed dolefully in unison. 

"A noble theory — breath-taking in its imagination — yet it 



64 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



cannot be. A red sphere must rule Kardoon. So it has been 
ordained since time immemorial." 

The Mattus oozed despair, and I felt my heart sink. I 
thought it could go no lower — but it slumped right down into 
my boots when we looked through the entrance into the big 
cave and saw all the guards waiting there. 



CHAPTER TEN 

The Place of Execution 

IT really seemed as though the prophecies of that uncanny 
Machine of Revelation were coming true — with Makkub's evil help or otherwise. 

They hauled us up to the surface in a nightmare journey 
during which they weren't particularly gentle. Worst part 
was the terrible climb from that prodigious cavern — far more 
horrifying in reverse — and what we'd have done if Hartnell 
had not left the line in position beats the imagination. Even 
so, we could not move fast enough to satisfy the guards, 
who every now and then gave us a jolt with their force-beams. 
I kept wondering all the time whether they might hit the 
Mattus or the gravity reactor. 

Once Hartnell slipped twenty feet down the line, despite 
the safety clip, but the guards acted like lightning and hauled 
him back in position immediately. I heard his frenzied yell 
of warning over the inter-com and paused, heart in mouth, 
until he was climbing again. Then I reflected how typical it 
was of the young devil that even in the moment when neardisaster came upon him he thought of Tubby and myself, toiling on lower sections of the line, whom he might take crashing with him to the bottom of that awful void. 

Continually we climbed, accompanied by the cluster of 
hovering, impatient moons where guards held Fuzzy-bubble 
and Fandar in custody. At last we were able to wriggle 



THE SINGING SPHERES 65 

through the rough, narrow aperture and stood trembling and 
exhausted once more in the smaller tunnels. 

A sudden scuffling and protest from Hartnell made me cry 
in alarm. "What's the matter?" 

"These damned bubbles won't let me reel in the Kaclin 
line! Tell 'em we've got to get it back — " 

The guards refused to wait. 

"Let it go," I said, wearily. "What's it matter now?" 
Come to that, v/hat did anything matter?" 

"Very well," said Hartnell, between his teeth. "Good luck 
to 'em when they try to haul us up that steep side to find the 
cliff entrance, that's all ! I'll make 'em use up a year's ration 
of energy!" 

And in actual fact, while they bustled us painfully through 
the Great Halls, up those awkward apertures and down the 
other side, we saw our first death on Kardoon. A guard, who 
had been notoriously zealous with his pushing and shoving, 
moved away from our little group and hovered indecisively 
for a few moments, his greenish radiance flickering slightly. 
It was, as Hartnell said afterwards, like a man wondering 
whether he was going to be sick or not. Next instant the 
sphere had gone — no noise, no silent flash — just nothing — as 
though an old-style electric bulb had been switched off. 

"Well," said Tubby, philosophically, "so much more work 
for the others." 

The remaining guards treated the incident as perfectly normal, taking no notice, and brought us eventually to the cliffface. They appeared to think we were being deliberately 
awkward in not climbing that frightful, steep curve of smooth 
rock and gave us a very rough journey. Once, during the upward haul, I bumped so violently that I thought my shoulder 
was dislocated. They pulled us unceremoniously to the 
entrance with force-beams from above, making Hartnell remark that it was "like being slung out of a Z-bar by the scruff 
of the neck." 

At last we stood under Kardoon's uneasy pink sky, with its 
dry heat pressing down on us gratefully after the cold, clammy 
atmosphere of the catacombs. 

"A nice change," Hartnell agreed. "Pity we shan't have 
a chance to get really used to it — " 

They took us back along the rocky defile to where the wide 
plain stretched its four miles of parched rock to hills on the 



3 



66 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



far side. But we were carefully steered from the direction of 
the nursery and made to walk eastwards, still skirting the cliffs. 

"At least," said Hartnell, "if they send anyone to find us 
they'll know we died with our boots on and pedometers tick
" _ _ )> 1 

ing. 

Levity seemed misplaced, I thought, in view of the fact 
that our pedometers weren't likely to work much longer. A 
long, narrow cleft appeared in the rock face, hemmed in by 
unclimbable walls and possessing no exit. 

Tubby looked around and upwards, wrinkling his plump 
features with disfavour. "Now I know why they wouldn't let 
us bring the Karlin line — " 

We huddled together at the end of the defile — ourselves 
and the two spheres. The guards took up positions in line 
along the cliff-side, remaining motionless there in a fashion 
similar to the very first spheres we had seen and who laid 
down that uncanny barrier of force-beams. No doubt another 
invisible obstacle now spread itself across the canyon — designed this time to keep us in. I snapped out the Mattus 
rod and asked Fuzzy-bubble about it. 

"Oh, yes, the guards are using their force-beams." Hollow 
despair dripped from his voice. "It is impossible to escape 
without help from outside. We can only await the end." 

"You mean that other spheres must concentrate forcebeams before, the guards will raise the barrier?" I cast my 
eye along the line of watchers, counting eight. 

"If — although it certainly will not happen — rescuers arrived, 
the guards would need their energies to beat off an attack. 
They could not do this and maintain the barrier at the same 
time." ' 

I wondered again whether the spheres were as intelligent as 
we thought. "Surely, then, you need only call to your 
friends? Your radio waves pass through rock, do they not? 
Those in the tunnels would hear — " 

Fuzzy-bubble shook his head, as it were, pityingly. "I 
could not do that without betraying them to Makkub. Also, 
be sure he has them watched. One suspicious move and they, 
too, would be consigned to the Place of Execution — " 

Perhaps, after all, it was I who lacked intelligence. However — Place of Execution? 

Fandar woke up at last, no doubt stimulated by this sinister 
phrase. "It is here, of course ! Do you not recognise it from 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



67 



the pictures in the Machine of Revelation?" 

I reached over and shook both Hartnell and Tubby violently. "The fourth picture!" I shouted. "This is it!" 

Wide-eyed, they stared around, forcing memory to recall 
details. Tubby gave an appalled exclamation and Hartnell 
pursed his lips as though to whistle. "It is, you know ! " he 
said. There was a brief, tense silence. "What about Fuzzybubble and his friend, though? I didn't see them?" 

I passed on this query through the Mattus. 

"Oh, yes," said Fuzzy-bubble. " We saw ourselves there. 
Perhaps you were too occupied with the wonder of it all—" 

This no doubt explained their attitude of resignation and 
despair. They believed implicitly in the machine's prophecies. We didn't— or at any rate, tried not to do so, for the 
evidence in favour of that devilish apparatus piled itself up 
implacably. 

"Time," I said, reflectively. "When will they solve its 
secret?" 

Hartnell grinned. "It's been done, Pop—" 

"I don't mean that damned machine. There's that great 

cluster of tall buildings back at headquarters, crammed with 

calculating machines and the cream of meta-physicists. 

Haven't they achieved anything at all?" 
I saw his mocking glance. "They've worked out theories—" 
"They've been doing that since the days of Einstein," said 

Tubby, despondently. "And where's it got us?" 

"The theory — the basic idea — always has to come first. 

The latest I heard is that there's no such thing as time—" 
"Tchah!" I said. 

"No, listen— forget the passing of days—" 

"In that case we'd never grow older — " 

"Ah ! " Hartnell heaved himself to his other elbow. "Now 
that's different. Imagine there's no time — but there's change 
— circumstances and conditions always in a state of flux. 
You don't grow older— you just change—" 

I said I didn't get it. 

"Think it over. Or maybe you'd prefer one of the older 
theories — that time is foreordained, with events coming towards us like a beam of light and happening as they reach us. 
Don't forget the light we see from the Great Nebula in Andromeda started out about 900,000 light-years ago. For all we 
know, the Great Nebula isn't there any more— it might have 



68 THE SINGING SPHERES 

met with catastrophe 800,000 years ago. Even so, we won't 
know for another 100,000 years—" 

"Oh, dear," said Tubby. 

"What now?" 

"That beam of light idea— it makes that confounded 
machine more plausible. The Wise Ones found how to go a 
little way along the beam, as it were — " 

Personally, I felt like going a long way round the bend, as 
they used to say, but at least the discussion took our minds 
from that forbidding line of spheres watchfully perched against 
the rocks and from the nagging anxiety which began to close 
upon us as nerves stretched to meet the tension. 

Beams? Light-beams or force-beams? That brought me 
to the question of the guards again and made the whole subject pointless. They propped themselves there, about ten feet 
from ground level, winking with an evil, greenish sheen. 
Through their tenuous substance I could see the uneven rocksurface. Strange how such frail bubbles could hold so great a 
force or why they failed to puncture themselves on sharp 
corners. Easing myself round a little, I noticed for the first 
time that the guards did not. after all, rest firmly against the 
clifl-face, but remained some two or three feet away. In fact, 
by shifting my line of sight more to the left, I obtained a 
clear view behind them right down to the brown, desolate 
plain beyond. 

I told Hartnell" about this. He was in the middle of a 
rather tedious discourse about the theories of some ancient 
scientist named Dunne, who had performed elementary experiments in time, and he didn't take kindly to the interruption. "Eh? Well, what of it?" 

This rather took the wind out of my sails, and I muttered 
something about it being interesting. 

He looked at me curiously and resumed his lecture. "Now 
where was I? Oh, yes, well this ingenious Dunne imagined 
time as a sort of escalator, with a man travelling on it backwards, looking down to where he had been — that's the Past, 
of course — yet all the time being carried upwards he knows 
not where — that's the Future. Now if — " 

He broke off and gripped my arm like a swamp-octopus 
from Zonnash. Deep in my own quagmire of despondent reflections, it nearly made me jump right out of my atmosphere 
suit. 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



"What was that you said, Pop?" 

"Eh? Me? Why, nothing— I was just thinking—" 

He gestured impatiently. "Not just now— a few moments 
ago. . About the guards — " 

Then I remembered. "Why, only that they don't actually 
cling to the rocks. They're hovering a couple of feet or so 
away — " 

He guffawed delightedly. "Yes, they are, aren't they?" 

"What's all this about?" demanded tubby, suspiciously. 

"Look here," I said, equally doubtful. "What harebrained scheme have you hatched up this time?" 

We knew sufficient of Hartnell's little ways— through bitter 
experience— to get alarmed when he showed enthusiasm of 
that kind. 

"Just a little idea to get out of here," he said, modestly. 

I drew a deep exasperated breath. "Is that all? And 
precisely how — ?" 

Sarcasm is always wasted on Hartnell. "Look, Pop, have a 
word with Fuzzy-bubble and ask him whether, it's right that a 
good, brisk prod would puncture the guards' envelopes." 

"What good will that do? They'd never let you get within 
a dozen yards of 'em ! Besides, all we've got to do it with are 
the gamma-pistols and they don't work on inorganic matter—" 

Regally, he brushed objections aside. "Don't argue, Pop. 
Ask him." 

Fuzzy-bubble, although rather surprised by such a gruesome query, agreed that this was true. "Failure of the envelope is invariably fatal, of course. That is why executions 
are performed by tearing it apart." 

"Ask him if it needs a lot of strength," said Hartnell. 

Apparently it did — the maximum a healthy young sphere 
could exert. 

"I still don't see what you're planning," I said. "If you 
chucked a pointed rock at 'em they'd only catch it in mid-air." 

He laughed delightedly. "Nothing so crude, Pop. Finesse 
—that's what we're going to use. Warn Fuzzy-bubble and 
the other, one. Tell 'em to be ready to follow us—" 

"Us?" 

He raised his eyebrows. "Don't you want to come with 
me?" 

There is a very ancient saying about "jumping out of the 
frying pan into the fire." I thought those old philosophers 



70 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



possessed a fund of wisdom which Hartnell might do well to 
consider. What rash and impossible plan had he devised? 

Yet Tubby and I need do nothing, he said, save keep 
close at his heels when he went into action, and if they'd got 
the slightest sense of what was good for them the two 
spheres would do the same. 

"Very well," I said, with a sigh. "Very well.' I could see 
the picture of those three graves very clearly. 

"Good!" said Hartnell, briskly. "Now I'll turn round 
while you unscrew the gravity-reactor from my suit." 

"Almighty Altair!" Tubby stole one of young Hartnell s 
favourite ejaculations without any shame, and I didn't blame 
him. 

"Now listen — " I said, nervously. 

"Unscrew the thing and don't argue!" 

I unscrewed it, making quite certain it was switched off. 

"Extend the power-pack leads about three feet, so that I 
can hold it in my hands." 

When he had got the thing arranged to his liking, he said : 
"Now come on! When I run— you run, too!" 

Of course, the guards could see us coming for fifty yards 
or more. I wondered what it would be like hitting that invisible barrier at speed. Would we bounce off— or feel as 
though we had run our heads against a block of solid malachite? , . 

Instantly an alarmed shrieking sounded over the inter-com. 
The guards— telling each other to be ready. They'd be exerting full power on the force-beam barrier. 

Hartnell went swiftly and unswervingly, with a strange, 
crouching movement, the gravity-reactor resting on both 
gloved palms and his elbows bent down against his chest, as 
though ready to take a sudden strain. 

Sweating copiously, I pounded at his heels, hearing Tubby 
behind me. I supposed Fuzzy-bubble and Fandar were 
there, too. I didn't know definitely, but I certainly didn't 
feel like looking round to find out. Those evil, greenish 
guards were frighteningly near. 

As we drew level with the first of them, I heard Hartnell 
grunt suddenly and swing towards the opposite cliff. Instantly, he threw his weight back to our path again, whereupon 
the same thing happened. And again— and again— 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



71 



"Perishing Polaris ! " gasped Tubby. "We're actually getting through!" 

Personally, I hardly dar.ed look. There was Hartnell, 
grunting from time to time as though something kept hitting 
him in the solar plexus, but still running. 

I cast a fear-filled glance at the cliff— just at the instant 
when the last remaining guard threw himself violently against 
the jagged rock and disappeared! 

We kept running until we reached the plain, then fell in a 
heap, completely spent. A great sound of rasped breathing 
occupied the inter-coms and I know for a fact that I made a 
considerable personal contribution to it. Trembling uncontrollably with the reaction, I lay there feeling as though my 
very bones had turned to water. 

Next I knew was a protesting noise from young Hartnell. 
"If you two heavyweights can drag your carcases off me, I 
could find out the damage — " 

"I don't know what sort of state Pop's in," said Tubby, 
"but me— I don't think I can shift for another ten minutes—" 

We did, though, to find Fuzzy-bubble and Fandar bouncing 
in violent wonder. Somehow I raised strength to switch on 
the Mattus. "Such marvels have never been known— even in 
the days of the Wise Ones ! " twittered Fandar. "Eight guards 
—defeated by only three! Truly the strangers possess a 
magic strength!" 

"Defeated by one alone," I said, giving credit where credit 
was due. "We merely ran with you." 

"Also," said Fuzzy-bubble, "are the strangers merciful, for 
they could have killed my own men at the entrance to the 
pass, yet they did not do so." 

I stared along the rocky defile. No guard remained to 
twinkle greenly against the bare, jagged stones, with all 
colours of the rainbow shimmering across the surface of his 
envelope. I wondered how Hartnell had managed it 

"Well," said Tubby. "What now?" 

"As I've probably sprained both wrists getting you out of 
that fix, you might at least put this reactor in place for me." 

I felt his arms through the supple material of the suit 
"Don't try to make a martyr of yourself," I said. "Your wrists 



72 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



are all right. But thanks, anyway. Now tell us how you 
did it." 

Young Hartnell is usually at his cockiest in times like these, 
but somehow we didn't find it difficult to forgive him. On 
this occasion, he chose to be annoyingly mysterious. "Let the 
explanations wait, Pop. It'll help while away the long winter 
evenings. This is the problem now : Are we going to leave 
Kardoon with the job half-done?" 

He made it sound all very worthy and righteous, whereupon 
I threw back at him a remark he himself had voiced earlier. 
"What job? Not so long ago you were telling us how important it is to get back to the ship with our information—" 

He grinned again. "Think what Makkub's likely to do to 
poor old Fuzzy-bubble. Are we going to leave friends in the 
lurch? Never let it be said that — " 

"No politics," I warned him. 

He made a rude noise. 

I tried again. "Let's leave before that picture of the three 
graves comes true — " 

In the end, of course, we had no option but to agree. 

"For. the second time," said Tubby, "what now?" 

"Fuzzy-bubble or Fandar might spy out the land. Maybe 
they've heard already what's happening." 

I passed on the query via the Mattus. 

"Oh, yes," said Fuzzy-bubble. "All men are called to the 
Great Halls. Makkub has summoned another emergency 
assembly in honour of those who are to be sacrificed. There 
is murmuring among the people — yet they are helpless — " 

"Murmuring?" inquired Hartnell. "That's good! What 
he really means is that they're screeching their heads off ! " 

"Be thankful it isn't sounding very loud in the intet-com, 
anyway." 

"But don't you see — with all of 'em listening to Makkub 
somebody might creep near enough to find out what it's 
about. We can't do it because we've lost the Karlin line — " 

Fuzzy-bubble volunteered for this rather dangerous job, 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



73 



while the rest of us remained hiding in some convenient 
corner of the rocks. 

Not wishing to stray too far from the main entrance, we 
arranged a rendezvous near the cleft leading to the nursery, 
and it was here, with considerable misgivings, that I watched 
him float away. We arranged for him to transmit a low 
note, recognisable over the inter-com, in case of trouble 
Whether this provided him with reassurance I don't know, 
but even if the signal came I wasn't optimistic about being 
able to form a rescue squad. 



CHAPTER ELEVEN 

"Can You See It? Look— Down There!" 

"POR the time being, then, we had nothing to do save sit in 
a secluded pocket of the rocks and hope no searchers 
would find us. Fuzzy-bubble had departed on his unenviable but necessary mission, leaving Fandar feeling rather 
dejected and alone. I tried to cheer him up over the Mattus, 
only to find he was in no mood for conversation. 

"At least," said Tubby, "we could pass the time hearing 
what Hartnell did with that gravity-reactor. I don't like not 
knowing things — " 

I looked at Hartnell curiously. "Just how did you do it?" 

He laughed, enjoying being mysterious. "Give your thanks 
to old Isaac Newton — " 

Remembering how I'd thought of this venerable twentiethcentury scientist while we were toiling up that ridge, with 
the gravity-reactor harness cutting our legs so painfully, this 
seemed very much of a coincidence. I still didn't understand, 
though. 

"Newton made a rule," said Hartnell. "Quite a number of 



74 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



'em, in factr— but one which said 'Every action has an equal 
and opposite reaction.' Work it out from that!" 

Tubby groaned. "Come on, come on— let's hear what you 
did!" 

"Those force-beams — we saw how Fuzzy-bubble lifted the 
stone and pulled over a slab of rock when he gave us his first 
demonstration. Now you can't push or pull anything without 
getting a purchase somewhere." He warmed to his explanations and began to gesticulate. "Imagine a man trying to push 
a door open. He presses against it with his hands, thereby 
digging his feet more strongly into the ground. Just as old 
Isaac said— an equal and opposite reaction. Yet if by any 
chance the door opens suddenly, while's he's still shoving, the 
pressure from his feet throws him off balance — " 

Then I saw it all, and marvelled at its simplicity. When 
the guards directed force-beams to provide that invisible 
barrier intended to hold us captive, it was also necessary to 
find support with a repulsor beam of similar strength against 
the rock. Indeed, had we tried to pass between them and the 
cliff we should also have found a barrier there, yet the adjusted beams held the spheres themselves in perfect balance. 

But when Hartnell ran that gravity-reactor through the 
force-beams, it nullified all effort exerted on that particular 
side and— as in the illustration of the man pushing against a 
locked door— threw them off balance so unexpectedly that 
they had no time to readjust their pressure, and so violently 
that they slammed themselves to extinction on the jagged 
stone. . 

"You mad young fool ! " I said, aghast. "You might have 
shattered every single bone in your, arms and shoulders!" 

He merely laughed. "But I didn't, did I, Pop? And 
here we are— away from the Place of Execution, safe and 
sound." 

"So far," amended Tubby, gloomily. "Wonder why they 
had to pick on a corner like that for it. Why not have the 
ceremonies in those nice, clammy vaults. They're more in 
keeping with the atmosphere — " 

"Better get Pop to ask Fandar about it," said Hartnell, 
Jazily. He lay back comfortably, hands clasped behind his 
helmet. We might have been enjoying a leisurely picnic on a 
summer's day, instead of waiting to be found by Makkub's 
murder squad. 



'/ 



THE SINGING SPHERES 75 

Anyway, for want of something better to do, I passed on 
the query. 

"Oh, yes," said Fandar, "the old Place of Execution was 
the room where Makkub visited you. That has not been 
used for many years now. Dissipated energy from the bodies 
of victims refused to disperse completely and gave rise to 
strange, disturbing manifestations — " 

Ghosts? They had them here, on Kardoon? I closed my 
eyes and shivered, despite the heat. What was I doing on 
this planet, at all? Why couldn't I be somewhere getting on 
with my work? A moderately competent botanist, getting on 
in years now, ought not to be marooned on such a desolate, 
forsaken world— without a blade of grass or scrap of lichenhearing bizarre stories about the ghosts of executed spheres. 
I was thankful we hadn't learned such things before being 
thrust into that dark, egg-shaped cell. 

"Listen ! " said Hartnell, suddenly. "Are they cheering, or 
something?" 

A shrill, confused uproar sounded in the inter-com, making 
us all experience once more that unpleasant head-swimming. 

"It is Makkub," explained Fandar. "He has announced 
the hour when the Machine of Revelation shall be operated 
again. Three hundred thousand people have been chosen as 
sacrifices—" The Mattus coldly reflected his horror.. "It is 
more than half our population"! There is much groaning. 
What we all regarded as an honour is now an affliction. The 
people are not happy — " 

Hartnell said nobody could expect them to be. 

"It is no part of our duty," I told Fandar, "to say how your 
world should be governed. Yet we have offered a solution — 
let the council depose Makkub." 

He sighed. "That is impossible — we must have a ruler, 
and while he is in authority he must be obeyed," 

I wondered if ever, in the long and savage catalogue of 
crazy ambition, there had ever been a more senseless massacre. 
Probably such had occurred somewhere, though I was glad I'd 
never heard of them. And this vast slaughter was to be 
pressed through in the hope that Makkub could see whether, 
when he came to the end of his days, his people would 
succeed in interring him in a marked grave ! The ridiculous 
horror of the whole business smacked of a madman's dream. 



76 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



That must be it, of course— Makkub was completely, hope
16 HLJnelTrose to his feet and shuffled impatiently. "I don't 
care if a hundred controllers were shouting at me over the 
radio rieht now— I'm going to do something! 

"But what?" I said, helplessly. "We can't even get down 
there We'd break our necks in the first cavern— _ 

He looked at me in that peculiar way of his and grinned 
again. "There's another way down—" 

Tubby and I stared. t . . .., „, n ^ 

"I don't know whether it's easier or not, but its worth 

try "What in the name of Orion are you talking about?" 
"Through the nursery!" 

Then I remembered how we had seen those new-born 
bubbles rising uncertainly from the clusters on the life-giving 
rock to be shepherded by nurse-spheres into an aperture on 
the far side of that basin— to the incubators, I^-bubble 
had told us, to learn about the strange society of which they 
were now members. , „ 

"We might " I said, doubtfully, "except for the guardsHe grinned. "We'll surprise 'em with the gravity-reactor 

a8 Fandar however, assured us that for an occasion such as 
Makkub had now decreed, a hundred per cent, attendance was 
essential— nurses, guards and all— save for those absent by 
special permission. He seemed confident that the only 
spheres who might be excused were those detailed to keep an 

ey "For " S he said, "any new-born citizens will not travel far 
from the nursery, and what is there to be guarded against, 
since Makkub believes you to be sitting in the Place of Execution awaiting ceremonial dissolution and later being placed in 
the graves which the Machine of Revelation has foretold as 
awaiting your remains?" i 

After he had delivered himself of this long-wmded sentiment I tried to ask him about the geography of the incubator 
caves because there wasn't much use making our way in that 
direction if the descent on the other side proved too precipitous. Apparently, however, he had never been in that section 
of the labyrinths. .. - C . 

"Well, come on," said Hartnell, "or we'll be too late. 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



77 



Leaving Fandar among the rocks in case Fuzzy-bubble 
should return — someone had to stay and the three of us 
didn't like the idea of being separated — we advanced as far as 
possible under cover of defiles until we reached the nursery 
entrance. No guardian spheres were in sight, and for a few 
moments we stood looking into that bright, incredible spawning ground, with the faint, eerie cheepings sounding in our 
helmets. 

"There's the way in," said Hartnell. "Right at the far side." 

Clusters of infant spheres coveted the stones so thickly that 
at times we were obliged to pause and map out the next stage 
of the journey by observation. Here and there smallish 
globes moved along in a lost, helpless, uncertain manner, a 
few inches from the ground, obviously not knowing what to do 
in the absence of nurses. Once Tubby almost stepped on a 
small bubble which floated across our path. 

"Mind your big feet," said Hartnell. "You nearly flattened 
little Pinky there." 

It might have been curiosity which attracted them towards 
us. Although newly entered upon existence, their monotonous, rocky surroundings must already have proved familiar, 
and the sight of strange things moving nearby could have 
stimulated the natural inquisitiveness inherent in all young 
creatures. Therefore they seemed to take a perverse delight 
in thrusting themselves against our ankles and I only hoped 
we wouldn't be subjected to any experiments with infant forcebeams ! 

We paused at the aperture — another funnel-shaped hob 
about six feet across. Hartnell shoved his head inside and 
shone the beryllium torch downwards, grunting with satisfaction. "Not too steep, after all— about eight feet sheer drop, 
then it flattens out quite rapidly. We ought to be able to 
slither down without much trouble.." Typically, he didn't 
bother with the problem of how we could get out again. 

"No spheres hanging about at the far end?" I inquired, 
cautiously. "You ought to be able to see 'em glowing — " 

"Black as the inside of the Old Ones' museum on Krellig," 
he said. I thought he might have chosen a happier analogy. 
Even after all these years I sometimes wake sweating in the 
night through dreaming of what happened to us in that terrible 
place. 

He turned and gazed once more across the stony basin. 



78 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



"See anything coming, Pop?" 

Brown rocks, rosy sky, masses of soap-bubble spawn — that 
was all. No greenish guards or other alarming visitors glinted 
against the landscape. Little spheres floating free of their 
stones moved slowly and hesitantly near the ground. 

"All quiet," reported Tubby. "Look, there's Hartnell's 
little friend, Pinky." 

"The one you nearly trod on? Where?" 

"Doesn't seem to be making much progress — " 

Whereupon the coin dropped with a resounding clang 
simultaneously in all our minds. Pinky! 

Through the morynium visor of his helmet, I saw Hartnell's eyes literally bulge. A small, tenuous, pink sphere — 
save for Makkub the only bubble of its type on the planet ! 
One was born every seventy years — and we had stumbled upon 
it unaware. 

"Well, well!" said Hartnell, softly. "Now we can make 
matters hum!" 

"Look here," I told him uneasily, "we keep sticking our 
noses into politics. I don't like it — " 

He took no notice. All thought of descending into the 
dark incubator caves forgotten — which was a comfort, at 
least — his only concern now lay in ways and means of hitting 
back at Makkub. The controllers, had they known, would 
have liked it even less than I did. 

"Come on," said Hartnell, "or we'll lose him. If he once 
hides among all those others — " 

He set off almost at a run, Tubby and I following with 
some reluctance. 

The same Providence that is supposed to look after children and drunken men saved the wandering spheres from our 
heavy boots. At least, we had no memory of treading on any 
during that staggering, ridiculous pursuit which finally brought 
us close again to little Pinky. 

Once more curiosity had him nuzzling our ankles and he 
prodded so strongly against my heel I feared he might meet 
the same fate as the guards in the Place of Execution. 

"Stand still ! " yelled Hartnell. "You'll damage him ! " 

"I am standing still!" I said, irritably, because the entire 
proceedings began to unnerve me. "But how in Altair do you 
think you're going to get him away from here?" 

He regarded me pityingly. "The Mattus, of course! What 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



79 



sort of things do human kids like? Chocolate? Ice-cream? 
Nice, brightly coloured fruit and similar stuff, don't they? 
Just conjure up big dollops of the Kardoon equivalent, Pop, 
and lure him to follow us." 

It was utterly fantastic, of cour.se. "They don't eat," I 
said, stuffily. "What's the good of offering even an entire 
confectionery counter to a — " 

He made a gesture of mingled impatience and despair, saying I was a gross, unimaginative materialist. "I know that ! 
All I'm trying to suggest is that you produce some suitably 
enticing thoughts. I can't go into details — that's your job—" 

"Perhaps he won't like me. Children have unreasoning 
prejudices, I'm told — " 

He said that this was only making difficulties and I should 
either get on with the proceedings or let him try the Mattus 
himself. To some extent he was right. I didn't fancy the 
idea at all. 

"He might turn out to be a little Makkub — " 

Hartnell's expression could not have been more pained if 
I'd deliberately insulted his favourite nephew. "All right," I 
said, hurriedly. "I'll try." 

In the course of our wanderings the Mattus thought-tr 
ferer. has provided many uncanny mental experiences — s 
exhilarating, some horrific, others quite entertaining, 
none, I think, is quite comparable in any way with the affair of 
little Pinky. (Needless to say, this absurd epithet stuck to him 
throughout subsequent events in the same way that we never 
knew Fuzzy-bubble's real name.) 

We had already learned, of course, that the spheres entered 
their world in a moderately adult state. Physically — if such a 
description can be applied to a fragile, shimmering globe of 
pure force — they expanded, moderately after coming loose 
from the rocks; mentally they were already adolescent, requiring only a brief general education in the incubator caves, 
after which they took their places in society as adult citizens, 
with duties allotted according to their aptitude. 

I held out the Mattus rod gingerly and switched on, not 
knowing quite what to expect. First impressions were utterly 
confused — as well they might have been — yet over this chaos 
spread a queer blanket of helplessness, bewilderment and, 
pecularly enough, contentment. The mental atmosphere 
might be likened to that when a man finds himself half-awake 



80 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



in a very comfortable bed in a strange room, idly wondering 
where he is, but too bemused to bother overmuch. 

And in addition there was a peculiar juvenile simplicity 
which, when I'd sorted things out, made the proceedings enjoyably easy. This pleasant surprise heightened my enthusiasm, and little Pinky proved undeniably friendly. 

"What are you?" 

The question came with interested curiosity. Not "who," 
mark you, but "what." At least he recognised us as beings 
different from his own, species. I did my best to tell him — 
referring to myself alone to avoid complications — but without 
much success. 

"And what is that?" He indicated Hartnell. 

"That," I said, determined on a measure of revenge, "is 
your uncle Hartnell." 

To this day no satisfactory explanation has been provided, 
although I've discussed the matter with psychologists and 
psychiatrists in many places. The best theory they can put 
forward is that the Mattus unconsciously transmitted my own 
deep affection for young Hartnell— which certainly exists, 
despite his many exasperating ways — and was accepted and 
copied by this juvenile sphere. Tubby advanced a quite 
different idea that Pinky instinctively recognised "another big 
bag of wind," but whatever the reason there is no denying 
that this small, rosy globe metaphorically attached itself as a 
nephew to a favourite uncle. The introduction of Tubby met 
with scant reaction and all the wide-eyed wonder remained 
centred on young Hartnell. 

"And who am I?" 

I didn't suppose for a moment that Pinky would appreciate 
the implications. "You," I said, "are a prince of Kardoon." 
"What's a prince?" 

The others, standing in silence while the Mattus worked, 
exhibited signs of impatience. 

"Come on, Pop," said Hartnell. "Those nurses or whatever they call 'em might be back at any moment. I don't 
hear 'em cheering any longer. How's it going?" 

I told him everything was under control. 

"Is it? You've talked him round? Let's get going, then." 

I got to work again on little Pinky. "We must leave here 
now. We will see all the wide fields—" I couldn't think of a 
more attractive description that might make a small boy wish 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



81 



to look at bare expanses of brown desert. " — on the other 
side of the hills." 

I sensed reluctance to leave familiar places. 

"Why?" 

"Don't you want to go with Uncle Hartnell?" 

That did it. He floated obediently alongside, at waistheight, while we carefully retraced our steps through the defile. 
There was only one possible line of action — to place little 
Pinky in Fandar's care and find out if news had been received 
from Fuzzy-bubble. 

The Mattus that day provided a rich fund of emotional 
eavesdropping. Fandar positively goggled when he saw what 
we had brought with us and he bobbed unceasingly in homage. 

"A prince of Kardoon ! " he breathed, half -unbelievingly. 

"You realise what this means, O strangers?" 

We might not appreciate everything, but we understood a 
good deal of the implications. No obstacle now stood between the council and a formal resolution to depose Makkub, 
although I didn't suppose for one moment that matters would 
be as simple as that. A tactical dilemma presented itself. 
Should we keep Pinky's existence a secret for the time being 
— or should we immediately announce him to the populace at 
large, thereby forestalling any murderous attempt by Makkub 
to elminate this new opposition? The trouble was that we 
were out of touch with latest developments in the Great Halls. 

Confronted by Fandar, Pinky knew his first experience of 
divided loyalties. He immediately recognised this yellowish 
sphere — who kept bobbing respectfully — as one of his own 
kind, yet Uncle Hartnell remained an undeniable attraction. 
The poor little fellow's bewilderment was obvious. 

"A baby prince ! " repeated Fandar, almost overcome by the 
wonder of events. "Truly, a momentous day!" 

"Look here," said Hartnell, "we've got to find out what's 
happening down there. How about trying again to get in 
through the nursery?" 

"We could wait for Fuzzy-bubble — " began Tubby. 

"He might be hours ! Or he might have been caught — " 

I fell back on the blessed solution of compromise. "Give 
him another ten minutes or so. If he hasn't turned up by 
then—" 

Meantime we didn't fancy being surprised, so I moved off 



82 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



to a point where I might look down upon the approaches to 
our hide-out, while Hartnell and Tubby stared in fascination 
at Pinky and Fandar, who busied themselves with squeaking, 
incomprehensible discourse. 

The brown rocks looked much the same; heat still pressed 
down from the unnatural sky. No moving thing was in sight. 
I lay, watching from between two large stones and hoping that 
no tell-tale reflection glinted from my helmet, for what seemed 
a long time. 

Then a sphere came in sight, floating rapidly — almost furtively — under shelter of the cliff. I caught a purplish sheen 
and knew him for Fuzzy-bubble. 

Scrambling down to meet him, I waited with the Mattus rod 
poised. He arrived filled with apprehension. "Now, surely, 
is civil war come upon our people ! Scenes of uproar without 
precedent take place in the Great Halls ! Battle cannot long 
be delayed!" 

I told him to calm down and explain what all this was about. 
"Makkub's proclamation concerning the Machine of Reation. His guards selected half the population as sacri
ces — " 

I said, rather impatiently, that we already knew. 

"There has been much murmuring. The chosen thousands 
resent having honour thrust upon them" — I suppose anybody 
would, in the circumstances — "whereas others, rejoicing at 
their own escapes, insist that Makkub be obeyed. The opposing forces are almost equally divided. I fear there will be 
great killing — " 

I was on the point of breaking the glad news about little 
Pinky when we suddenly found ourselves surrounded by nearly 
a dozen green guards. In his anxiety, Fuzzy-bubble had let 
himself be followed, and I'd been too engrossed in his news 
to notice. 



CHAPTER TWELVE 



In For a Penny, In For a Pound 

T^HE exceptionally rough journey back to the throne room 
■*■ may have been because the guards knew of their comrades' fate in the Place of Execution or merely because I 
came under the heading of "Escaped Prisoner — May Prove 
Desperate." Whatever the reason, when I stood once more 
before Makkub it was as much as I could do to remain 
upright and hold out the Mattus antenna. 

My left side was a mass of bruises from shoulder to hip 
where they tumbled me unmercifully up and down the slopes 
of the Great Halls, never actually loosing the grip of their 
force-beams, but easing the power so that I rolled head over 
heels in the darkness, then snatching me back again to the 
heights where they floated with such uncanny ease. Once I 
thought of adapting Hartnell's ingenious ruse and switching on 
the gravity-reactor in the hope that it might intercept a forcebeam and send its owner slamming against the roof. Only 
the realisation that, in turn, I would drop to the bottom of 
the cavern dissuaded me. 

Finally they slung me into the open space before the council, where I waited, dazed and exhausted, to see what happened next. Never again, I vowed bitterly, would I let Hartnell trick me into political interference. Despite all our chafings at red-tape, the higher-ups of Inter-X knew what they 
were doing when they framed rules for landing parties. Given 
the chance, I'd behave according to the book on any future ' 
expedition. 

Makkub, squatting on his idiotic throne with green Pakkan, 
orange Zakkar and the semi-circle of counsellors around him, 
didn't waste any time before beginning to gloat. In fact, I 
got the impression he particularly welcomed the opportunity 
as a diversion from a rather uncomfortable situation. 

"Now, O misshapen one, do you realise there is no escape 
from the watchful eyes of Makkub! Listen, all people! 
Here before you is the thing which has brought such distress 
upon Kardoon — whose wilfulness in refusing to impart his 

83 



84 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



secrets has made it necessary to consult the Machine of Revelation to such a great extent. He is one of those responsible for three hundred thousand being called upon to make 
the Sacrifice of Honour!" 

The great squealing that arose shrilled in my helmet so unbearably as to make me switch off the intet-com and rely 
solely on the Mattus. I had no one to talk to, anyway. 

But what disorted "logic" was this? And who said the 
spheres weren't intelligent. Obviously I was being used as a 
scapegoat to subdue rebellious spirits and direct their wrath 
away from Makkub. 

"Therefore, let all present witness that I call once more 
upon this Ugly One to reveal how the ruler of Kardoon, too, 
may possess a grave at which men may worship. How say 
you now, O Thing?" 

I repeated what I'd told him before. "Such matters cannot 
be—" 

He commenced to vibrate with fury, bouncing on the point 
of that ivory rod and quivering so ominously that I expected 
him to emit sparks. The packed spheres shrieked in a chorus 
of enmity. 

"What have you to lose, O monster? You and your companions will have graves here on Kardoon. Such has been 
decreed by the Machine and from that there is no escape. 
Why, then, do you deny such privilege to me, Makkub?" 

"Sometimes," I said, "graves are no places of honour, but 
men spit upon them as they pass. Such action depends not on 
the s;rave itself, but upon the lifetime character of the occupant" 

This made him think for a moment, but he determined not 
to be baulked. "We will tolerate no insults. All men know 
that my rule over Kardoon has been wise and beneficent. 
Come now— one final chance before you are handed over to 
the executioners—" 

Play for time, I told myself, desperately. But how? 
Strictly speaking, in such circumstances, Hartnell and Tubby 
should have made their way back to the ship, so that know- 1 
ledge of life on Kardoon might be reported for the archives. I 
That— no more and no less— comprised the purpose of our j 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



85 



expedition, and the regulations made no bones about the fact 
that information was worth more than a few Inter-X lives. 
As Tubby said before, in a tight corner, we signed on with 
our eyes open and never hesitated to take the money; therefor we ought not to be surprised if one day we found ourselves called upon to honour the bargain. Yet red-tape can 
never tie down the human element completely, and I felt sure 
that the others, far from leaving in the scout ship, were lying 
low until little Pinky could be smuggled somewhere safe. 
"Tell me ! " roared Makkub. "Reveal your secret or — " 

And while I stood there, dry-mouthed and aching, a sudden 
scuffle sounded behind me. It was Hartnell and Tubby, being 
pushed through the throng at the end of guards' force-beams 
and with dust-smudges on their suits that showed them to 
have had a trip as unpleasant as my own. 

Hartnell, naturally, grinned. "Hello, Pop. Makkub still 
here?" 

"Where's Pinky?" I said, in alarm. "They didn't get him, 
did they?" 

"Frankly, I don't know— we had other things to think of at 
the time. What's been happening to you?" 

I gave them chapter and verse, right up to the final ultimatum. "We've got to play for time," I said. "I've racked 
my brains but I can't think of anything — " 

"Why not let Fuzzy-bubble give 'em a soul-stirring address 
about little Pinky's arrival?" 

My heart leapt, then fell with a thud. "He doesn't know, 
either. Think he'll take our word for it?" 

"At least," said Hartnell, dryly, "you could try." 

As I expected, Fuzzy-bubble viewed the news with polite 
scepticism. "It would be a great marvel," he said, with a 
sigh, "yet it is impossible. Mistakes in recognising princes of 
Kardoon are not unknown among our own people, even the 
nurses — " 

"Fandar saw him, too." 

This shook him a little, but he resumed his attitude of 
doubt, wagging his head sadly, as it -were. "Fandar is a 
most worthy friend— yet his days are spent in a world of 



86 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



records and archives. He knows little of outside matters — " 
"Very well," I said, determinedly. "If you won't tell them, 
I will!" 

To give him credit, he threw in his hand on our side. "The 
story might gain tune," he said, reflectively. "Once a seed 
of doubt is sown — " 

Seeds of doubt were sown all right. Not only doubt, but a 
lot of other assorted reactions. Sighs and gasps of astonishment mingled with guffaws of ridicule, outcries against blasphemy and whispers of hope. Even the counsellors were 
plainly baffled. Some suspected Fuzzy-bubble of sheer, downright lying to save his skin; others, remembering him as an 
upright character, became strengthened in their opposition to 
the present ruler and saw an opportunity to depose him. 

Most vigorous denunciation, of course, came from Makkub himself. "Time shall not be wasted with this farrago!" 
he screeched. "I call all men to witness this traitor who 
allies with the three monsters against his own people. He is 
not worthy of his race — a renegade and coward, deserving ot 
death. He lies merely in order to confuse honest men and 
turn them against their rightful governors — " 

I stepped forward and pushed out the Mattus rod. "We, 
too, have seen the young prince." Putting forth all the emphasis and concentration I could exert, the sweat started running down my face again, but I wanted the council to hear. 
"Although Makkub has murdered other successors, we have 
this one safely hidden ! " 

The dreadful whisper whined and swelled. "Killed? The 
other princes have been killed?" 

There was revelation in the council's reaction. The news 
obviously came as a shock to most, including Zakkar. Pakkan didn't turn a hair, so to speak, but continued to glow 
spitefully green, whereupon I guessed that he and some of 
his guards had most likely carried out the order. 

Makkub quivered with rage and quite obviously regretted 
his idle boasting to us in the condemned cell. He saw how 
counsellors recoiled in loathing upon their semi-circle of 
perches and decided to bluster the matter through. 

"Let none be misled by this scurrilous slander ! Heed not 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



87 



the words of these creatures, for they wish only to save their 
strange lives and spread more mischief among the peaceful 
people of Kardoon. Their distorted minds blame us for the 
fate that is upon them — yet we are entirely innocent in the 
matter. It is not we, but the holy Machine of Revelation 
which has decreed they shall never see their own world again. 
And who shall say that the Wise Ones' wonderful engine 
depicts matters that are untrue?" 

He paused, hoping we'd fall into the trap. It was the old, 
sickening manoeuvre of deliberately inflaming mob passions 
to by-pass unpleasant truths. He wanted us to refer disrespectfully to the Machine — and he'd got us fixed very nicely. 

But I didn't intend to let him get away with it. "O Makkub, we in turn defy you to produce the red spheres who are 
intended by the Wise Ones to rule over Kardoon in succession 
to you ! Bring them to the Great Halls, that all men may 
know your innocence!" 

"If the princes are dead," declared Makkub, coming back 
at us smartly, "it is you and your friends who have killed 
them by infamous magic. Perhaps that is why your own 
deaths are decreed — " 

It was only to be expected that the assembly believed their 
own leader in preference to a weird little group of three 
"monsters" and a purplish-hued renegade. Shrill screams of 
outrage whined loudly over the inter-com, setting our teeth on 
edge. 

"How's it going, Pop?" asked Tubby. 
"Can't you guess?" 
His face fell. "Not too good, eh?" 
"Makkub's made 'em believe we massacred the red 
spheres — " 

"Stuttering Sirius!" said Hartnell. He gave an exclamation of disgust. "I might have known you and Fuzzy-bubble 
would muck things up!" 

"If he does anything to little Pinky," I said, between set 
teeth, "I'll—I'll crawl right back out of that damned grave 
and—" 



88 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



Makkub actually used up some of his precious energy to 
hover a couple of feet above the throne. "This is how the 
Wise Ones' prophecy is fulfilled ! How farseeing and sagacious is their undying influence, for their action doubly affects 
the destiny of our race. The crime of these misshapen 
strangers not only leads them to their deaths; it also establishes my leadership beyond doubt. Hail to the Wise Ones ! 
How inscrutable are their ways ! Now summon the executioners—that all men here assembled may witness the Act of 
Justice!" 

During our adventures on many worlds we had known occasional tight corners, yet in each case we could perceive a 
gleam of hope. More often than not it was young Hartnell 
who produced some ingenious escape manoeuvre, but this time 
he had to confess himself baffled. We were powerless against 
the force-beams of all those massed spheres, which would be 
turned against us in any escape attempt, and there was no 
hope of repeating the trick with the gravity-teactors. 

A group of ominous green spheres detached themselves 
from somewhere in the background and floated towards us. 
The silence of horrible anticipation now hung over that great 
black hall as we stood there with obscene radiance from 
thousands of living bubbles reflected on our suits. A hushed 
multitude waited to see us torn in pieces. 

"Well," said Tubby, "this looks lie it, I'm afraid—" 

"Never mind," said young Hartnell. "We've had quite a 
good run — " 

"Been nice knowing you both," I said, trying not to choke. 

I saw their faces, pale and strained, through the helmet 
visors. Hartnell grinned faintly. "Say goodbye to Fuzzybubble for me — " 

The green spheres grouped themselves for business, choosing positions where they might fix their repulsor beams to 
the walls. I hoped it would be over quickly. I didn't feel 
afraid so much as depressed. It seemed such a shame that all 
our opportunities of carving Man's frontiers farther across 
the shimmering galaxies with Inter-X should be cut short 
in such sordid, useless fashion. My heart warmed with nostalgia towards all the familiar things aboard Old Growler— 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



89 



even the controllers. I wondered vaguely whether they would 
write anything complimentary in our obituary reports. I 
closed my eyes and waited. 

A sudden, isolated squeaking sounded over the inter-com, 
followed by a collective sigh of awe. Makkub giving the 
executioners the go-ahead sign, no doubt. 

For a split-second nothing happened. 

Then a prodigious uproar tore at our ear-drums, bringing 
acute physical pain, so magnified by the tension that I thought 
those green spheres had actually begun operations. But the 
head remained safely on my shoulders and I opened my eyes 
again. 

A cluster of spheres piled themselves high across the 
entrance on our left, which I remembered as leading to the 
laboratory tunnels. 

"What in the name of Procyon's happening now?" demanded Hartnell, blinking with relief. 

"I don't know," said Tubby, thankfully, "but it looks like a 
reprieve ! " 

And, indeed, the executioners no longer paid us attention. 
They were putting their force-beams to better use in hauling 
at the melee — without much success, so far as I could see. 

Then suddenly the milling globes parted, and through the 
gap came Fandar, followed by four other yellow spheres bearing smoothly aloft none other than little Pinky! 

I could easily have wept with relief and delight. 
"Good old Fandar!" exclaimed Hartnell. "He did it, 
after all!" 

"Pity Makkub hasn't got a face," said Tubby. "I'd like to 
see his expression right now!" 

Holding the Mattus rod often proves inconvenient, but it 
has compensations. Now, for instance, I enjoyed an exclusive picture of that evil, red sphere's "expression" — twisted 
with astonishment, terror and baffled rage. 

Sometimes I may be a trifle slower than young Hartnell to 
recognise opportunity, but at that moment there was no exhesitation. "See, all men," I said, straining to make 



90 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



myself heard over the appalling noise. "Is this not truly an 
infant prince of Kardoon?" 

Great cries of acclamation and homage ripped through the 
vast cavern, mingled with the shouts of those who still sided 
with Makkub— mostly, I supposed, those who had been lucky 
in escaping nomination as sacrifices and didn't want to tempt 
fortune prematurely until they saw which way the wind blew. 

The cluster of spheres which at first blocked the entrance 
proved to be adherents of Fuzzy-bubble, and they had actually flung themselves there as a protective escort on seeing 
Fandar's surprising arrival. 

"Behold" cried Fuzzy-bubble, admirably taking his cue. 
"The prince approaches. The counsel should receive him 
with fitting dignity." 

There wasn't much that Makkub could do about it, save 
sit there grinding his teeth. Being unfamiliar with ceremonial procedure on Kardoon, I wondered whether he was 
supposed to make a speech of welcome. 

Anyway, the clamour decreased, the counsellors sat more 
steadily on their thrones and various officials began to move 
with hauteur in preparation for solemn ritual. The effect was 
spoiled, however, by little Pinky, who bounced from his foursphere carriage, alarming the bearers and causing scandalised 
whispers among the counsellors. "Uncle Hartnell ! " he cried, 
delightedly. 

His bright, rosy bubble danced round Hartnell's helmet for 
a few ecstatic moments, then came to rest, quivering with 
excitement near the control belt. I think he was fascinated 
by all the switch levers there, and I hoped he wouldn't try 
prodding them with any force-beams. 

Fuzzy-bubble shepherded him back to the quartet of attendants, then turned to me. He had to approach the subject rather delicately, but it boiled down to a wish that after 
we had witnessed the ceremonies installing Pinky as a Prince 
of Kardoon, the three of us would remove ourselves to more 
secluded quarters. "Because," he said, "Makkub retains 
support among certain sections of the people. Much grief 
and slaughter may ensue before he is deposed — " 

"Could we help in any way?" The "no-politics" rule 



THE STNGING 



SPHERES 



91 



caused a twinge of conscience, but I ignored it. We had 
travelled so far along this forbidden path that we might just 
as well continue to the end. 

The answer proved rather humiliating. Fuzzy-bubble 
smiled pityingly, as it were, and said "Many force-beams ma; 
be used in battle. We might not be able to protect you ail 
the time—" 

The truth of this remark made me writhe. Admittedly. 
Hartnell's ruse had succeeded in eliminating the line of 
guards who tried to keep us cooped up the Place of Execution, but we would be helpless before direct, offensive action. 
I didn't like the situation before; these dark hints about open, 
violent conflict made it even less attractive. 

"What you mean," I said, bluntly, "is that you'd rather not 
have the responsibility of looking after us. You'd prefer u~ 
to return to our ship and leave Kardoon. Is that it?" 

"If such things could be," answered Fuzzy-bubble, in a 
rather peculiar way, "my friends and I would rejoice, for you 
would return to us in happier times. Yet you forget that the 
Machine of Revelation has foretold how you will never see 
your own world again. The exact manner in which the 
prophecy will be fulfilled is not known— but be certain the 
Wise Ones are never wrong. How else would anyone know 
the strange marks we saw on the graves, which you say identify the person lying beneath the ground?" 

Yes, how could they? That picture certainly wasn't faked 
We had seen not only names, but our official Inter-X numbers on the markers. I felt that icy shiver begin again in the 
nape of my neck and travel slowly along my spine. 

Meantime, official initiation proceedings continued. The 
general effect was meaningless but exceedingly pretty. Faintly 
luminous spheres of many colours gyrated in stately procession around the three rod-like thrones still occupied by Makkub, Pakkan and Zakkar, shining with their red, green and 
orange radiance within a circle of purple and yellow globe", 
that moved in single file, in pairs, in clusters and then back 
again until I felt my eyes watering with the strain. Littlr 
Pinky was raised high by his escort. Over the Mattus I could 
hear him chuckling with delight at the entertainment, to the 



92 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



disapproval of more sober-minded counsellors. 

Hartnell yawned. "How long's this going on, Pop?" 

I didn't know. "Anyway, when it's over we definitely try 
to get back to the ship. Fuzzy-bubble says trouble's on the 
way." 

Despite the concentration of keeping his cameras fixed on 
that fantastic scene, Tubby clicked his tongue disgustedly. 
"I'd like to know what we've been having up to now—" 

Suddenly Hartnell opened his eyes widely. "What about 
little Pinky? We can't leave him to Makkub's tender 
mercies." 

"Fuzzy-bubble's promised to look after him— but he can't 
look after us as well." I swallowed my pride and came out 
with the truth. "You've got to admit we're pretty helpless 
against these things and their force-beams—" 

He mulled over this unpleasant fact. "He won't like losing his Uncle Hartnell — " 

"You can send him a picture-book, with nursery rhymes," 
said Tubby. The remark was rather heartless, I thought. 

Clinching the matter, I said "We might do more harm than 
good by hanging round where we're not wanted— and if some 
of 'em get the idea we're siding with Pinky they might back 
up Makkub out of sheer contrariness." 

Hartnell sighed. "I suppose you're right, Pop. Pity, 
though. I've never had a nephew before — " 

Someone must have told Pinky that the ceremony was over, 
for he suddenly came bouncing across again, freed from official duties, and danced round us, eventually hovering fascinated near HartnelPs control-belt. 

No one save myself had the slightest inkling of what was in 
Makkub's mind. He gave no audible or visible warning 
about his intentions. Only because I held the Mattus rod, 
with the switch on, could I detect the surge of unreasoning 
malevolence that flooded into his mind. 

Startled, I glanced first at the big sphere still perched on 
his absurd, pointed throne— red, evil and scowling; then at 
the unwitting cause of his discomfiture, little Pinky— pale 
rose, innocent and laughing. 



THE SINGING SP HERBS 



93 



In that dreadful moment I knew Makkub had decided to 
extinguish this one frail rival. For how could he suffer? 
Kardoon must have a ruler. Whatever the penalty for murder, he remained immune — secure from punishment or deposition — so long as no successor existed. 

Processes of thought are so instantaneous that these reflections passed in the same moment that I threw the gravityreactor switch to "Maximum," yelled a warning and hurled 
myself desperately across the line of fire. In saner moments 
I'd never have dreamed of so foolhardy an action. Yet what 
else could I do? 

No sooner was I face to face with Hartnell when passing 
in a gigantic sideways dive powered by the gravity-reactor 
than Makkub loosed a vicious force-beam. Except for my 
presence it would have smashed Pinky directly into the row 
of control buttons on Hartnell's belt. Instead, the invisible 
bolt spent itself almost entirely against the gravity pack, 
although sufficient energy remained to swing me round bodily, 
nullify the remaining impetus of the leap and drop me to 
the ground like a sack of potatoes. 

Facing Makkub in mid-flight, I had a clear view and 
understanding of the surprising consequences. He was in 
the same position as the man pushing against a closed door. 
To this end, he balanced himself with an attractor beam 
anchored to the stone floor. Once equilibrium became unexpectedly disrupted by my gravity-reactor, this attractor 
beam took charge — pulling him violently downwards before 
he could recover. He impaled himself on the rod-like 
throne — and vanished. 

One great gasp of horror ascended from the crowded 
spheres. Nor was it a manifestation of unanimous approval, 
and by the time I rose painfully to my feet hostile emanations poured in through the Mattus, with inter-com shrieks so 
loud and piercing we thought madness had come upon us. 

Fuzzy-bubble, having seen young Hartnell's ingenious trick 
in the Place of Execution, realised what had happened. The 
general populace, however, fully believed they had witnessed 
the deliberate assassination of their ruling sovereign. 

"You must leave ! " said Fuzzy-bubble, urgently. "Come— 



94 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



or the Wise Ones' prophecy may be fulfilled prematurely!" 

"We can't leave little Pinky!" said Hartnell. "They'll rip 
him to pieces ! " He didn't seem to grasp the fact that, whatever happened to us, his "nephew" now enjoyed the status of 
supreme dictator on Kardoon. If we could only lie low until 
he established his authority over Makkub's crowd all might 
yet end happily. 

"Fandar will take charge here," said Fuzzy-bubble. He 
grew increasingly apprehensive. "Come ! We have no time 
to lose — " 

We stumbled hurriedly to the exit with cries of baffled 
rage echoing round the great cavern. I saw how the same line 
of spheres who bad facilitated Pinky's first entrance now held 
back the crowd while we escaped. 

A pitiful little voice sounded through the uproar as I cast 
a final, backward glance. Four attendants were firmly but 
gently placing a small, rose-red sphere on the tall, central 
throne between Pakkan and Zakkar. 

"Want to go with Uncle Hartnell ! " said Pinky, plaintively. 
He might be a dictator, but he didn't have his own way in 
all respects. 

"Get moving," I told Hartnell. "Your protege's nicely 
launched on a successful career!" 

A slow grin spread over his face. "That's right, Pop. Not 
every lad gets such a good start in life!" 

Then it seemed that all hell broke loose in the Great Halls 
and we were running for our lives through those black eggshaped tunnels. 



CHAPTER THIRTEEN 



The Prophecy Is Fulfilled 

UZZY-BUBBLE'S protecting spheres must have fought a 
A rearguard action with the mob to cover our retreat, 
otherwise we would have been speedily overtaken during that 
sweaty, scrambling, nightmare journey, during which we received no help save guidance. On the previous trip, although 
their treatment was impatient and ungentle, the guards had at 
least provided impetus with their force-beams for our flagging 
feet. This time we were obliged to haul ourselves by sheer, 
physical effort up those steep, curving banks— often only by 
forming a hand-to-hand chain— and when we tumbled 
through an entrance aperture the relief was often so great 
that we slid thankfully down the far side regardless of how 
precipitous the plunge might prove. 

Occasionally Fuzzy-bubble lent slight assistance— but only 
occasionally, and knowing what his effort entailed, I didn't 
blame him. It couldn't be particularly cheering to realise 
that every time he lifted one of us bodily up a slope a day or 
so became sliced from his allotted span of years. Nevertheless, he did his best, and eventually we emerged blinking 
into the light of Kardoon through the incubator caves— lined 
with neat rows of little, glowing spheres— into the nursery. 

Then across the spawning rocks, with their masses of soapbubble growths, into the defile between the cliffs and eventually to the wide plain. Nurse-spheres remained with the mob 
in the Great Halls, so that everywhere lav still deserted save 
for the new-born globes moving slowly' and uncertainly a 
foot or so above the ground. 

"Heed well the skies ! " cried Fuzzy-bubble. "Observer 
parties from the guards will be flying high, trying to locate 

us." 

So, while we hugged the base of the cliff, our eyes turned 
continually to that uncanny, pink firmament, trying to distinguish against the glare any glint of floating bubbles 



95 



96 THE SINGING SPHERES 

I remember thinking we had quite enough to occupy our 
attention apart from that. Hampered by ihe whipping Mattus 
rod, I stumbled in the wake of Hartnell and Tubby, wondering whether they felt equally exhausted and depressed. 
Despite latest Mark V air-conditioning, the Bergmann suit 
had grown so stifling that I feared a puncture, which wouldn't 
have been surprising, anyway, considering how the fabric had 
been abraded — especially on shoulders and hips — during underground clambering. Punctures mean leaking oxygen, and 
even the normal 100-hour supply won't last long at that rate. 
I was sticky all over with sweat and didn't think I could go 
much farther. 

"If he's taking us the long way round to avoid passing the 
main entrance," said Hartnell, discouragingly, "we've a tidy 
stretch to cover yet." 

This, naturally, failed to cheer me overmuch, and in some 
ways I wasn't at all sorry when Fuzzy-bubble cried "Listen ! 
They're coming ! I can hear the flight director's orders ! " 

We dodged into a convenient fissure, where overhanging 
rock screened us from view, and lay down. The relief was 
heavenly. 

It didn't last long, however. "Quick ! They will seek us 
here! Move farther into the cliffs!" 

Climbing over and around great boulders, slithering and 
cursing across loose scree, diving all the time beneath sheltering precipices, I completely lost sense of direction. At 
length, when the fissure came to an end, we hauled ourselves 
gingerly to the topmost rock and peered out. 

Kardoon's familiar landscape spread itself to our gaze in 
uncannily familiar fashion. The scene of a flat plain enclosed by cliffs repeated itself, producing the impression that 
we "had been there before," yet unidentifiable by landmarks. 

Then, while we watched, a crowd of spheres poured from 
somewhere among distant rocks and set a course with unmistakable purpose. 

"It is the main force of guards!" cried Fuzzy-bubble. 

I heard young Hartnell catch his breath — and in the same 
instant all of us knew why the view proved so easily recognisable. 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



97 



"The picture!" breathed Tubby, in a low, awed voice. 
"The picture in the Wise Ones' machine!" 

It was there, just as we had seen it earlier in flickering, uncertam images— the rugged, desolate land, the coloured sky 
and the soaring clusters of spheres. 

Fuzzy-bubble's reaction mingled sympathy with satisfaction. "What have I told you, O strangers? The Wise Ones' 
prophecies are always fulfilled." 

"Look!" said Hartnell, grabbing my arm. "Look, they're 
not coming this way after all! What's the idea?" 

"Probably a false alarm from the spotters. Maybe they've 
seen a piece of mica shining on the ground and think it's one 
of our helmets." 

"Maybe you're right, at that, Pop." I could see he was 
thinking deeply. "You know— I've got an idea!" 

Deep uneasiness gripped me. "Don't do anything foolish — 

He grinned, whereupon I feared the worst. "You and 
Tubby stay here with Fuzzy-bubble. I won't be gone long—" 

"Listen ! " I said, desperately. "Listen— what are you up 
to now? If it's any more of your hare-brained tricks—" 

He was all wide-eyed innocence. "Tricks, Pop?" 

"You know very well what I mean." 

"Don't go away," said Hartnell. 

He slithered quickly and easily among the rocks and became lost to sight. 

Tubby and I looked at one another for a tense drawn-out 
moment. "What's he up to?" 

I shrugged. "You know Hartnell—" 

"Ai'^ lwayS has t0 do things the hard wa y>" agreed Tubby 
All we need do is to lie here and keep our heads down and 
the spheres'll get fed up with looking for us and go underground again." 

Poor Fuzzy-bubble was completely baffled by the proceedings, but at least he appreciated the good sense of stavine 
under cover. J 5 



98 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



The soaring guards had vanished in the sky. Nothing 
moved against the inhospitable, brown background. 
It grew hotter than even 

Time passed, each second ticking another grain to the 
weight of our uneasiness. 

"The guards!" said Fuzzy-bubble, suddenly. "They return!" 

"Oh Betelguese!" I muttered. "Where's that fool Hartnell?" 

We could do nothing save hide until the flight had passed. 
They seemed to be moving quite rapidly, but it took a long, 
time before I dared push my head up again. 

Then the cold hand squeezed my heart, for as we stared 
out yet another picture from the Machine of Revelation came 
into view—a representation of spheres returning with, as 
Hartnell had said in spacemen's jargon, "mission completed. 
They flew unerringly across the plain and vanished whence 
they had originally come. 

"Don't put your head out yet," I said, warningly. "The 
first lot may come back." I stared round in growing anxiety, 
"Where's Hartnell?" I repeated. "What's the fool up to?" 

Within a few minutes the observer flight passed overhead 
and followed the main body to whatever headquarters lay 
among those distant rocks. 

"Have they given it up as a bad job, do you think?" 

I didn't know what to think. The manoeuvre could be a 
trick to lure us into the open, or the guards might have been 
recalled for more urgent duties. 

We talked over , possibilities for a little while— Fuzzybubble's ideas were no more useful than our own — and before any plan of campaign emerged a sudden scrambling 
sounded from farther along the defile, making us grow tens 
with apprehension. 

It was Hartnell. He didn't bother to approach very closely 
but stood there in the open waving his arms for us to joio. 
him. 

Tubby and I looked at one another. 
"Do you think—?" 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



99 



I shrugged. "How could he?" 

Tubby grunted "Artful-that's the word for him, Pop. 
Hartnell the Artful. A very good description-if you can 
pronounce it." ' au 

"Stop your jabbering and come on ! " said Hartnell. "Let's 
get back to the ship while they're all out of the way. Here am 
I going to all the trouble of clambering over rocks instead of 
using the inter-com so that the spheres won't overhear and all 
Ar e ctum."° Ure chattenng awa ^ like a Io * °* ^nkeys on 

He was doing quite a lot in that line himself, but I hadn't 
the inclination to argue. His suggestion about trying to 
reach the scout ship held much sound sense. S 

w P F ^Tfi b r U ? bIe acc ° m P ani f d us to the edge of the plain where 
Mrrlr Ti f M l^^red that uncanny force
barrier. The entrance lay about three miles to our right-a 
dark gap m the cliff-face-but no tell-tale pinpoint of re* 
fleeted light betrayed the presence of guards on the rock 

much to'^o I, " ZZ T y ; b , UbbIe , SSid ' " J muSt Ieave y° u > for there is 
much to do. J udgmg by events m the Great halls and afterwards this was understatement. "Even though you have been 
unable to help us, as I hoped, your visit his £^1 much 
good and opened a new era on Kardoon. Perhaps the Znv 

biZ'wIn ° f llVSS , y ° U h T aVC Saved fcom MakkuSnhoty ambition will serve to prolong the existence of our race Onlv 

the shades of the Wise Ones know for certain, and we shall 
never consult them again. We will wait in gnorarS bu 
m hope, for whatever the future may hold." ° ranCe ' Dut 
"Little Pinky " said Hartnell, anxiously. "Is he sure Fan
srs^i. *■ ■ p«^s a. 

doon ,s eertamly safe. Not even those who siS with Mak 
kub w,ll harm our youthful new sovereign, for they realise 
Si" red ., s ? here T st command, and there is none She? 

-s^affiS^ ->~ *« *™ 

I sensed the way he made a decision not to linger. 



100 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



"Now, O strangers, walk warily. Make the long journey 
in the shadow of the cliffs, that guards may not find you. 
Between this point and the place where your incomprehensible 
vessel rests must the prophecy of the Wise Ones be fulfilled. 
Farewell— for we shall never meet again!" 

Solemnly, he moved from one to another of us, bobbing 
briefly in salutation near our helmets, then floated quickly 
away through the hot air, growing fainter and fainter until at 
last only an intermittent bright speck marked his path. Then 
that, too, ceased and he was gone. 

Tubby sighed. "Poor old Fuzzy-bubble. Cheerful sort of 
chap, isn't he? Still, I suppose he did his best, and we've a 
lot to thank him for." 

Personally, I didn't particularly thank Fuzzy-bubble for re 
minding us about the one remaining picture from the Machin 
of Revelation that so far remained undecided. Every time 
recollected those three tragic little mounds, with the marker 
bearing our names, the icy trickles ran down my backbone. 

"Well," I said, speaking more bravely than I felt, "no us 
standing here. Let's press on." 

We did so in silence, trudging resolutely and watchfully 
round that wide plain in the effort to escape observation. 

"This suspense is- killing me," said Tubby, moodily. "I 
it going to happen — or isn't it?" 

I couldn't help him. Nagging all the while at my thought 
was the inescapable fact that all the other pictures had 
materialised Were we as vain as Makkub in believing tna 
Destiny singled us out for preferential treatment? I began to 
wish at least that if Death were upon us the job might be 
accomplished before we'd gone to all the trouble of walking 
back to the ship. 

"Think of the controller," said Hartnell, consolingly 
"Everything'll be forgiven when he reads the pedomete 
totals ! " 

"It won't," said Tubby. "I suppose they'll bury our suit, 
with us!" 

It wasn't altogether the happiest of journeys. 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



101 



Towards the end, when we climbed the ridge from which 
we first heard those strange, shrill, whining sounds in our 
helmets, Hartnell had to be helped along. 

"You say the gravity-reactor isn't working? Probably that 
rough treatment it had when you wiped out the line of guards. ' 
He shook his head. "No, Pop. I took it to pieces." 
We ail stopped in our. tracks. "Took it to pieces?" 

What exactly had he been doing while we waited hidden 
among the rocks? "What for— in the name of Altair?" 

But Hartnell merely grinned and said he'd tell us later. 

So at length we breasted the summit and saw our ship. 
On many worlds through the years our eyes had rested on 
scenes of surpassing beauty. None gave us quite so much 
satisfaction as the sight of a bare, brown Kardoon wilderness 
— with the scout ship shining proudly in its midst. 

Sands of time for the Wise Ones were running out fast. 
Another half-hour and their record for infallible prediction 
would lay in splinters. 

"Unless, of coure, we get wrecked at take-off," said Tubby. 

It wasn't one of his particularly optimistic days. 



CHAPTER FOURTEEN 



The Riddle of The Graves 

THUS we brought our journeyings into full circle. We 
climbed into the ship and moved the lever which automatically locked all space ports. Observation screensvisual, telescopic, radio-cosmic and ultra-violet — showed no 
movement across the wide plain or in the pink sky. 

Young Hartnell — who once took a special course of study 
in scout ship flying and invariably assumes the role of pilot 
on such occasions — seated himself at the controls and began 
to set meters ticking, coloured signal lights winking in preparation for departure. 

"I think," I said, doubtfully, "we ought to report now. 
Just in case — " 

The others looked at me. 

"Do that, Pop," said Hartnell. "As you say — just in case. 
Though I might tell you I can handle one of these flying 
beetles as well as the next man — " 

"No reflection," I said, hastily. "It— it's just that damned 
Machine of Revelation — " 

They watched in silence while I launched the call-sign on 
its radio journey across empty wastes to Old Growler. Over 
millions of miles impulses sped at the speed of light — 186,000 
miles a second — yet a minute and a half elapsed before answer 
came. 

102 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



103 



"Controller," said the ship, unemotionally. For all the interest he showed I might have been calling up the equipment 
department to order a dozen nuts and bolts. 

"Preliminary report before official recording," I told him, 
and briefly outlined what had happened since our landing. 
Two points caused a slight manifestation of interest— the 
Machine of Revelation and the unfortunate political situation 
in which we'd become embroiled. When I confessed our 
activities in the latter respect— for Inter-X men aren't brought 
up to conceal facts, however unpleasant— Tubby and Hartnell crowded closer, making faces and gesticulating to ensure 
I should present our case as strongly as possible. They had 
good reason, too, because the controller made no secret of his 
disapproval. 

"You say the present ruler of Kardoon is friendly?" heasked, at last. 

I thought of little Pinky, perched on the tall throne between 
the orange and green spheres of his chief advisers, with the 
council pedestals curving away to either side. "Yes," I said 
"definitely friendly." 

He then switched inquiries to the Machine, for which I 
was extremely thankful. "You say all prophecies have 
materialised save the picture of the graves?" 

Even controllers can sometimes be stupid. If the episodeof the graves really had been fulfilled, how could I be talking 
to him? From the corner of my eye I saw young Hartnell 
grinning and making absurd gestures of derision. 

"That is correct," I said, solemnly. "Report is being forwarded now in the event of mishap at take-off which might 
lead to burial of present personnel as recorded by the 
machine." 

He actually became human for a moment, "You mean 
to say you actually believe in this machine's capabilities?"* 

"¥/e're not really enthusiastic," I pointed out, carefully 
"but what else can we do?" 

"Wait." 

Then we knew that a slight hubbub must have developed 



104 THE SINGING SPHERES 

in the higher levels of the ship where the scientific panel sits 
in permanent session, and even controllers daren't interrupt 
the deliberations of these great brains save for some really extraordinary event. I wondered if, when the controller told 
them, the panel might have any explanation of that fantastic 
apparatus, with its countless thousands of intertwined tubes 
and its electrodes across which pictures of events yet to come 
formed upon a tenuous electronic screen built from living 
force. 

His voice sounded unemotional again, and I knew by the 
tone that subsequent words were in process of being permanently recorded for the archives. "Present your report, with 
fullest details, immediately." 

When it was over, he said, "Every precaution must be exercised at take-off. Make immediate structural, electrical and 
mechanical check of the scout ship. Emphasis to pilot that 
there is no margin for error." 

Hartnell made some sarcastic comment, whereupon Tubby 
said : "Don't take it as a personal criticism — they aren't concerned so much about our skins as the information and the 
films we're carrying." 

Continued uncertainty proved unnerving. "Come on," I 
said. "Let's get it over." 

The controller had one last word. "Report immediately for 
rendezvous instructions when scout ship is clear of Kardoon's 
gravitational field. That is all." I heard a faint, almost imperceptible click as the recording gear was switched out, then 
he added, rather surprisingly, "Good luck." 

This touch of informality between controller and field squad 
— whose relations are normally tinged with guarded hostility 
— seemed to call for acknowledgement. "Thanks," I said. 
"We'll need it." 

Hartnell locked in the firing relays and we adjusted safety 
belts. I began to sweat again. Coloured lights winked along 
e control panel mockingly, while every swing of dial needles 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



105 



ticked away another second of my life. 

Then the big, red warning lamp flashed — slicing off the prepunching intervals. An ignition indicator clicked over. 
Hartnell snapped the last switch and leaned back in the pilot' 
chair. 

"That's that," he said. "I've done all I can. Now th 
ship's taken over — wait for it!" 

Thunder of firing jets sounded dully on our ears and tlr 
entire vessel began to tremble. I'd lived though such events 
dozens of times before and paid scant attention. On this 
occasion my eyes bulged with trying to watch all the reaction 
meters at once, but instead of needles and dials I saw only a 
sombre landscape and three graves. The safety belt across 
my chest seemed so tight that it constricted breathing. 

Next instant, thrust tightly into the chair by acceleration, 
knew we had left the ground. 

Somehow, we continued to exist through succeedin 
minutes. Each moment I expected the pressure to ease, denoting a serious engine failure; my mind rapidly traversed 
such gruesome possibilities as a sudden fatal swing brought 
about by atmosphere vanes cracking away from the hull. 

But nothing untoward happened. The ship left Kardoon's 
atmosphere safely, Hartnell kept acceleration at maximum and 
we knew a warm, indescribable feeling of relief. I looked 
again at the meters. Whatever might go wrong now, our 
velocity ensured that we were not destined to fall back upon 
those cruel brown rocks. 

I freed my safety belt and took a deep breath. "Well," I 
said, quietly, "so it didn't happen after all ! " 

Tubby wriggled uneasily. "Our names are mud already 
over that political business. What'll the controller say?" 

Hartnell laughed. "Don't you like the idea of going back 
to the ship? Are you sorry the Wise Ones' prophecy 
flopped?" 



106 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



"It seems ridiculous now — it wasn't at the time." 

"But," I said, "what's the explanation of the pictures that 
actually did come true?" 

I pondered further upon a theory of time we'd previously 
discussed. Suppose the future reached us in a constant 
stream of episodes, like representations in a moving-picture 
projector. Light travelling from distant stars often took 
many thousands or millons of years to reach us. Sometimes 
the star itself which we saw in the night sky had long since 
ceased to exist — yet it was still linked to us by that band of 
light extending across untold voids. Suppose, again, there 
was a similar "band of light" reaching towards us from the 
future, bearing within itself "moving pictures" of events yet 
to occur. Stationary upon our own vantage point, and 
allowing time to roll past at its normal velocity, we saw these 
events gradually unfolding themselves. Yet was it entirely 
impossible not to wait until the future's "light" reached us, 
but to construct a machine which captured and reflected the 
"light" a little way ahead? In that case we might certainly 
view the same events twice — once upon the machine's screen, 
again in actuality. 

But in what way could the Machine of Revelation have 
slipped? Was it, perhaps, subject to hallucinations? 

I mentioned these speculations to Hartnell, but he only 
laughed. "Don't you believe the Machine at all, then?" 1 
asked, rather hurt. 

He grew solemn again. "Oh, yes, Pop. I believe it shows 
the future — a bit flickery and uncertain, perhaps — but it. 
works." 

I spread my hands helplessly. "Well, then — " 
Tubby, slightly less bewildered and baffled than myself 
first caught the glint in Hartnell's eye. "You've got something up your sleeve ! " he said, accusingly. "Something you 
haven't told us ! " 

"Who? Me?" He must have known he couldn't bluff it 
out any longer. 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



107 



"That gravity-reactor!" I said, in sudden inspiration. "You 
took it to pieces ! Why?" 

His white-toothed grin was sheer, infuriating mockery. 
"You ought to know! Both of you saw it!" 
"Saw it? When?" 

I felt the hair prickling in the nape of my neck. 
"We're still here, aren't we?" demanded Tubby, "How 
can we be in those graves and in this ship at the same time?" 

"Who said we were supposed to be in the graves?" asked 
Hartnell, softly. 

"Who? Why— why— if we weren't— well, what's the idea 
of the graves, anyway?" Tubby became flabbergasted into 
incoherency. I kept my mouth shut, but I felt the same way. 

Hartnell said we'd have to believe the theory that no one 
could escape the future. On that supposition, all events were 
predetermined, but didn't necessarily work out at face values. 

"Face values," he said. "That's the crux. Like all other 
machines, the Wise Ones' gadget can't think— it merely 
records what it sees. It certainly saw those graves. Now I 
won't pretend to explain what happened— all I know is that I 
got an idea when the guards were after us— you remember I 
left you among the rocks?" 

"Yes," I said, "and nearly gave us several assorted heart 
attacks. 

"Well, the guards knew what Earthmen's graves looked like 
and they knew we didn't occupy 'em till we were dead So 
while it was quiet I took a few armfuls of boulders and scree 
from the cliff-face and made those mounds. Just for a realistic touch I broke up the gravity-reactor casing— I'd got nothing else— and made markers with our names and numbers 
You saw what happened afterwards. When the guards 
spotted those graves they fully believed us to be dead and 
went back to their hidey-hole." 

I sat down quickly, dizzy with confusion. "But the 
Machine-how did the Machine know you intended doing 



103 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



He shrugged. "I don't suppose it did — it merely recorded 
the scene at that particular spot at that particular time in 
the future." He switched on the grin again. "The Machine 
wasn't wrong, after all, was it?" 

I shook my head slowly. "Everything we saw on that 
screen came true — everything!" 

"If only I'd recognised those markers as bits of casing — " 
said Tubby, doubling his fists and making threatening 
motions. 

Young Hartnell laughed with a curious intonation. "You 
know, that's the funny part about it — I did ! " 

We'd made our official report and received rendezvous instructions. Nothing lay before us save a couple of days' 
tedious journeying back to Old Growler and the subsequent 
prospect of unpleasant interviews with our superiors. 

"Probably a court-martial," I said. "Taking intelligent 
life with intent — that's how they'll frame the charge." 

"I wouldn't be surprised," said Hartnell, "if they don't 
forget any charges when they open the pedometers and see 
how busy we've been. Exceptional devotion to duty — and 
all that." 

"There's some impressive mileage, admittedly — " 

He nodded mysteriously. "More than you think, Pop." 

I stared. "You can't fake the pedometers — they're sealed!" 

His lips curved in a pleased manner. "Not -to a forcebeam ! I had a look at the mileage indicator when I took 
my suit off. The mechanism must have ticked round like 
mad when they were hauling us through those caves ! 

"Anyway, I didn't intend to kill those guards," he went on. 
"I only wanted to make 'em let go. Besides, your affair with 
Makkub was sheer accident and he got nothing less than he 
deserved." He sighed. "Poor little Pinky. He'll think his 
Uncle Hartnell's dead. Wonder if he'll miss me — " 

I was still thinking about the forthcoming interview. "You 
know how fussy they are about intelligent life — " 



THE SINGING SPHERES 



109 



"Intelligent? Those bubbles?" 

"Why, aren't they?" I said, surprised. 

He pretended to consider the matter. "I suppose so, in a 
way." The well-known grin lit up his lean, tanned face. 
"But if they'd got real intelligence wouldn't they have asked 
themselves one question when they saw the graves?" 

"What question?" demanded Tubby. 
"How, with all three of us supposed to be dead- iid we 
bury ourselves?" 

THE END. 



All characters in this story are imaginary and no reference 
is intended to any living person. (Copyright 1952.) 



110 

projectiles (2) 



CRY FROM SING. 

For a long time I have been 
seeking a lady pen pal; she must 
however be an sf reader. I haven't 
had any luck so far, and there 
must be plenty of my fellow 
readers in the same spaceship, so 
to speak. Can you help? (I am 
21.) 

R.M.9487 MNE. R. WATKINS, 
Y TRP. 40 Commando R.M., 
C/O G.P.O., Singapore. 

We don't usually go in for this 
sort of thing, but in view of 
reader Welkins' obviously limited 
opportunities, we make an exception. 

AND ONE FROM AUK. 

I would appreciate it if you 
would print my name as I am 
anxious to' correspond with a 
young fan (I am 17), with the 
intention of exchanging notes 
and books. The science fiction 
movement is still in its infancy 
out here. 

FRANK DODD, 
72 John St., Ponsonby, 
Auckland, New Zealand. 

That's about all we can print 
from your interesting letter, 
Frank. But let's hear from you 
again. 

KITCHEN DREAMS 

I beg to assure you that the 
(physically but not mentally) 
weaker sex is not immune from 
sf. My ma-in-law, an American 
in her sixties, has just gone off 



to Belgium— with her usual 
stock-pile of sf. I have three fine 
sons and three equally fine 
daughters, but when the days are 
long and arduous I think of the 
time when my sons will 'stand 
by for blast-off' to some far 
planet, and my day becomes interwoven with the dreams of the 
future. By this time I have 
either got all the dishes washed 
and away or else the water's cold, 
and I have to come down to 
Earth and get on with it. Good 
luck to AUTHENTIC and all its 
readers. 

MRS. M. HOLLAND, 
Medstead, Hants. 

A lovely letter, Mrs. Holland. 
We could see you quite plainly at 
the sinkl Believe us, we are certain that women are as great 
sfans as men. A while back we 
offered to sponsor a Women's Interplanetary Society, but we got 
no encouragement from the ladies. 

NEW FANZINE 

If you have space to spare, how 
about mentioning our new fanzine: STRAIGHT UP, 5/- per 
year, 12 issues in a year. Edited 
by Fred. J. Robinson at 37 Willows Avenue, Tremorfa, Cardiff, 
Glam. Fans in this area wishing 
to get together can contact Fred 
or me. 

T. H. GRIFFTHS, 
8 Vaughan Street, 
Pwllgwaun, Pontypridd, 
Glam. 

Come on, you Welsh fans, 
heres your chance to start your 
own club and put Cardiff on 
the sf map! 



s-f handbook 

Terms of interest to science-fictioneers 



Dark nebulae — Obscuring 
clouds in the Milky Way consisting of myriads of dust particles. 

Deimos — Mars' smallest moon, 
five miles in diameter. 

Diffuse nebulae — Formless 
masses of cloudy luminosity, as 
seen in Orion, for example. 

Deliquescent — The property of 
picking up water from the environment and dissolving in it. 
A deliquescent substance becomes liquid on exposure to air. 

Desiccation — The process of 
drying; removal of water. 

Deuterium — Isotope of hydrogen obtained by fractional electrolysis of water. In combination 
with oxygen gives heavy water. 

Digit — One half the diameter 
of the Sun or Moon. Used in 
measuring the extent of eclipses. 

Diode — Thermionic valve containing two electrodes in the form 
of anode and cathode. 

Diurnal — An action or process 
occurring every twenty-four 
hours. Man and other animals 
who sleep at night are said to 
have a diurnal rhythm. 

Ductility — A metal is said to be 
perfectly ductile when it is capable of being pulled out into a 
wire of indefinite length. 



Duralumin — A hard aluminium 
alloy containing 4 per cent, copper and traces of manganese, magnesium and silicon. 

Dynamite— Nitroglycerine absorbed in kieselguhr. Kieselguhr is an inactive earth consisting of the siliceous skeletal remains of diatoms. 

Dyne — The absolute unit of 
force. A dyne, acting on a mass 
of one gram will give it an acceleration of one centimetre per 
second per second. 

Escape velocity — The velocity 
required to be reached before an 
object will follow a path away 
from the primary body and not 
return without the application of 
force. In the case of Earth, this 
is 25,000 m.p.h. To calculate the 
escape velocity for any primary, 
multiply the surface gravity by 
the radius, double it, and then 
find the square root of the answer. 

Equinoxes — The two points at 
which the Sun crosses the celestial 
equator. 

Excited atom — An atom in 
which an electron has been lifted 
to a higher orbit. 

H.J.C. 



HYPNOTISM 



Learn to use this strange, mysterious power, that charms and fascinates 
men and women . . . control desires . . . make V0U Master of every 
situation ! Life is full of alluring possibilic.es for those who learn the 
secrets of KYPKOTISi*, PERSONAL HA8NETISM, and AUT0-SUGGES1 i0H ! 
lethods enable you to develop these amazing sciences, easily— 
! Complete, Thrca-in-one Courss, by expert, 5/-, post free. 
IWELL' (Publiaations/FSA), Aibert Street, Lockwocd, HutSdersfield. 




112 



operation fantast 



Fan service for sciencejiction fans 

MAGAZINE AND BOOK TRADING. POSTAL LIBRARY 

BOOKBINDING. INFORMATION AND RESEARCH BUREAU 

"CONTACT" BUREAU. 
NEWSLETTER. QUARTERLY FANZINE. ANNUAL HANDBOOK. 
O.F.' is run on a co-operative basis by those members sufficiently enthusiastic, for the mutual benefit of themselves and all other science-fantasy 
enthusiasts who care to join. 

The FANTASY ART SOCIETY is a separate organisation for those 
interested m pictorial fantasy, co-operating to market fantasy art 
products. FANTASY ART SOCIETY members are automatically made 
members of 'O.F.' 

Full details of OPERATION FANTAST, together with a wealth of 
information about sf in general (including a directory of dealers, publishers, libraries, clubs, etc., specialising in science-fantasy) is contained in the HANDBOOK, 1952, now available. 

°° P I f, our quarterly fanzine - and a free c °py of th « 

HANDBOOK, send 1/- in stamps or postal order, to: — 

MAVIS PICKLES (O.F. DISTRIBUTION), 
41 COMPTON STREET, 
DUDLEY HILL, BRADFORD, YORKS. (Adv.) 

BACK NUMBERS 



In response to many readers' enquiries we are again publishing below a 
complete list of previous issues of ASF that are still available: 

IN A TEST No. 18 CHAOS IN MINIATURE 



No. 8 WORLD 
TUBE 

No. H PLANET OF POWER 
No. 15 REPORT FROM MANDAZO 

No. 16 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 
No. 17 THE COMING OF THE 
DARAKUA 



No. 19 SPACE WARP 
No. 20 EARTH OUR NEW 
EDEN 

No. 21 ALIEN IMPACT 
Nd. 22 MICE OR MACHINES 
If you have difficulty in obtaining any of the above titles, 
order direct from the publishers: — 
HAMILTON & CO. (STAFFORD) LTD., 
1 & 2 Melville Court, Goldhawk Road' 
London, W.12 



CHRP a AVft 




J5 luu-y 



Send i/- for the History and a S.A.E. to Joan the Wad, 44, Joan's Cottage, Lanlvet, 
Cornwall. Thousands say : — 

SHE HAS THE SECRET 

In several million booklets you may have read extracts from testimonials received from as 
far back as 1930. We just take them at random. We possess more than Twelve Thousand unsolicited testimonials, and we know from chance remarks that many who swear by Joan, never 
trouble to report to us. Having so many we can't possibly publish them all, nor can we constantly be changing our advertisements and we have been content to keep to those originally 
published, but such is the immense interest being displayed we thought we would depart from 
our rule in a small measure and just publish 6 or 7 of the huge number that came in during 1945. 
Remember similar testimonials have been coming in unceasingly since 1930. 

NEVER WITHOUT MONEY 

" I received one of your Histories about thr - 2 weeks ago and it has brought me luck. Before 
I received your book I was always without money, but now, thanks to you, I am never without 
money! (Mrs.) G. O., Glos. 8.10.45." 

INCREASE IN WAGES 

"... already after one fortnight we have had luck. I won . . . sum of £30 . . . also have got 
a £1 per week increase in wages unexpected so Joan the Wad must be our lucky Star. So please 
send Jack O'Lantern to make the pair complete. (Mrs.) D. M., Kirkgate, Leeds. 19. 11.45." 
LOST HIS JOAN— LOST HIS LUCK 

" Please let me know how much to send for Joan the Wad and Jack O'Lantern. I had them 
both in 1931, but somehow lost them in hospital two years ago. I can honestly say that since 
losing them nothing has seemed to go right with me. I know what good luck Joan can bring by 
honest facts I have really experienced ... I certainly know that Joan the Wad is more than a 
lucky charm. (Mr.) E. E. S., Liphook, Hants. 10. 11.45." 

HOMELESS 

LOOKED FOR A HOUSE FOR FOUR YEARS— Got Joan, Got a House, Got a Job as well. 

"... Believe it or not, things have taken an astonishing change for the better since the day 
I received Joan — more than I have dared hope for before. I am being discharged from Services, 
Oct. 22nd. My family are homeless and I couldn't take a job. But now I have been offered a job 
with a cottage and good wages, one of my favourite jobs, tractor driving. Please note I have been 
after a house for just on four years. G. S., Army Fire Service, Slough. 10.ro.45." 

MARRIED A MILLIONAIRE 

"... two of my friends have won £500 each since receiving your mascots and another has 
married an American millionaire. . . . Please forward me one Joan the Wad and one Jack 
O'Lantern. C. E., Levenshulme. 3. 11. 45." 

BETTER JOB, MORE MONEY, LESS HOURS, IMPROVED HEALTH 

" My dear Joan . . . She has brought me continual good luck and her influence spreads to 
every sphere ... I have got a much better job . . . greater waees . . . less working hours . . . 
and my health has greatly improved. I have always been a lonely kind of person, but ... a 
friend of the opposite sex, she is also lonely . . . great opportunity f ir comradeship offered. 
So you see how the influence of Joan works. My pockets have always oeen f til and I have had 
many wishes and desires fulfilled ... I would not part with Joan for h.-r weiuht in gold, she 
is much too valuable in every way. Her powers extend all over the vvrld, and she works unceasingly for the full benefit of her friends and adherents. She rides in my pocket day and night 
and never leaves me. . . . D. H., Leeds, 9. 2.1 1.45." 

All you have to do is to send a I/- stamp (Savings Stamps accepted) and a stamped addrtsseli 
envelope for the history to— 

44, JOAN'S COTTAGE, LAN I VET , BODMIN 

For Canada and U.S.A. send SO cents for History, or 2 Dollars for bow History and /Won " 
For Australia, send Is. 6d. for History, or 8s. Od. for both History and Masioi. 




NOW 



. . . An expression of the time* ... 
But don't let this lethargic, hang-dog 
feeling creep into your system. If you 
want to get somewhere — 



is the time to start caring ! I 



If you feel you are a misfit, a square peg in a round hole, if your job is distasteful, 
lacks scope or stimulation, if every aspect of your mode of living is uninspiring and 
tedious you need help, and help of the kind that Psychology can give you, through 
REALIZATION. This unique book will help you along the road to success, in 
whatever sphere you choose, whether business, social life, factory work or the 
Services. ... 

REALIZATION clears the befogged mind, it explains how to release your own vital 
power, magnify it, how to harness it for practical use. The effects of this astounding 
book are certainly remarkable. Shyness, timidity and self-consciousness are replaced 
by confidence, courage and optimism. You can gain poise, charm and personal 
assurance that will carry you far. REALIZATION will show you the way towards 
a more successful life, 
devoid of maladjustment, complexes and 
frustrations. Give 
yourself this chance. 
It is such an easy way 
of ironing out your 
troubles. Thousands 
have benefited by its 
teachings. Let it 
help you get to grips 
with life again and 
give you faith in yourself end the future. 



PSYCHOLOGY PUBLISHING CO. LTD. (Dept. HAC/R2) 
MARPLE, CHESHIRE 

Send 2\d. stamp TO-DA Y for this inspiring message "RE A L IZA TION" 



PSYCHOLOGY PUBLISHING CO. LTD. 

(Dept. HACJR2), MARPLE, CHESHIRE 
Please send me a copy of your inspiring 
6,000-word message entitled " REALIZA-, 
TION." I enclose 2jd. stamp. 

NAME..... 

ADDRESS 



L 



(ff you do not wish to use coupon, please apply 
by letter) 









ililll 


HtBAL 


IZATHMR 


■ '. . 















